LONDON, England (CNN)  -- The British Museum plans to display a statue of supermodel Kate Moss that it bills as the largest gold statue built since ancient Egypt.



The statue of Kate Moss will be displayed in the British Museum in a gallery holding anicent Greek sculpture.



Called "Siren," the statue will be part of a group of major sculptures by leading British artists to go on display at the museum in October, the museum announced.



The museum says the artist, Marc Quinn, claims it's the largest gold statue since ancient Egypt.



His previous work included the marble sculpture Alison Lapper Pregnant, which appeared on a plinth in London's Trafalgar Square.



The Kate Moss statue, weighing 50kg, will be displayed in a gallery of the museum that houses ancient Greek sculpture. The museum calls it a "fitting setting" for the statue of Moss, "interacting with the great Greek beauties that surround it."



Moss, whose slight frame was at the forefront of the waif look in the mid-1990s, is now nearly as well known for her celebrity lifestyle as her modeling career.



The one-time girlfriend of British rocker Pete Doherty is a tabloid newspaper and celebrity magazine favorite, and now dates Kills guitarist Jamie Hince.



She has recently mixed her modeling work with designing collections for the British clothing giant, Topshop.



Other artists exhibiting include Damien Hirst, who most recently created a $100 million diamond-covered skull, and Angel of the North creator Anthony Gormley.



The exhibit is expected to run from October 4 through January 25, 2009.

***

LAS VEGAS, Nevada (CNN)  -- A young girl shown on video being sexually assaulted was raped while in the care of a baby sitter her mother hired, the mother's attorney said Tuesday.

Chester Arthur Stiles, 37, of Nevada is being sought as a suspect in the videotaped rape of a young girl.

The mother did not know her daughter had ever been victimized and was apparently oblivious to efforts to find her until last Friday, Jerry T. Donohue said.

"A family friend called her and said, 'My God, you need to turn on the TV. I believe that is your daughter,'" he said.

Donohue said the mother recognized the suspect, Chester Arthur Stiles, 37, a former animal trainer.

The abuse most likely occurred while the mother - a single woman working six days a week - was at work, Donohue said.

The attorney said he knows who the baby sitter is, but would not release that information because of the ongoing investigation.

Earlier, officials had said the girl, who is now 7, was 3-years-old at the time the video was made. But Donohue said Tuesday, "To my understanding, the abuse occurred before she was 3 years old."

The mother of the girl asked that the news media leave the family alone.

"I want to ask you, the press, to respect my family's privacy and to not attempt to contact my daughter or myself," the mother said in a written statement read by her attorney.  Watch Donohue read the mother's statement »

The mother also said she is cooperating with investigators and that her daughter "is safe and healthy."

The girl's videotaped rape set off a nationwide search last week. She was found Friday with family in Las Vegas, Nevada, after thousands of tips poured in.

Professionals have since evaluated her and she appears to be "healthy and fine and happy," the lawyer said.

The lawyer said neither he nor the mother has watched the videotape.

Asked whether the mother is thankful to the news media for having published the girl's picture so that authorities were able to identify her, Donohue said, "Not really ... there's some things maybe you don't want to know."

Still, he said, he hopes the man in the tape is brought to justice.

"Speaking as a father myself, I wish the guy would dig a hole in the desert and put a gun in his mouth," he said, referring to such an outcome as "Wild-West justice."

Meanwhile, the intense manhunt for Stiles continued Tuesday.

On Monday, Stiles' former girlfriend, Tina Allen, told CNN she thinks she is the reason Stiles came in contact with the girl and is "mortified" by the allegations against him.

Allen said she and Stiles were in an on-again, off-again relationship for 10 years until recently, when she called it off.

"He said he'd been in the Navy and, you know, I was looking for a strong guy to represent to my sons what I thought they needed to be," Allen said.

Allen said she took Stiles to a crowded apartment where her son and daughter lived. Also living in the apartment were a family friend and her daughter, who allegedly was victimized by Stiles.

"I'm disgusted. I'm ashamed, embarrassed, mortified," Allen said of the alleged rape. "I regret every, every step I ever took, I feel bad for the baby."

The FBI is also seeking Stiles, a resident of Pahrump, Nevada, in a separate matter involving state charges of sexual assault and lewdness with a minor under the age of 14. Pahrump is about 60 miles west of Las Vegas.

A man who said he found the tape in the desert and held it for at least five months before handing it over to authorities turned himself in Sunday to Nye County officials.

Darren Tuck, a Nevada resident who allegedly showed the tape to others

***

DINGLE, Ireland (CNN) -- Fewer tourists and relatively warm temperatures may be reason enough to put Ireland on your list of winter travel destinations, especially Dingle Peninsula, once ranked by National Geographic Traveler as "the most beautiful place on Earth."



Winter offers tourists a chance to explore Ireland's west coast  unhindered by bothersome crowds.



The peninsula, on Ireland's west coast, includes the oceanside town of Dingle, which boasts more than 1,000 full-time residents.



Winter visitors will avoid the area's hundreds of thousands of summertime tourists.



Boats crowd Dingle's popular marina, bringing fresh seafood catches of the day.



Some of the marina vessels also will ferry visitors to see Fungie, a locally famous dolphin who has lived in the waters outside town since 1984.  See breathtaking photos of Dingle »



Outside Dingle, numerous vacation cottages are available to rent, including homes in the village of Dunquin. In winter, rates are drastically cut, and rental period dates may be more flexible.



Most shops and restaurants have shorter hours during winter, and traditional music is found in some of the pubs on the weekends.



As with most of Ireland, pubs abound, even in the smallest villages. A beer (preferably Guinness) and some hearty pub grub are a perfect way to cap a day of exploring the wintry sights of the peninsula.



Because Ireland sits near the warm waters of the Atlantic Gulf Stream, the Emerald Isle has an average temperature of 46 degrees Fahrenheit (7 Celsius) during December, January and February.



But pack smart and bring layers of clothing, including warm sweaters and jackets, because winter weather often means rain on Ireland's western shore.

***

BANGKOK, Thailand (CNN)  -- At least 59 people were killed in a fire that broke out early Thursday at one of Bangkok's most upscale nightclubs, where about 1,000 revelers were ringing in the new year, Thai police said.



Rescue officials work at the scene of the fire in Thailand.



Most of the dead were Thai, but foreigners have been identified, among them from Australia, the Netherlands, Nepal and Japan, police said.



Another 100 people were believed injured.



The fire, at a club called Santika, started at about 12:35 a.m. (1735 GMT), police told CNN.



The blaze started near a stage where fireworks were being used as part of a performance, according to authorities.  Watch the fire engulf the building »



Most of those who died in the building suffered smoke inhalation or were trampled in a rush to get out of the club, they said.



British citizen Andrew Jones said he was celebrating in the area when he walked up on the fire.



He said he saw victims being rushed out of the fire on stretchers and spoke to witnesses, including a fellow Briton who saw fireworks being lit onstage.



"He immediately ran out of the building, but immediately when he'd done that the lights went out and he couldn't see," Jones said.



The club is located in one of Bangkok's busiest commercial districts. Its Web site features images of bands and DJs performing on both indoor and outdoor stages, and says that it "innovatively blends the comfort of nature with the excitement of the Bangkok nightlife."



The site advertises the club's new year's party, which was named "Goodbye Santika."



CNN's Kocha Olarn contributed to this report.

***

LONDON, England -- Nihat Kahveci sent Turkey into the Euro 2008 finals behind defending champions and Group C winners Greece with the only goal in a narrow 1-0 victory over battling Bosnia-Herzegovina.



Goalscorer Nihat gets a kiss from team-mate Altintop after Turkey sealed their place with a 1-0 win over Bosnia.



The result ended Norway's hopes of snatching qualification despite their 4-1 victory away to Malta with Steffen Iversen scoring a first half hat-trick.



Nihat struck at the end of a first half that Fatih Terim's Turkey dominated, yet the hosts were unable to build on that lead and had to endure some tense moments.



Just a point had separated the third-placed Scandinavians from Terim's men -- and Turkey needed to win to progress.



Nihat led the charge forcing early saves from goalkeeper Adnan Guso and finally making the breakthrough two minutes before half-time.



Hamit Altintop found space down the left and crossed for the Villarreal forward who finished from 12 meters.



Iversen broke the deadlock in Malta after 25 minutes and fired a second from the penalty spot three minutes later -- completing his treble on the stroke of half-time.



Michael Mifsud hit back for Malta after the re-start, but Andre Schembri was red-carded after 67-minutes before Morten Gamst Pedersen's strike wrapped it up all to no avail.



Portugal went through from Group A after a goalless home draw against qualification rivals Finland while group winners Poland completed their program with a 2-2 draw away to Serbia E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- Cyclist Chris Hoy has been knighted in the United Kingdom New Year Honors list, while every British gold medallist from the Beijing Olympic Games has also been rewarded.



Hoy completes a remarkable year by being knighted in the United Kingdom New Years Honors list.



In a move that breaks with tradition, triple-gold medallist Hoy will be knighted while still competing and will take part in London 2012 as Sir Chris.



The 32-year-old told PA Sport: "To become a knight from riding your bike, it's mad. It is an amazing honor and is also great for the sport."



Hoy, who was made an MBE after winning his first gold in Athens in 2004, was also voted BBC Sports Personality of the Year earlier this month.



The Scotsman was one of 10 Olympic cyclists to be honored, while a number of Olympic coaches and officials were also recognised.



Rebecca Adlington, the 19-year-old swimmer who won two Olympic golds -- the first British woman to win an Olympic swimming gold for 48 years -- receives an OBE (Order of the British Empire) .



Adlington said: "I'm absolutely delighted to receive and accept the OBE -- it is fantastic to be recognised in the New Year Honors List. There are so many amazing names on the list, it's something I'll treasure for the rest of my life."



Christine Ohuruogu, the only British athlete to win a track and field gold in Beijing when she claimed the 400m title, has been given an MBE (Member of the British Empire).



"It is nice to be called the Olympic, world and Commonwealth champion and now to be made an MBE is extra special," said Ohuruogu.



Away from the Olympics,  Lewis Hamilton receives an MBE after becoming the youngest ever Formula One world champion.



"It is a massive honor and incredible privilege. It is the most amazing culmination to what has been quite a year for me," said Hamilton.

***

London, England (CNN) -- London police said Friday they are investigating a car accident in which Prince Andrew reportedly struck a police officer while driving into Buckingham Palace.





A spokesman for the Metropolitan Police did not name anyone involved in the incident, but Buckingham Palace confirmed Prince Andrew was the driver of the car.





It happened as the policeman tried to move two Japanese tourists out of the way of Andrew's 4x4 car at the palace, the BBC reported. The officer hurt his arm in the incident and complained to his superiors, the BBC said.





"It was a minor incident and the police are looking into it," said a palace spokesman, who by custom is not named.





Police refused to confirm any details of the incident, including when it allegedly happened. The BBC quoted a police spokesman as saying the officer's injuries were "minor."





The prince, who is a week shy of his 50th birthday, lives at Royal Lodge in Windsor, just west of London.





Prince Andrew is Queen Elizabeth's second son after Prince Charles and is also called the Duke of York. He served as a helicopter pilot in the Royal Navy for 22 years and is currently Britain's special representative for international trade and investment.





British papers reported last year that the prince bought a 200,000-pound ($312,400) Bentley Arnage, which joined his existing limited-edition Aston Martin Virage V8 Volante.

***

(CNN) -- Officials are searching for the driver of a white truck seen on Santiago Canyon Road on Sunday, near the time the Santiago fire started, Orange County authorities said Friday.

Chief Chip Prather holds a photo of a white truck similar to the one seen on Santiago Canyon Road.

"These people are not suspects at this time," Orange County Fire Authority Chief Chip Prather said. "They are persons of interest who were seen near the fire in a vehicle like this."

The vehicle is a white, 1998 to 2004 Ford F150 pickup with chrome tubular running boards.

Prather said the information came from a lead called into the investigation's tip line.

A $250,000 reward has been offered for information leading to the arrest of the person or persons responsible for the blaze.  Watch how residents feel about arsonist »

The Santiago fire, now 27,000 acres and still burning, was deliberately set, officials said Thursday.

Several mandatory evacuations remain in place for the Santiago fire, which has destroyed 14 homes and various other structures. Late Friday afternoon, the blaze moved into Silverado Canyon, authorities said. Sheriff's deputies were evacuating residents in the fire's path.  Watch the Santiago flames rage »

Authorities also suspect arson in the Rosa fire in San Diego County, which burned more than 400 acres before being fully contained. There was no information on the investigation.

Elsewhere, the Los Angeles County District Attorney's Office filed arson charges Friday against a 41-year-old Sun Valley man who witnesses said set a fire in the West Hills neighborhood and walked away.

Catalino Pineda is one of five people who have been arrested in arson investigations this week, but none of them has been linked to the major wildfires raging across Southern California.

Pineda was arrested Wednesday after witnesses said they saw him lighting a fire on a hillside, police said. The fire was quickly extinguished. The witnesses followed Pineda to a nearby restaurant and called police, who arrested him.

Pineda was expected to be arraigned in Van Nuys Superior Court Friday, Deputy District Attorney Steven Frankland said. He is charged with one count of arson of a structure or forest.

Pineda is being held on $75,000 bail and faces up to six years in prison if convicted.

In San Bernardino, east of Los Angeles, John Rund, of Hesperia, was arrested Wednesday on arson charges after a witness reported seeing him in brush near the starting point of a fire Tuesday, the sheriff's department said. That fire was quickly put out by passers-by.

Investigators are trying to determine if Rund, 48, may have ties to other wildfires. He is being held on $750,000 bail.

The San Bernardino County District Attorney's Office on Thursday filed arson charges against Anthony Riperti, 47, of Redlands. A statement from the office did not say when or where Riperti is accused of setting a fire. He is being held on $250,000 bail.

In San Diego County, the sheriff's department this week arrested an adult and a juvenile allegedly seen by an anonymous tipster starting a fire in Vista in the northern part of the county. In a written statement, the sheriff's department identified the adult as Gorgonio Nava. The Vista fire Department extinguished the blaze before it grew out of control, the statement said.

Investigators have determined that the Grass Valley fire in San Bernardino County was not caused by arson, and a preliminary investigation into the cause of the 11,675-acre Slide fire seems to indicate arson was not a factor, sheriff's spokeswoman Cindy Beaver said.

More than 1,600 homes have been destroyed in the past week by Southern California wildfires. E-mail to a friend

***

New York (CNN) -- Lil' Wayne was sentenced Monday to a year in prison.





The rapper, whose legal name is Dwayne Carter, pleaded guilty in October to felony gun charges as part of a deal with prosecutors.





The charges stem from his arrest in 2007 outside New York City's Beacon Theater. According to police, Carter had a .40-caliber pistol on his tour bus. His attorney said it belonged to someone else.





His sentencing was delayed twice -- first so he could get dental work done, including removal of his diamond-studded braces, then because of a fire at a Manhattan courthouse.





At Manhattan Supreme Court on Monday, the room was packed with onlookers, while more people crowded outside.





Carter was offered the chance to make a statement but declined, shaking his head.





His attorney requested that Carter have protective custody while he is incarcerated. The attorney also requested medical attention because of his recent dental surgery.





As Carter was leaving the courtroom, a fan said to him, "Keep your head up, Weezy," using the rapper's nickname.





Another man wore a T-shirt that said "Free Weezy."





Carter also faces felony drug possession and weapons charges in Arizona.





Lil' Wayne is a multiplatinum-selling and Grammy-winning rap artist. His hits include "The Block is Hot" and "Lollipop." His album "Tha Carter III" was the top selling disc of 2008. His latest album, "Rebirth," was released last month.





CNN's Jennifer Rizzo contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- European Union peacekeepers in Bosnia on Tuesday raided homes belonging to family members of Ratko Mladic, the highest-ranking figure still at large from the Balkan conflict in the mid 1990s, Serbian media reported.





Portuguese peacekeepers stand guard outside a home raided on Tuesday.





The force raided houses belonging to Mladic's sister, Milica Avram, and sister-in-law, Radinka Mladic, in East Sarajevo, an area of the city inside the Bosnian Serb-controlled Republika Srpska, a seperate political entity to the Muslim-Croat-controlled Bosnia-Croat Federation.





The raids were a part of a broader operation targeting locations and people who are believed to be helping Mladic evade trial, the reports said.





Serbian authorities recently put up "wanted" posters for Mladic at police stations across Serbia, reminding people of the 1 million euro ($1.3 million) reward for any information leading to Mladic's capture.





Mladic, who commanded the Bosnian Serb military during the 1992-95 war in Bosnia-Herzegovina, has been the Balkans' most wanted since former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic was arrested in Belgrade last July.





The 66-year-old is wanted by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) for allegedly overseeing the killings of almost 8,000 Bosnian Muslim men and boys in the town of Srebrenica in July 1995.





Mladic is charged with genocide, crimes against humanity, and violations of the laws of war. He has been on the run for 13 years, ever since the ICTY issued the indictments against him.





The ICTY has accused Serbia of knowing Mladic's whereabouts and letting him slip through their hands. Serbia's status as a candidate for European Union membership also remains conditional on Mladic being handed over to the ICTY.





Serbian leaders have denied protecting Mladic.

***

(CNN) -- The U.S. diplomatic courtship with Iraq in the 1980s continued despite Saddam Hussein's use of chemical weapons. Click on the links to read once-classified documents from the Reagan administration.





Once-classified documents show the U.S. continued its courtship with Iraq despite use of chemical weapons.





Date: December 5, 1986 Subject: U.S.-Iraqi Relations: Picking Up the Pieces Summary: After disclosures that the United States was secretly providing weapons to Iraq's enemy, Iran, Assistant Secretary of State Richard Murphy recommends strengthening commercial ties with Saddam Hussein because "U.S.-Iraqi relations are in crisis." Read the document (pdf)





Date: March 3, 1988 Subject: Iraq's Foreign Policy: Deeper into the Mainstream Summary: Anticipating an end to the Iran-Iraq war, a State Department official is optimistic that continued ties between the United States and Iraq will lead Saddam Hussein "deeper into the mainstream." The author concludes that "fears of Iraq's aggression seem exaggerated." Two weeks later, Iraqi forces attack Kurdish civilians in Halabja with poisonous gas. Read the document (pdf)





Date: December 29, 1988 Subject: Export-Import Financing for Iraq Summary: In the closing days of the Reagan administration, the State Department's top human rights official argues that continued financial aid to Iraq "can simply not be squared with our worldwide human rights policy." However, Assistant Secretary of State Richard Murphy counters that U.S. financial ties with Iraq have "far greater use with Baghdad as a carrot than as a stick." A year and a half later, Iraq invades Kuwait. Read the document (pdf)

***

KABUL, Afghanistan (CNN) -- Taliban gunmen executed a young couple for trying to elope in rural Afghanistan, a local police chief told CNN Tuesday.

The woman was forced by her parents to become engaged to a man she did not like, said Police Chief Gabar Furdali, and decided to leave home with another man.

Local Taliban commanders found out and set out to punish them, said the police officer in the village of Man De Khe in the Kash Rud district of Nimruz province, a remote southwestern province that borders on Iran and Pakistan.

The Taliban gathered residents of Kash Rud to watch the execution of the two. The man, Abdul Aziz, and the woman, who was not named, were shot to death, the police officer said. He did not say when the killings took place.

NATO troops who patrol the country have "limited presence in that particular area," a spokesman told CNN.

The killings were not "within our area of responsibility, but we are aware of the reports" said the spokesman for the NATO mission who declined to be named, in line with policy.

There is a tradition of "honor killings" in the region that long predates the Taliban, said Barnett Rubin, an Afghanistan expert at New York University.

Journalist Tawab Qurayshi contributed to this report

***

MADRID, Spain (CNN) -- A 92-year-old woman with cocaine strapped to her body flew all the way from Brazil to Spain before police arrested her, in a wheelchair, at Madrid's airport.





A Civil Guard spokeswoman says the 92-year old was apprehended at Madrid's Barajas Airport.





They found 4.3 kilos, or nearly 9.5 pounds, of cocaine packets strapped to her legs and torso, and also arrested a 44-year-old female companion, who tried to escape on another plane, a Civil Guard spokeswoman told CNN Tuesday.





The two women, both from Uruguay, were arrested Friday after arriving in Madrid on a flight from Sao Paolo, Brazil. But officials did not release details about the case until this week, after a judge had arraigned the two on drug trafficking charges. The judge ordered the younger woman to prison but sent the 92-year-old to a senior citizens' home in Madrid.





Due to her advanced age, "it's practically impossible" that she would be tried or face jail time, said the Civil Guard spokeswoman, who by custom is not identified. Police did not identify the two women.





Civil Guards became suspicious when the younger woman repeatedly told the older woman -- who had asked for an airport wheelchair in Madrid to traverse the terminal -- that if they rushed, they would make their connecting flight to Spain's Canary Islands.





The Civil Guards, who run customs controls at the airport, stopped the woman in the wheelchair.





The younger woman immediately fled, first trying to make the connecting flight, which by then had closed its doors, and then attempting to leave the airport terminal for the street.





But she was stuck in the "satellite," or second building, of Terminal 4, which is connected to the main building and the street by an underground train. Police caught up with her before she left the satellite terminal.





The two would-be smugglers probably expected a cash payment and return flight tickets to Brazil from their drug trafficking contacts, the Civil Guard spokeswoman said.

***

(CNN) -- The toddler whose body washed ashore in Texas last month has been tentatively identified as a 2-year-old girl, and her mother and a man identified as her boyfriend were arrested Saturday, the Galveston County Sheriff's office said Sunday.



Police believe two-year-old Riley Ann Sawyers may be "Baby Grace."



Investigators believe the child they dubbed "Baby Grace" is actually 2-year-old Riley Ann Sawyers, the Galveston County Sheriff's office said Sunday.



DNA analysis is still in progress to confirm that identification.



The child's mother, Kimberly Dawn Trenor, 19, and a man identified as Royce Clyde Zeigler II, 24, were arrested Saturday on charges of injuring a child and tampering with physical evidence, the sheriff's department said.



The couple lives in Spring, Texas, a Houston suburb about 75 miles north of Galveston.



Their bonds were set at $350,000 each.



The arrests followed searches conducted Saturday after a November 7 tip, the sheriff's department said.



Deputies and FBI agents plan to release more information at a news conference Monday, Galveston County Sheriff's Maj. Ray Tuttoilmondo said.



The girl's grandmother, Sheryl Sawyers, of Cleveland, Ohio, told CNN affiliate WKYC that Riley Ann has been missing since June.  Watch Sawyers family describe their fears before child was identified »



On October 29, a fisherman discovered the body in a blue Sterilite plastic container on an uninhabited island in Galveston's West Bay.



Police dubbed the dead girl "Baby Grace," and asked the public for help in identifying her.



A medical examiner said the child's skull was fractured, and a forensic dentist estimated her age at 2 to 3 years.



In composite sketches, the girl is wearing a pink skirt and matching top -- clothing authorities said she was wearing when she was found. The other sketch, a close-up rendering of the child's face, shows a fair-skinned toddler with long blond hair.



"She is more to us than just a case number, more to us than just an unidentified body. She is very much a human being," Tutoilmondo said last month. "She is someone's child, someone's grandchild, someone's cousin, someone's best friend, and to us, that is the most important part about this case."



"We have adopted the name of Baby Grace because, there again, that is part of the emotional part of this case for us," he said, holding a tiny sneaker identical to one of those the child was wearing when she was found. E-mail to a friend



CNN's Hank Bishop contributed to this story.

***

(CNN)  -- Emergency teams on Sunday were assessing damage from deadly storms that devastated parts of Missouri, Kentucky and West Virginia this weekend -- even as the threat of more severe weather continued.





West Virginia Gov. Joe Manchin tours Mingo County to assess damage caused by extensive rain and flooding.





The storm that tore through Madison County, Kentucky, on Friday was a category EF-3 tornado, the National Weather Service said Sunday.





An EF-3 is the third-strongest category of tornado, with winds of 136 to 165 mph, strong enough to destroy large buildings and lift cars off the ground.





At least one person was killed by that storm, with several other serious injuries. A waste water treatment plant was destroyed, two fire departments sustained major roof damage and some manufacturing facilities were damaged, local authorities said.





Three people were killed in southern Missouri during high winds, thunderstorms and flash floods. A couple was killed when a tree fell on their car on a highway near Poplar Bluff. A man died of a heart attack near Springfield when winds tossed him and his wife into an open field, officials said.





A weekend of storming in West Virginia destroyed as many as 400 buildings and severely damaged an additional 1,000, said Rob Jelacic of the West Virginia Office of Emergency Services.





"We are in recovery mode," Jelacic said Sunday.





There were no known deaths in West Virginia from the storms.





After the storms came floods. On Sunday, parts of the Meramec and Big rivers were rising feet above flood levels, causing residents already hit by the storms to seek higher ground.





Forecasters expected the Meramec to crest Monday 4 to 8 feet above flood state in St. Louis County. The big river was expected to crest a half-foot higher on Monday than it did Sunday.

***

(CNN)  -- The search continued Tuesday for as many as 67 people missing after a boat carrying about 200 Haitians capsized, the U.S. Coast Guard said.



The U.S. Coast Guard intercepted this crowded boat last week and repatriated its occupants to Haiti.



The boat overturned Monday off Turks and Caicos, a British territory about 550 miles southeast of Miami, Florida.



Searchers aboard boats and aircraft have rescued 118 passengers and found 15 bodies, said Petty Officer Jennifer Johnson, a Coast Guard spokeswoman, on Tuesday morning.



The Coast Guard described the boat's occupants as migrants from Haiti. The overcrowded vessel was believed to have set sail from the Haitian port of Cap Haitien, the Turks and Caicos Sun newspaper reported.



The search resumed at dawn Tuesday after being suspended because of darkness Monday night, Johnson said.



The Coast Guard is contributing one boat, the 210-foot cutter Valiant, and three aircraft to the search, Johnson said. The aircraft are a Falcon jet out of Miami, an HH-60 helicopter and a slow-flying C-130 cargo plane out of Clearwater, Florida.  Watch Coast Guard rescue Haitians after boat capsizes »



"If the weather and conditions are right, [the C-130] can fly really low," Johnson said. "It makes a fantastic search aircraft."



Turks and Caicos authorities are using small boats in the search, she said.



About 70 people were plucked Monday from a reef near the island group, authorities said. Four other bodies were found, though it was unclear which authorities located them.



A nurse at Myrtle Rigby Hospital in the Turks and Caicos said that about 70 people were brought there, including four who had died.



Five people were admitted to the hospital, and the others had minor injuries, the nurse said.



The Coast Guard said it intercepted another "grossly overloaded" boat, with 124 Haitians aboard, late last week in the same region. Those migrants were returned to Cap Haitien on Monday.



Overloaded vessels can quickly lose stability and capsize, sending migrants into the water, a Coast Guard release said.



CNN's Jim Kavanagh and Lateef Mungin contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- A motorcycle competitor has died the first stage of this year's Dakar Rally in Argentina Sunday.





Jorge Martinez Boero was only two kilometers from the finish of the 57km special from Mar del Plata to Santa Rosa when he came off his Beta bike with tragic results.





Organizers said the 38-year-old from Argentina, who was taking part in the annual event for the second time, suffered a cardiac arrest after his fall.





He was treated by medical staff within five minutes of the accident, but died on the way to hospital.





In a statement on the official website of the endurance rally, organizers sent their "heartfelt condolences to his family and loved one's."





Boero's death was the 21st involving a competitor during the event, which was started in 1979 as the Paris-Dakar rally.





It finished in the Senegal capital for 29 times until the organizers brought the event to South America in 2009.





This year's event covers 9,000 kilometers and takes in Argentina, Peru and Chile.





Cars, motorcycles and trucks compete in their various categories over a series of grueling special stages on difficult terrain.





Chilean Francisco Lopez won the opening stage of the motorbike section as the Aprilia rider covered the 57km course in 32 minutes 37seconds.





Russia's Leonid Novitzkiy took first in the cars section in a Mini, with NASCAR star Robby Gordon in fifth place in his Hummer.

***

(CNN) -- England and France set themselves on course for the quarterfinals of Rugby's World Cup with their second wins of the competition in New Zealand Sunday.





Fellow Six Nations side Wales also revived their hopes with a hard-fought 17-10 win over Samoa after their narrow opening defeat in Pool D to defending champions South Africa.





Martin Johnson's England saw off another determined challenge from Georgia 41-10 to stay on top in Pool B, while France beat Canada 46-19.





The French were troubled by the Canadians, who only trailed by a converted try after an hour before Damien Traille grabbed a breakaway try and Vincent Clerc crossed twice late on to make the scoreline flattering.





Marc Lievremont's team will have to improve against hosts New Zealand in Auckland next Saturday, with the losers likely to face England in the last eight.





England were scarcely more impressive against a Georgian team who have impressed in the World Cup and were also in touch at halftime.





But England pulled away after the break with Shontayne Hape and Chris Ashton scoring two tries apiece with Delon Armitage and Manu Tuilagi also going over.





After the off-field furore involving Mike Tindall, who captained the side in the opening win over Argentina, England were looking for a big performance but Johnson was disappointed with their display.





"If we are happy with those standards we will go home early," he told AFP.





Wales were behind in Hamilton as they trailed 10-6 at the half, but were sparked into life by winger Shane Williams's 67th-minute try, his eighth in the World Cup.





"We knew today was a must-win game," said coach Warren Gatland."

***

BEIJING, China (CNN)  -- A 13-year-old Chinese girl tried to commit suicide because she wanted her family to donate her liver to her cancer-stricken father, state media reported Thursday.

The girl, Chen Jin, swallowed more than 200 sleeping pills after she discovered a medical note in her mother's purse that said her father was dying of liver cancer and had three months left to live, the news agency Xinhua said.

Jin's mother returned home after visiting her husband in the hospital to find the front door locked. The mother climbed in through a back window and found two empty bottles of sleeping pills.

"Mom, I'm sorry I couldn't stay with you any longer," read a note that the teen had left next to her. "Please give my liver to dad and save him after my death."

The incident occurred January 24 in Jiangsu province in east China. The teen was taken to the same hospital as her father, where she remains in intensive care, drifting in and out of consciousness, Xinhua said.

Doctors say that even if she pulls through, she will need surgery for burns she suffered from an electric blanket on her bed when she lost consciousness, the China Daily newspaper said.

According to Chinese media reports, the family -- whose monthly income is about 1,000 yuan ($146) -- has already spent nearly 100,000 yuan ($14,600) in medical expenses since the father was diagnosed with cancer more than a month ago. The mother, who is also in poor health, retired early more than eight years ago.

The woman told China Daily she is now trying to keep her husband from learning of their daughter's desperate act of love.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- "Why do I find it hard to write the next line?" If you recognize the lyric then brace yourself for some good news.

Spandau Ballet, pictured aboard HMS Belfast, on Wednesday.

Twenty years since their acrimonious split, Spandau Ballet -- the pin-up boys who helped shaped the sound of 1980s glam pop -- have announced the first dates of what band members say will be a full world tour.

The Tony Hadley-fronted band, who enjoyed worldwide success with hits such as "True" and "Gold," will launch their comeback in Dublin, Ireland, on October 13 before playing seven dates across the UK.

Wednesday's announcement took place onboard HMS Belfast, a retired Royal Navy moored in the Thames that was the scene of a key early gig by the band in 1980 that launched them on the road to global stardom.

"It is impossible to stress too highly how achingly fashionable Spandau Ballet were in the winter of 1979 and the summer of 1980," GQ magazine editor Dylan Jones writes in a biography of the band.

Formed at a London school in 1979, Spandau Ballet went on to sell 25 million records worldwide, emerging out of the post-punk "New Romantic" music scene.

Along with fellow British band Duran Duran, their sound, style and attitude came to define an era dominated by ostentatious glamour, gold lame suits and big hair.

"Not only did their albums sell by the millions, but their look and style impacted on the fashion world and beyond," said a press release, summing up the band's influence on the decade.

"They created their own style, combining creativity with entrepreneurship and the 'can do' spirit of early 80s youth at a time of crisis and upheaval eerily reminiscent of 2009. Spandau Ballet are both commercially and culturally enormous."

Following the band's split in 1989, several members including Hadley unsuccessfully sued main songwriter Gary Kemp for a larger share of songwriting royalties.

Since then, Hadley has appeared in the London production of the hit musical "Chicago" and also won an 80s revivalist reality TV show "Reborn in the USA." Several other members of the band have carved out moderately successful acting careers.

***

ATLANTA, Georgia (CNN)  -- Atlanta rapper DeAndre Cortez Way, better known by his stage name Soulja Boy Tell 'Em or just Soulja Boy, was charged with obstruction after running from police despite an order to stop, a police spokesman said Friday.



Rapper Soulja Boy was arrested in Georgia after allegedly running from police.



The 19-year-old singer was among a large group that had gathered at a home in Stockbridge, 20 miles south of Atlanta, said Henry County, Georgia, police Capt. Jason Bolton.



Way was arrested Wednesday night along with another man, Bolton said. Police said Way left jail Thursday after posting a $550 bond.



Bolton said officers responded to a complaint about a group of youths milling around the house, which appeared to be abandoned. When police arrived, they saw about 40 people. Half of them ran away, including Way, Bolton said.



The ones who remained told officers they were at the home to film a video. Way was arrested when he returned to the house to get his car, Bolton said. He said the house was dark inside and looked abandoned.



"He just ran from the police, and then he decided to come back," according to Bolton.



The second man who returned for his vehicle was arrested after police found eight $100 counterfeit bills inside, according to the officer.



Way broke into the music scene two years ago with his hit "Crank That (Soulja Boy)." The rapper also describes himself as a producer and entrepreneur.

***

(CNN) -- France has awarded its highest decoration to veteran CNN correspondent Jim Bittermann.



CNN's Jim Bittermann at the special ceremony in  Paris where he was made a chevalier.



At a special ceremony presided over by the Foreign Minister Bernard Kouchner in Paris Tuesday, Bittermann was presented with the "chevalier" (knight) of the National Order of the Legion of Honor.



Bittermann, CNN's senior European correspondent based in Paris, said: "For the past 30 years, I've been explaining France and the French to the rest of the world."



During his career with CNN in Paris Bittermann has covered the death of Princess Diana, the last days of Yasser Arafat, the French triumph at the 1998 World Cup and the Concorde air disaster.



He joined CNN from ABC News, where he was a Paris news correspondent from 1990-1996; before that Bittermann was a European correspondent for NBC News. He began his career in broadcast journalism in 1970 in Milwaukee.



Founded in 1802 by Napoleon Bonaparte to recognize outstanding accomplishment, the chevalier is given annually to around 3,500 Frenchmen and women -- but few non-nationals.



Of the 13 honorees this year from outside France, two are American. Previous non-French recipients include former U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower, fillm legends Charles Chaplin and Orson Welles and Norman Schwarzkopf, who led allied forces against Iraqi ruler Saddam Hussein during the first Gulf War.



Apart from his work for CNN, in recent years Bittermann has been a featured speaker at journalism events such as the International Diplomacy Institute, as well as lecturing and moderating panels at the World Economic Forum in Davos.



In 1999 Bittermann was appointed a professor at the American University of Paris, teaching courses broadcast news, writing and production and politics and media among others.

***

(CNN) -- A judge subpoenaed the Spanish king's son-in-law Thursday in a corruption case that has drawn increased scrutiny to the royal family.





Inaki Urdangarin, the Duke of Palma de Mallorca, must testify on February 6, a Spanish court said in a statement.





The case, widely reported in Spanish media for weeks, has fueled public criticism of the royal family. Thursday's statement from the Balearic Islands Superior Court of Justice formally named Urdangarin as a defendant, but did not specify charges against him.





According to media reports, authorities have been investigating whether a foundation headed by Urdangarin improperly used public funds.





Mario Pascual Vives, an attorney representing Urdangarin, told reporters Thursday that his client is "absolutely innocent."





Vives said Urdangarin, who lives in Washington, was on a skiing trip in the United States and had not spoken with him about the case since the court's announcement Thursday.





Urdangarin, a former Olympic handball player, married the Spanish king's youngest daughter in 1997.





The corruption allegations have brought increased scrutiny to the monarchy as Spain faces a nationwide economic crisis.





The court's announcement came a day after Spain's royal family publicly revealed its finances for the first time in an effort to boost public confidence and transparency.





An announcement by the royal palace that Urdangarin will not participate in official family activities during the investigation and remarks by King Juan Carlos in his Christmas Eve speech that "justice is equal for everyone" have deflected public criticisms of the royal family, according to Gerardo Correas of the International School of Protocol in Madrid.





A large round of applause greeted the king at an inauguration ceremony for the new legislature earlier this week, Correas said.





But many Spaniards were still buzzing over the political scandal -- with some asking whether other members of the royal family were connected to, or aware of, Urdangarin's business dealings.





"The debate continues in the street and will continue for a long time," Correas said.





CNN's Ana Maria Luengo-Romero and Miguel Angel Antonanzas contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- A British man convicted of having sex on a Dubai beach was re-arrested as he prepared to board a flight back to the UK, according to media reports.



File image of one of the co-accused -- Vince Acors -- arriving at court in Dubai in September.



Vince Acors, 34, from London, was due to fly to Heathrow Monday following his deportation from the Gulf state. But he was detained at Dubai Airport and returned to jail as his flight confirmation was allegedly "not in order," the British Press Association said.



Acors and fellow Briton Michelle Palmer, 36, were initially given three-month jail terms for unmarried sex and public indecency, but these were suspended on appeal.



Acors had been due to return last Friday but a hold-up in the deportation process meant he was unable to board a UK-bound plane and spent the weekend in jail, PA said.



His lawyer Andrew Crossley said: "The return of Vince Acors has been delayed yet again and he will not be returning to the UK. The situation is close to becoming farcical and Vince is severely disappointed.



"After having booked and confirmed his return flight on three separate occasions through the course of the day Vince was re-arrested at Dubai Airport, as his flight confirmation was allegedly not in order. He has been returned to jail, his precise return is now unknown."



Palmer and Acors were arrested on a public beach shortly after midnight on July 5. Police charged them with illicit relations, public indecency, and public intoxication. A court found them guilty in October and fined them 1,000 dirhams ($367) for the charge of public indecency.



Both denied they had intercourse. And during the trial, Mattar argued that the public prosecutor failed to produce corroborative evidence against his clients on the first two charges, though he said both tested positive for liquor.



The United Arab Emirates, where Dubai is located, is home to thousands of expatriates and is among the most moderate Gulf states. Still, the oil-rich kingdom adheres to certain Islamic rules.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Investigators had a "significant break" in tracking the salmonella outbreak when they found the bacteria on a jalapeño pepper imported from Mexico at a Texas food supplier, the Food and Drug Administration announced Monday.



The FDA has discouraged all consumers from eating raw jalapeño peppers.



The FDA also warned consumers not to eat fresh jalapeños and products made with fresh jalapeños.



The discovery may provide a clue to the source of a recent outbreak of Salmonella Saintpaul. The bacteria have sickened more than 1,200 people in 42 states, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.    "One of the jalapeño peppers has tested positive with a genetic match to the Saintpaul strand," said Robert Tauxe, deputy director of the CDC's Division of Foodborne, Bacterial and Mycotic Diseases. Consumer Tips Blog: Hold the jalapeños  He said officials are "looking at the chain that the peppers would have passed through to decide if any of them are a point of contamination."   Watch more on the salmonella outbreak »  Tauxe called the discovery a "significant break."   "While this one sample does not give us the whole story, this genetic break is very important," he said. "This will hopefully help us pinpoint the source of this outbreak."



The bacteria were found at a distribution center in McAllen, Texas, and the distributor has agreed to recall the products. Although the pepper was grown on a farm in Mexico, Tauxe said, investigators are not yet certain where the bacteria originated.  Read food safety tips »  "This does not mean that the pepper was contaminated in Mexico," he said. "We aren't only looking for the source, but the reason for the spread [of the outbreak]."



The news comes just days after the FDA lifted its ban on consumption of certain raw tomatoes. The FDA has not ruled out tomatoes as the source of the original outbreak, but investigators have determined that tomatoes currently in fields and stores are safe, Dr. David Acheson, the FDA's associate commissioner for food protection, said Thursday.  Learn about the differences between salmonella and E. coli »  The FDA is still investigating fresh tomatoes as a possible source of the outbreak. It is possible that tomatoes were paired with another food that was contaminated, Tauxe said.  Watch more on the FDA investigation » Before Monday's warning, the agency had discouraged high-risk people -- elderly people, infants and those with impaired immune systems -- from eating serrano and jalapeño peppers.  Two elderly men with pre-existing conditions died while infected with Salmonella Saintpaul, and the FDA said the infection could have contributed to their deaths.

***

(CNN) -- Indian batsman Virender Sehwag admitted he was not too disappointed after he fell seven agonising runs short of a world record third triple-century in the third Test against Sri Lanka.



The 31-year-old opener had moved from his overnight score of 284 to 293 before he chipped a flighted delivery from Muttiah Muralitharan back to the bowler who claimed the catch at the second attempt.



"I am very happy I got at least 293 runs -- I am proud of what I have achieved," Sehwag told reporters at the close of the third day's play.



"Not many people have got two triple centuries and followed that with 293. So there is nothing to be disappointed about.



"I tried to take my time, but maybe the ball was not there to be hit. I misjudged the length and the ball went straight into Murali's hands.



"I always tell myself to bat the full day, and if there is a ball to be hit, just hit it. If I'm able to bat the whole day we will be in a good position."



The innings, which lasted 254 balls and included 40 boundaries and seven sixes, was the backbone of India's highest-ever total of 726-9 declared in reply to Sri Lanka's 393.



India skipper Mahendra Dhoni hit an unbeaten century before he opted to declare with a lead of 333 before Sri Lanka saw off a difficult few overs in their second innings to close on 11 without loss.



Elsewhere, England claimed a 2-1 series victory over South Africa in Durban after the fifth one-day international was abandoned without a ball being bowled.



Andrew Strauss' side became only the third team to beat the Proteas in a home one-day series after the umpires called the match off with the onset of another heavy downpour.



Meanwhile, a century from Dwayne Bravo was the highlight of a competitive opening day of the second Test between Australia and the West Indies at the Adelaide Oval.



The West Indies won the toss, elected to bat and finished the final session with momentum to be 336 for six at stumps.

***

(CNN) -- Ghana international Michael Essien has followed goalkeeper Petr Cech in agreeing a new five-year contract with English Premier League side Chelsea.

Michael Essien has made a big impression on new Chelsea coach Luiz Felipe Scolari.

The midfielder, who is in China for the start of the club's pre-season tour, is now tied to the London outfit until the summer of 2013.

The 25-year-old has made 143 appearances since moving to Stamford Bridge from French club Lyon in a $49 million transfer in August 2005, scoring 14 goals in total and helping Chelsea win the league title that season.

Essien's decision to commit his long-term future to the club is a boost for new manager Luiz Felipe Scolari, who allowed veteran holding midfielder Claude Makelele to join Paris St Germain on Monday.

"I have not been here long but it is clear to me that Michael Essien is one of the best midfield players in the world," Scolari said. "I have always admired him and it is good news for me and for Chelsea that he signs for so long."

The Accra-born Essien, who started his career in France with Bastia in 2000 before moving to Lyon three years later, was also pleased with the deal.

"I am really pleased to have extended my career with Chelsea," he said. "I am very happy here. We have a great team and fantastic fans who have always made me welcome.

"With the addition of the new manager, I am feeling very positive about the season ahead."

Chelsea announced on Monday that Czech Republic goalkeeper Cech signed a new five-year deal, while England full-back Wayne Bridge committed himself to four more years last week.

Scolari is still seeking to keep England midfielder Frank Lampard, who has ended talks over a new deal and now appears to be resigned to waiting until his contract runs out before joining Inter Milan following the upcoming season.

The Brazilian has so far added only Portugal playmaker Deco to his midfield ranks.

His first match in charge will be Wednesday's friendly against Guangzhou Pharmaceutical, one of the three games the team will play in China.

Striker Didier Drogba, who has been linked with moves to AC Milan and Barcelona, is not among the touring squad due to a recurring knee problem.

Khalid Boulahrouz, meanwhile, completed his transfer from Chelsea to Stuttgart on a four-year contract with the Bundesliga club.

The Netherlands central defender was released Monday by Chelsea and arrived in Stuttgart's training camp in Austria shortly before midnight after passing a medical exam in Stuttgart.

The deal between Stuttgart and Chelsea was completed Tuesday. Details were not given.

The Dutchman played for Hamburger SV for two seasons before going to Chelsea in 2006. He was loaned to FC Sevilla last season.

Boulahrouz's departure came a day after 35-year-old former France international Claude Makelele signed a two-year deal with Paris-Saint Germain after joining from Chelsea on a free transfer.

***

(CNN) -- Marco Simoncelli's local track is to renamed in his honor following the Italian MotoGP star's death in Malaysia last month.





The 24-year-old was born in Cattolica on the Adriatic Riviera, less than five miles from the Misano World Circuit, which will now bear his name.





The board of directors of the circuit voted unanimously for the change following the tragic accident at the Sepang International circuit on October 23 which claimed Simoncelli's life.





"We owe it to the memory of Sic (Simoncelli's nickname)," Lucas Colaiacovo, the circuit's vice president was quoted on its official website.





"We owe it to his family, to the hundreds of thousands of fans who admired his courage and humanity, all of the individuals in the sporting world and media who support this spontaneous and moving proposal.





"We are pleased and proud to associate the Misano circuit with Marco Simoncelli, a champion in sport and in life."





The circuit added that it would not use Simoncelli's name for any commercial activities.





Meanwhile, the MotoGP series has moved to the Spanish port city of Valencia for the first race since Simoncelli's fatal accident.





His San Carlo Honda Gresini team are taking part in the final round of the world championship in his honor, but it was newly-crowned champion Casey Stoner on his Repsol Honda who set the fastest lap in first practice Friday.





Suzuki's Alvaro Bautista led a wet second session with a time of one minute 47.975 secs, two seconds slower than Stoner's earlier benchmark.





It was marked by a series of crashes, one of them involving Simoncelli's former teammate Hiroshi Aoyama, but he escaped unhurt.

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN) -- George Harrison's closest friends and family gathered in Hollywood on Tuesday to dedicate the late Beatle's star on the Walk of Fame.



From left, musicians Tom Petty, Jeff Lynne and Paul McCartney join Harrison's relatives for dedication of his star.



"There's someone here from every important stage of George's life and career," Harrison's widow, Olivia, said.



Harrison, who was 58 when he died of cancer in 2001, becomes the second Beatle with a Hollywood star. John Lennon was the first.



The new star is next to the iconic Hollywood headquarters of Capitol Records, the distributor of much of Harrison's music for the past five decades.



Tuesday's ceremony coincided with the Capitol/EMI announcement that it will release Harrison's first solo greatest hits collection -- "Let it Roll: Songs by George Harrison" -- on June 16.



Actor Tom Hanks said the world changed for him in January 1964 when he heard his first Beatles song.



"That's when we escaped the doldrums and moved on to a brighter, better, more joyful future," Hanks said.



Superstar musicians Paul McCartney, Tom Petty, Joe Walsh and Jeff Lynne attended the star's dedication, but they did not address the crowd.



Scores of Harrison fans showed up for the event, with some traveling from as far as Liverpool, England.



"We all have deep feelings for George, because he was such a deep-feeling person," Olivia Harrison said.



"He was a beautiful, mystical man, living in a material world," she said. "He was funny as the day is long and just as perplexing."



His son, Dhani, 30, joked about his father's star.



"It's good, it's lovely and it's nice and shiny and I'm glad it's not outside of Frederick's of Hollywood," he said.



Harrison was just 15 when schoolmate Paul McCartney asked him to join his and John Lennon's band, the Quarrymen. The band evolved into the Beatles and the rest is history.



Harrison played lead guitar and sang for the Beatles. Songs penned by Harrison included "Taxman," "While My Guitar Gently Weeps," "Something" and "Here Comes the Sun."



Harrison was a pioneer of what has since become a tradition of rock stars supporting charitable causes with their music. In 1971, he helped organize the star-studded "Concert for Bangladesh" at New York's Madison Square Garden.



In addition to his post-Beatles solo career, Harrison played with several groups -- most notably the Traveling Wilburys, alongside Petty, Lynne, Roy Orbison and Bob Dylan.



CNN's Denise Quan contributed to this report.

***

LAGOS, Nigeria (CNN)  -- A man "angered" by Manchester United's defeat to Barcelona in the final of the Champions League killed four people when he drove a minibus into a crowd celebrating the Spanish side's victory, police in Nigeria have told CNN.



Barcelona fans celebrate in the city's Las Ramblas thoroughfare early Thursday morning.



Ten people were also injured in the incident in the town of Ogbo, where the driver was subsequently arrested, a Port Harcourt Police spokesperson said.



"He was displaying his anger at his team losing the match. The driver had passed the crowd then made a U-turn and ran into them," spokesperson Rita Inomey-Abbey said.



Both Manchester United and Barcelona have a large fan base across the African continent, with millions tuning in to watch European football on a weekly basis.



Meanwhile, more than 100 people were arrested in Barcelona city center in the early hours of Thursday morning following the Catalan team's 2-0 victory in Rome in the final of Europe's top club competition.



Police arrested 119 young people after violence flared at a special celebration party in Place de Catalunya near the Las Ramblas thoroughfare, while 238 people suffered minor injuries.



City officials estimated the damage at up to 100,000 euros ($140,000) as the youths attacked police with bottles and damaged shops, parks and public utilities such as lamp-posts.



The trouble took some of the gloss off the achievement of Barcelona, who became the first team to win the Champions League, Spanish League and Spanish Cup titles in one season.



Manager Josep Guardiola led the club to glory in his first season in charge, ending a period of three years without a trophy.

***

ST. PETERSBURG, Florida (CNN) -- The acrimony from the Republican campaign trail carried over quickly into the CNN/YouTube GOP presidential debate Wednesday.

The debate marked the first time the candidates had faced off on the same stage in over a month.

With five weeks to go until the first contest of the 2008 nominating season, the Republican candidates engaged in a free-for-all, trying to differentiate their views on immigration, the Iraq war, abortion, gun control and even whether they believed every word in the Bible was true.

Unlike previous debates in which the candidates focused most of their attacks on Democratic front-runner Hillary Clinton, Wednesday night's attacks were launched at each other.

Former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani and former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney traded jabs over illegal immigration, something they have been arguing about on the trail for the past month.

Romney attacked Giuliani's record, saying that as mayor, he promoted illegal immigration. And Giuliani shot back, accusing Romney of having a "sanctuary mansion" at his own home.  Watch the debate format produce raw moments »

"In his case, there were six sanctuary cities. He did nothing about them. There was a sanctuary mansion -- at his own home, illegal immigrants were being employed," Giuliani said.

Romney denied Giuliani's allegation, and the two raised their voices as they tried to talk over each other.

In his quest to appeal to the hard-line immigration wing of the party, Romney also turned some of his fire on the same topic toward former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee, who has been rising in the polls.

Rep. Tom Tancredo, who has anchored his candidacy on securing the borders and cracking down on illegal immigration, seemed delighted with the give and take, saying the other candidates were trying to "out-Tancredo" him.

Huckabee drew one of the night's largest cheers when he said that one of the agencies he would abolish to control federal spending was the Internal Revenue Service.

"Most people in this country are more afraid of an audit than they are of a mugging, and there's a reason why," he said.

Sen. John McCain, freshly back from a visit to Iraq over Thanksgiving and the most hawkish of the candidates, and Rep. Ron Paul, the most anti-war of the candidates, tangled on two occasions over the Iraq war.  Did  YouTubers get their questions answered? »

Asked which government programs they would cut, Paul said bringing the troops home from Iraq would save "a trillion dollars."

McCain said: "It's that kind of isolationism that caused World War II," which drew some hoots from the crowd.  Watch McCain, Paul spar on Iraq »

Paul replied: "The real question you have to ask is why do I get the most money from active duty officers and military personnel?"

A retired brigadier general, Keith Kerr, who is gay, asked candidates if they thought U.S. military personnel were professional enough to work with gay and lesbian troops.

CNN later learned that a June media release from the campaign of Democratic  front-runner Clinton listed Kerr as a member of its steering committee for gay and lesbian supporters.  Watch Kerr deny that the Clinton campaign influenced his question »

David Bohrman, CNN senior vice president and executive producer of the debate, said, "We regret this incident. CNN would not have used the general's question had we known that he was connected to any presidential candidate." Political Ticker

Kerr told CNN after the debate that he has not worked for the Clinton campaign and was representing no one other than himself. Kerr also said he is a member of the Log Cabin Republicans, a national gay and lesbian Republican grass-roots organization.

Prior to the debate, CNN had verified Kerr's military background and that he had not contributed money to any presidential candidate.

In a section of the debate about gun ownership rights, three of the GOP presidential hopefuls said they do not own guns: McCain, Giuliani and Romney.

***

NEW DELHI, India (CNN) -- India on Wednesday urged Sri Lanka's Tamil rebels to "release" civilians, who it said numbered about 70,000 in Sri Lanka's war zone.





A Sri Lankan soldier poses in front of a Tamil Tigers emblem in the rebel group's former military headquarters.





India is ready to help evacuate them, External Affairs Minister Pranab Mukherjee told the Indian parliament.





"Estimates on the number of civilians trapped vary, but 70,000 or so are estimated to be there now. The LTTE were reportedly using them as human shields," he said, referring to the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, also known as the Tamil Tigers.





"As the conflict enters what may be the final phase of military operations, the LTTE would best serve the interest of the Tamils by immediately releasing all civilians and laying down arms," Mukherjee added.





He noted that some civilians had either been caught in cross-fire or "stopped and even killed" by Tamil rebels as they tried to escape.





Government troops and the Tamil Tigers are locked in a battle over the rebels' remaining territory in northern Sri Lanka's Vanni region.





The rebels have been fighting for an independent homeland for the country's ethnic Tamil minority since 1983.





Tens of thousands of people have fled the region as government forces have advanced and rebels have been pushed into a smaller and smaller patch of land.





CNN's Harmeet Shah Singh contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- AC Milan coach Leonardo has admitted his relationship with club owner and Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi is "difficult."





Italian newspaper Corriere dello Sport reported Berlusconi as saying the former Brazil international would be leaving at the end of a season in which Milan failed to make a title bid and were thrashed in the second round of the European Champions League by English club Manchester United.





Although Milan vice-president Adriano Galliani refuted the quotes from Berlusconi on Italian television, a denial from the prime minister has not yet been forthcoming.





At a news conference on Friday Leonardo told reporters: "I don't know what Berlusconi said but, aside from this, I can't deny that our relationship is difficult.





"We are very different, perhaps we are incompatible, but the important thing is the next three games and I care about them too much.





"I believe I am headstrong. I believe in my ideas and I do so with passion. It's an incompatibility on a style level and a way of being.





"If someone says that I have said something that I haven't said, I deny it. But the relationship will go forward.





"I have never spoken about the future because I have never considered it to be the moment for obvious reasons, and I don't consider it to be today either."





Leonardo has been linked with a return to South America but he insisted he has received no offers to return to Brazil.





He said: "I can say that I have never spoken with anyone at Flamengo, the Brazilian FA and the 2014 World Cup organizing committee. I have no official offer from anyone."





AC Milan play Fiorentina at the San Siro in Serie A on Sunday.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- More than 170 people around the globe, including at least 61 in the United States, have been arrested in a major operation targeting international child pornographers, officials said Friday.





Attorney General Michael Mukasey and European Union representatives announced the sting's results Friday.





Operation Joint Hammer has rescued 11 girls in the United States, ages 3 to 13, who were sexually abused by child pornography producers, U.S. Attorney General Michael Mukasey and representatives of the European Union said at the Justice Department.





Dozens more were located in Europe, including several young female victims in Ukraine.





Authorities found connections between producers, distributors and customers in nearly 30 countries as a single investigation grew to a global inquiry into the dark corners of brutality and child abuse.





The investigation, code-named Operation Koala in Europe, was developed when investigators determined that a pornographic video found in Australia had been produced in Belgium.





"This joint EU-U.S. coordinated effort began with the discovery in Europe of a father who was sexually abusing his young daughters and producing images of that abuse," Mukasey said.





Further investigation showed a number of online child porn rings. Some included dangerous offenders who not only traded child pornography but also sexually abused children, the officials said.





Agents are still attempting to locate child victims whose images have appeared in photos and videos, and more arrests are expected as the FBI, Immigration and Customs Enforcement and the Postal Inspection Service continue the investigation.





A Postal Service official said ringleaders primarily targeted prepubescent female victims to satisfy their customers but noted that other groups produce photos and videos of boys and girls of all ages -- or even infants.





"For this subset, that's what turns them on," the official said.

***

(CNN) -- The Virginia Tech community on Monday remembered Deriek Crouse, the police officer who was gunned down last week while conducting a routine traffic stop on campus.





The funeral service for Crouse, 39, was held at Cassell Coliseum, near where authorities say he was shot dead Thursday by Ross Truett Ashley. A witness saw Ashley approach the officer's vehicle -- where Crouse was at the time -- and open fire, then flee the scene, police said.





The 22-year-old shooter, who was not involved in the traffic stop and had no connection with Crouse before the shooting, killed himself about 30 minutes later a quarter of a mile away, authorities said.





"He was a lifelong public servant," Virginia Gov. Bob McDonnell said of Crouse at Monday's service. "For the last four years, he went to work here protecting the citizens of the state and the students and the faculty and the administrators of Virginia Tech, swearing the oath of the Constitution, strapping on his gun, putting on his badge and doing a police officer's duty."





Crouse, an Army veteran, joined the Virginia Tech police force six months after a 2007 mass shooting on the Virginia Tech campus, according to the school's website.





He had worked at the New River Valley jail and with the Montgomery County Sheriff's Department. Crouse was trained as a crisis intervention officer, firearms instructor and defensive tactics instructor.





The Christiansburg, Virginia, resident is survived by his wife, Tina, plus five children and stepchildren, his mother and brother.





Students, supporters and others affiliated with Virginia Tech have championed Crouse's memory since his death, including making attempts to help his family.





An online effort known as "Hokies for Crouse" had raised nearly $75,000 for the Crouse family as of early Monday afternoon.

***

(CNN)  -- At least 10 people were killed, and an unknown number remained missing Wednesday, after a boat authorities believe was used for human smuggling capsized off the coast of Florida.



The Coast Guard said it rescued 26 people from a capsized boat off the coast of Florida.



Almost all of the victims are believed to be from Haiti and the Bahamas, according to the U.S. Coast Guard -- which said a dangerous number of people was packed onto a small pleasure cruiser.



The Coast Guard said it rescued 26 people from the boat, and searchers didn't know how many more people had been on the boat.



"You don't put 26 people on a small boat. It was way overloaded, completely unsafe," said Capt. Jim Fitton, the Coast Guard's sector commander in Miami, Florida. "With smugglers, you have the potential for this because smugglers aren't interested in people's welfare. They're interested in making money."



The boat capsized about 15 miles east of Boynton Beach, Florida, some time around 2 a.m. Wednesday, the Coast Guard said. The agency was notified more than nine hours later by someone who saw the boat.



There were women and children on the boat, Fitton said. A pregnant woman was taken to a hospital, while most of the victims remained onboard a Coast Guard cutter that was being used in the continuing rescue efforts, he said.



Only eight of the people rescued by Wednesday afternoon were wearing life jackets.



The Rev. Luke Harrigan, a Ft. Lauderdale, Florida, pastor to members of the Haitian community who is working with the Coast Guard, said he is contacting family members of the victims who were killed.



"Most of them now didn't even know they were coming to the United States," he said. "Sometimes the person organizing the trip doesn't even tell them where they are going."



He said it's not uncommon for smugglers to charge people from the impoverished island nation as much as $4,000 for passage into the United States.



Coast Guard rescuers were continuing to search the area of the crash Wednesday evening.

***

Click here for video



Thursday, August 20, 2009



8:13 PM ET - Gruesome details emerging from Buena Park police in the brutal death of 28 year old Jasmine Fiore. Not only was Fiore stuffed in a suitcase and thrown away in a dumpster, but we learn Fiore's teeth and fingers were removed. Authorities believe the murder suspect, Ryan Jenkins, is armed with a handgun, still on the run, most likely in Canada. (From Stacey Newman, Nancy Grace Producer)



7:24 PM ET - Moments ago Buena Park, California police announced that as of this afternoon an arrest warrant has been issued for Ryan Jenkins in the murder of 28 year old swimsuit model Jasmine Fiore. Jenkins is officially a fugitive. Although Jenkins' black BMW has been located in Washington State, Fiore's white Mercedes is still missing. Authorities do believe Jenkins has crossed the border into Canada and they are now working with Canadian Royal Police to apprehend Jenkins. (From Stacey Newman, Nancy Grace Producer)



6:23 PM ET - Major developments right now! The Orange County DA's office confirms they will file murder charges against reality TV star Ryan Jenkins in the brutal death of swimsuit model Jasmine Fiore. A news conference is set to take place any moment, standby for more details. We will also bring you all the latest developments on the show at 8pm EST for the full hour tonight. (From Stacey Newman, Nancy Grace Producer)



3 PM ET - Is a reality TV star wanted for questioning in the murder of swimsuit model 28 year old Jasmine Fiore on the run? LA cops have been unable to get in touch with Ryan Jenkins since Jenkins reported her missing and cops discovered the gorgeous model dead inside a suitcase dumped inside a Buena Park apartment complex dumpster. The last reported sightings of Jenkins were in San Diego alongside Fiore, before her death and within the last 48 hours near a Washington state marina. Jenkins' car and empty boat trailer discovered at that marina alongside the US-Canadian border. The Buena Park police are set to hold a news conference shortly. (From Stacey Newman, Nancy Grace Producer)



1:41 PM ET - Investigators confirm a reality TV star they want to question in connection with the murder of swimsuit beauty Jasmine Fiore may be heading for the border. A car and empty boat trailer belonging to Ryan Jenkins was discovered at a marina in Washington State, a few miles from the Canadian border. Authorities say Jenkins most likely walked across the border to British Columbia. LAPD wants to question Jenkins as a person of interest in Fiore's death because he was one of the last people to see her, reported her missing hours before the model's body was found, then took off. Jenkins has a criminal domestic violence record and was best known for his appearance on VH1's "Megan Wants a Millionaire". In light of the investigation, VH1 has shut down airing any more new episodes. (From Stacey Newman, Nancy Grace Producer)



Wednesday, August 19, 2009:  7:28 PM ET - Preliminary reports are the swimsuit model found dead in a suitcase inside a Buena Park, California dumpster was strangled. Jasmine Fiore had signs of physical trauma when her body was discovered Saturday morning. The shocking discovery came just hours after her husband, reality TV star, Ryan Jenkins reported Fiore missing. The pair was last spotted in San Diego at a poker game Friday night. And the skeletons are already flying out of the closet for Jenkins. We've just received a criminal report stemming from a 2005 assault case in Calgary, Alberta involving Jenkins and a woman who was not Jasmine Fiore. (From Stacey Newman, Nancy Grace Producer)



5:36 PM ET - A reality TV star is making headlines at this hour for something other than appearing on the airwaves on VH1's "Megan Wants a Millionaire." Police want to question 32 year old Ryan Jenkins in connection with the brutal death of a young, gorgeous swimsuit model. 28 year old Jasmine Fiore vanished after a poker tournament in San Diego. Fiore was allegedly there with Jenkins and reports are the two were husband and wife, secretly married in Las Vegas. Police confirm Jenkins

***

(CNN) -- A man shot his estranged wife to death, along with their son and grandson, before turning the gun on himself as police closed in, authorities in Livingston Parish, Louisiana, said Sunday.



Police say Dennis Carter Sr. shot four family members, three fatally, before turning the gun on himself.



Dennis Carter Sr., 50, also shot and critically injured his pregnant daughter-in-law, the parish sheriff's office said in a statement.  The shootings occurred Saturday night in the town of Holden, Louisiana.



Authorities were dispatched to a report of shots fired at a home about 10:40 p.m. Upon arrival, they found three people dead and the fourth -- Amber Carter, 25 -- in critical condition, the statement said.



Those killed were Dennis Carter Jr., 26, Amber Carter's husband; their son Mason Carter, 2; and 49-year-old Donna Carter, mother of Dennis Carter Jr. and estranged wife of Dennis Carter Sr., police said. All had been shot to death. A 16-month-old child at the home was unharmed, authorities said.



Deputies believe Amber Carter attempted to escape from the gunman by jumping from a second-story window, holding Mason in her arms, the statement said, but the boy did not survive his gunshot wounds.



Amber Carter had several bullet wounds, said Perry Rushing, chief of operations for the sheriff's office, and authorities believe the gunman shot her in the back as she was attempting to get out the window while holding the child. She also may have been shot again after she got outside the home, Rushing told CNN.



Amber Carter was flown to a Baton Rouge, Louisiana, hospital, and later transferred to New Orleans, Rushing said. She was in critical condition as of Sunday morning.



A neighbor in the area told deputies that he heard a gunshot and saw Carter Sr. walking to a car, a red El Camino, with a gun in his hand, the sheriff's statement said.



At 11:30 p.m., a police officer in the adjacent town of Livingston saw the vehicle entering Interstate 12 heading eastbound, the statement said. A Livingston Parish sheriff's deputy followed the car and attempted to stop it. "However, the suspect shot himself with a handgun, in plain view of the officers, as the vehicle veered off the shoulder of the interstate near the Holden exit," police said.



Records from the Livingston Parish Detention Center show that Dennis Carter Sr., of Hammond, Louisiana, had been jailed "on three separate occasions in 2009 alone, on three separate charges of violation of a protective order and one charge of aggravated assault (domestic)," the sheriff's office said.



"At this time, there do not appear to be any other suspects or victims in this ongoing investigation," police said.



Holden is about 35 miles east of Baton Rouge.

***

(CNN) -- Evangelist Tony Alamo is likely to spend the rest of his life in prison after an Arkansas judge sentenced him to 175 years Friday on charges that included taking minors across state lines for sex, according to prosecutors.



A jury convicted Alamo in July on 10 federal counts covering offenses that spanned 11 years and dated back to 1994, according to documents from the U.S. District Court for the Western District of Arkansas.



Alamo, the 75-year-old founder and leader of Tony Alamo Christian Ministries, will serve the sentences on each count consecutively, for a total of 175 years in prison, prosecutors said.



In addition to his sentence, Alamo was fined $250,000, court documents showed.



His lawyer filed an appeal Friday.



Christopher Plumlee, assistant U.S. attorney for the Western District of Arkansas, welcomed the sentence.



"Given the number of victims and the difficult type of testimony they had to provide in order to get to trial, it's gratifying for them to see him get this sentence," he said. "Not only did they entrust their lives to him, he did it in the name of God. And he betrayed their trust."



Authorities in September 2008 arrested Alamo, whose real name is Bernie Hoffman, and raided his 15-acre compound near Texarkana, Arkansas.



An indictment released in November 2008 accused Alamo of transporting five girls across state lines for sex. The criminal complaint included accounts from three girls, two of whom were 17 when the complaint was released last year, and one who was 14.



All three said Alamo sexually abused them.



In a phone interview last year with CNN, Alamo called the accusations a hoax.



"They're just trying to make our church look evil ... by saying I'm a pornographer. Saying that I rape little children. ... I love children. I don't abuse them. Never have. Never will."

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Up to 80,000 items at the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library are unaccounted for, probably because of haphazard record-keeping and inventory procedures, officials said Thursday.



An audit found "significant breakdown in internal controls" at the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library.



An audit completed last month by the National Archives and Records Administration's inspector general looked at the management of presidential artifacts at six presidential libraries.



It "cites particular issues at the Ronald Reagan Library. ... We acknowledge that problems exist in inventory control at the Reagan library," said a statement from Allen Weinstein, national archivist.



Inspector General Paul Brachfield was more blunt.



A "significant breakdown in internal controls" was found at the Reagan library, in Simi Valley, California, he said in a statement Thursday.



The audit results prompted the Ronald Reagan Presidential Foundation to urge the National Archives -- which is responsible for maintaining the artifacts -- to move quickly to fix the problems.



The chairman of the board of trustees has contacted Weinstein "to express the serious concerns and disappointment on behalf of the Reagan Foundation and Mrs. Reagan," the foundation said.



Library officials told auditors that "the collection contained approximately 100,000 items, yet the library systems only had information to locate and account for approximately 20,000 items," Brachfield said.



"This does not automatically mean the approximately 80,000 remaining items are missing. The vast majority may very well be safely located within the library's storage facilities. ... Some of these items may be missing or stolen, or none of these items may be missing or stolen."



Control deficiencies at the library created an environment that could potentially have been exploited, Brachfield said.



Although Congress has a copy of the audit, it has not yet been made public because of the ongoing investigation into the whereabouts of the items.



The count of 100,000 was an estimate taken from the original Reagan White House Gift Unit database, Weinstein said Thursday, but was never meant to be used as a concrete inventory control number.



The Reagan library has already begun implementing recommendations from the audit, he said.



It has upgraded its management inventory software, is hiring additional trained museum staff, has begun a comprehensive inventory and is addressing storage issues by reshelving artifacts and taking steps to protect artifacts in case of an earthquake.



"Like all of the presidential libraries, the Reagan library stores their gifts in a locked vault, which is protected by a security camera," Weinstein said.



The audit examined management of artifacts at the Reagan library; the Franklin D. Roosevelt library; the John F. Kennedy library; the Gerald R. Ford library; the George Bush library; and the William J. Clinton library, Weinstein said.



"Early collections of artifacts came to presidential libraries with few controls and incomplete information relating to the collections," he said. E-mail to a friend

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- More than two dozen guests joined first lady Michelle Obama at the president's speech to a joint session of Congress Tuesday night.

Leonard Abess Jr. was recognized by President Obama during Tuesday's State of the Nation speech.

One person on the first lady's guest list was Leonard Abess Jr., a Miami banker who received a $60 million bonus from the proceeds from the sale of shares of City National Bank in Florida and gave it out to his 399 workers and 72 former workers.

During his speech, President Obama said Abess didn't tell anyone about his generosity, but when the local newspaper found out, Abess simply said, "I knew some of these people since I was 7 years old. I didn't feel right getting the money myself."

Abess demonstrates the kind of "responsibility" the president has called for from high-profile financial CEOs, the White House said.

Obama contrasted Abess' story with the greed that he said got the country into the problems it faces now.

"CEOs won't be able to use taxpayer money to pad their paychecks, or buy fancy drapes, or disappear on a private jet. Those days are over," Obama said.

Obama also referenced in his speech an eighth-grader who wrote a letter to members of Congress appealing for help in rebuilding her deteriorating school.

Ty'Sheoma Bethea, a student at the J.V. Martin Junior High School in Dillon, South Carolina, was invited after a letter she sent lawmakers appealing for help rebuilding her school made its way to President Obama.

Obama talked about the school during his first news conference earlier in February as evidence of crumbling schools across the country.

Other guests of the first lady Tuesday night included injured Afghanistan veteran Spc. Jonathan N. James, equal pay advocate Lilly Ledbetter and Blake Jones, the co-founder and president of a solar electric company.

The president and first lady  also invited Vermont Gov. Jim Douglas -- one of the president's key Republican allies among the nation's governors in passing the massive $787 billion stimulus bill -- and Ohio Gov. Ted Strickland, a key Democratic governor whose state is among the hardest hit by the economic downturn.

The practice of inviting guests to sit in the House Gallery is a tradition dating back to 1982 when president Ronald Reagan recognized Lenny Skutnick -- a good Samaritan who pulled a survivor out of the frozen Potomac River in Washington after an Air Florida plane crashed into the 14th Street Bridge.

Since then, presidential administrations steadily increased the number of invitees to the first lady box, often including prominent athletes and celebrities, citizen heroes, members of the military, and individuals likely to benefit from policies proposed by the president.

It has also become customary for the president to acknowledge a handful of guests sitting in the box during his speech, especially those who have a particularly compelling story or illustrate a point he is trying to make.

Earlier Tuesday, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi announced an expansive guest list of her own, including hero-U.S. Airways pilot Chesley "Sully" Sullenberger and several other crew members of flight 1549.

CNN's Alexander Mooney contributed to this report.

***

Port-au-Prince, Haiti (CNN) -- In patches across the Haitian capital, many earthquake survivors are not waiting for an international clearing and rebuilding effort to begin. They are pulling out shovels, wood and cement to slowly repair and rebuild themselves.





"This is what we have to do now," Jean-Fritznel St. Claire said as he hammered away at huge, fallen slabs of a Digicel office building, breaking them into chunks to be shoveled into a truck and taken away. Digicel is a telecommunications company.





St. Claire and three friends working with him at Digicel expected the company to pay them for their hard labor, but the group insists that they and others who stayed in the earthquake zone are eager to start clearing rubble and building what they can.





"The people who left [Port-au-Prince] have no hope," he said, his face dripping with sweat. "We have hope. So we're here."





Elsewhere in Port-au-Prince, businesses and families repaired cinderblock walls and pounded new beams into fractured roofs. One work crew near the airport replaced several broken sewer pipes that were part of a system set up for their neighborhood.





But this individual rebuilding alarms teams of engineers studying the damage in Haiti after the 7.0-magnitude earthquake January 12.





"It worries me," said Reginald Desroches, a Haitian-American engineer from Georgia Tech who is part of a volunteer assessment team working with the United Nations' mission in Haiti.





Desroches and his crew say many Haitians are using broken pieces of buildings as construction material, including the metal rebar, or reinforcement bars, that critically strengthen concrete but now lie twisted and bent in the rubble. That makes the bars weak and potentially unsafe.





But Haitians are turning to what's available -- even though the materials might be deemed unsafe -- to rebuild structures that ultimately may be declared unsound.





"This is a problem," fellow engineer Jean-Philippe Simon said. "These things can just collapse all over again."





Indeed, the Digicel building where St. Claire is working contains massive cracks, is missing a two-story wall and leans over the area he's cleaning up.





Asked if he's worried that the place could collapse, undermining his backbreaking work, St. Claire responds, "We can't control that. That is up to God."

***

(CNN) -- The slayings of two super-yacht staff within two weeks have shaken the luxury yacht industry and sparked calls for crews to exercise extreme caution.



Australian luxury yacht captain Drew Gollan was killed in January in English Harbor, Antigua.



Both slayings occurred in popular yachting destinations in the Caribbean and involved violent attacks.



Last week, U.S. luxury yacht chef Sara Kuszak, of Savannah, Georgia, was killed after being abducted during a morning run in Puerto Rico. The body of Kuszak, who was five months pregnant, was found with a slashed throat in a field. A local man has been arrested by police in connection with the incident.



On January 22, Australian Drew Gollan, captain of Perini Navi yacht Perseus, was shot dead in what was described as a "failed robbery" in English Harbor, Antigua.



Gollan, 38, was described as a "widely respected member of the yachting community." His death came less than a year after the double killing of a British couple on the island. Suspects have been arrested and charged with murder in both cases.



Antigua, in particular, is highly dependent on the luxury yacht industry to boost its local economy -- and it appears news of the crimes is already having a negative impact.



In a press release, the Antigua Charter Yacht Meeting acknowledged that "a number of boats have decided to leave Antigua in the wake of this incident." Further reports from yachting magazine SuperYachtWorld suggest several captains on the island have also decided to leave.



Meanwhile, luxury yacht staff who are remaining in the Caribbean have been urged by industry Web site yotcru.com to "exercise vigilant personal safety at all times."



After the death of Gollan, local Antigua politicians and yacht industry representatives held an emergency meeting to discuss the problem.



At the meeting, the prime minister of Antigua and Barbuda, Baldwin Spencer, said: "Antigua is still a safe place to be. It's an unfortunate situation, however we are all hoping that justice will be done," SuperYachtWorld reported.



Spencer also pledged new security efforts to help prevent future crimes.



An international charter company manager and luxury yacht industry expert, Els Bucknell, said yacht crews and clients were "shocked and saddened" by the deaths, and there would likely be a short-term impact on the Caribbean region.



"Most people assumed that this part of Antigua was safe and I think it has come as a shock," she said. "Some boats have already left and I think you will see some of that."



However, Bucknell felt the incident would not affect the region in the long term.



"People do forget about these things over time ... and the local business people with police and other authorities have made a serious attempt to make it safer.



"The economy being the way it is has more to do with how business operates than these kind of things," she said.

***

London, England (CNN) -- The debut album by New York rock band The Strokes has been named "album of the decade" by influential British music magazine, NME.





Released in 2001, "Is This It" topped the 100 Greatest Albums Of The Decade list compiled by a panel of musicians, producers, writers and record label bosses, according to NME.com.





The Libertines' 2002 debut "Up the Bracket" was runner-up, with Primal Scream's "XTRMNTR" from 2000 in third spot.





The Strokes formed in 1999 with a line-up that includes lead vocalist Julian Casablancas, guitarists Nick Valensi and Albert Hammond, Jr., bassist Nikolai Fraiture, and drummer Fabrizio Moretti.





Fans had to wait two years before "Is This It" was finally released to critical acclaim, with hits such as "Last Night" and "Hard to Explain" underlining their Velvet Underground-inspired garage rock sound.





However, the album fared better among British fans, reaching number two in the charts compared to 33 in the United States.





The band's second album, "Room On Fire", was released in 2003 and again reached number two in the British charts with singles including "12:51" and "Reptilia."





But their third album, "First Impressions of Earth", gave the band its first number one success, when it snatched top spot in Britain in 2006.





It also reached the hitherto unknown heights of number four across the Atlantic.





On hearing about the NME accolade, frontman Casablancas told the BBC: "It's totally crazy! I thought it was great when I heard.





"But does it mean it's a good musical decade or a bad musical decade? I don't know, I'm such a bad judge of my own stuff."

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN) -- Los Angeles fire officials say they're worried that nighttime winds could push two major wildfires, which already are blamed in two deaths, closer to pricey neighborhoods on the Pacific coast.



Fire draws near homes in the Los Angeles-area community of Porter Ranch, California, on Monday.



"We are concerned about what will happen tonight when the winds pick up,"  Los Angeles Fire Chief Douglas Barry said Monday.



California Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger Monday declared a state of emergency Monday in Los Angeles and Ventura counties because of the fires.  Democratic Rep. Brad Sherman, whose district covers the area where the fire is burning, called on President Bush to issue a federal disaster declaration for the area.



At least two people have died because of the blazes, which have burned 8,000 acres in the hills and mountains of Los Angeles and Ventura counties, fire and police officials said.



One was identified as a man who died in a makeshift wood-and-cardboard shelter and appeared to be homeless. A dog's body also was found.



The other victim was killed in a collision of motorists who were trying to exit a freeway that was closed because of one of the wildfires, a fire official said.



No identity or age was available for either victim.



"Winds are causing fire conditions to change by the hour," Schwarzenegger said in a statement released Monday. "Several thousand acres have already burned with minimal containment and more acres are threatened." iReport.com: Are wildfires affecting you?



Residents downwind were warned to remain alert into the night. "It can go from here to the ocean in a matter of two to three hours," said Los Angeles County Supervisor Zev Yaroslavsky, The Associated Press reported.



Barry said investigators have not determined a cause for either blaze.



Fire officials warned that strong winds, predicted to reach more than 60 mph after 11 p.m., could send fire roaring south down the Pacific coast near Highway 101.



Officials have shut two freeways north of Los Angeles and authorities dispatched water-dropping helicopters and more than 200 fire engines as the blaze "started to push toward the city," said John Tripp of the Los Angeles County Fire Department.  About 350 police officers are on the scene, patrolling evacuated neighborhoods and warning residents ahead of the flames.



Officials shut down part of Interstate 210, also known as the Foothill Freeway, and any residents north of the freeway were under a mandatory evacuation order. The fire jumped the interstate in one spot and headed toward the Lake View Terrace area.



A portion of State Route 118, known as the Ronald Reagan Freeway, also was closed.



The larger of the two fires has charred more than 3,500 acres in the Angeles National Forest, officials said.  See video of the Angeles National Forest fire »



That fire destroyed several structures, including about 30 mobile homes in the Lopez Canyon area, said Los Angeles County fire inspector Sam Padilla. The mobile homes had been evacuated Sunday.



The other fire, burning nearby, is expected to expand as the winds push the flames away from the center.



In San Diego County, a wildfire that began on an explosives training range at Camp Pendleton had grown to more than 1,500 acres by nightfall and forced the evacuation of 1,400 homes, The AP reported.



In northern California, a wildfire that started Sunday on Angel Island in San Francisco Bay had spread across 250 acres as of Monday morning but hadn't damaged any buildings in the historic state park, a Marin County fire official said.  See video of the Angel Island fire »

***

TAMPA, Florida (CNN) -- Some Christian congregations, particularly in lower income, urban areas, are turning to an unlikely source for help -- the Church of Scientology.

Rev, Charles Kennedy uses Scientology founder L. Ron Hubbard's book during a Friday night sermon.

Scientologists do not worship God, much less Jesus Christ. The church has seen plenty of controversy and critics consider it a cult. So why are observant Christians embracing some of its teachings?

Two pastors who spoke recently with CNN explained that when it comes to religion, they still preach the core beliefs of Christianity. But when it comes to practicing what they preach in a modern world, borrowing from Scientology helps.

The Rev. Charles Kennedy, of the Glorious Church of God in Christ, a Pentecostal church in Tampa, Florida, and the Rev. James McLaughlin, of the Wayman Chapel African Methodist Episcopal Church in Houston, Texas, are among the theological hybrids.  Watch Rev. Kennedy preach »

They say they are not scared off by programs with ties to a church that critics say has aggressive recruiting, secretive ways and rigid theology. As men of God rooted in Christian values, they do not see Scientology as a threat to their faith, but rather as a tool to augment it.

Scientology was founded in the 1950s by L. Ron Hubbard, a science fiction writer. Followers are taught that they are immortal spiritual beings called thetans. Although the church says there is a supreme being, its practices do not include worshipping God.

"I'm looking for solutions, and the people that I help, they don't ask me who L. Ron Hubbard is," said McLaughlin, who works with addicts. "You know what they say? 'Thank God.' "

Critic Rick Ross, a court-certified Scientology expert, sees something more sinister at work. He warned that mainstream acceptance makes it easier for the Scientologists to achieve their ultimate goal -- new recruits.

"Their hope is that through these programs, people will become more interested in L. Ron Hubbard, what else Mr. Hubbard had to offer, and this will lead them eventually to Scientology," Ross said.

The church has long been in the headlines for practices critics say are little more than cult-like mind control. It is also known for its stable of devout celebrity followers.

And according to published reports, Scientology has been recently diversifying its outreach to include other religions and ethnic groups.

Kennedy, McLaughlin and a handful of other Christian church leaders -- no one can say how many -- are finding answers to their communities' needs in Scientology's social programs.

For Kennedy, it began two years ago when he attended a meeting at the Church of Scientology's spiritual headquarters in Clearwater, Florida. He was introduced to a book called "The Way to Happiness" -- Hubbard's 64-page, self-described "common sense guide to better living."

In the book, which lays out ways to maintain a temperate lifestyle, Kennedy found a message he believed could help lift his predominantly lower income African-American congregation. He said the book's 21 principles help them with their struggle in an urban environment where there is too much crime and addiction and too little opportunity.

Kennedy knew that before he could introduce any Scientology-related text to his congregation, he would have to prove that it did not contradict his Christian beliefs. And so, he found Scripture to match each of the 21 principles.

Now Kennedy uses "The Way to Happiness" as a how-to supplement to his sermons. He believes it is easier to understand and clearer to follow than ancient Scriptures taken from the Bible.

When asked whether Scientology's values contradict the religion of Jesus Christ, Kennedy replies, "Sometimes yes. Sometimes no." But he says his congregation can relate to "The Way to Happiness."

Kennedy admits other pastors have criticized him, but the disapproval is not enough to discourage him. He insists that he has witnessed the changes "The Way to Happiness" has inspired in people. He also maintains that the Scientologists, many

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- The regional airline involved in a fatal February plane crash outside Buffalo, New York, contested a report Monday alleging the pilot did not have the training to handle the emergency that brought the plane down, and that he might have been fatigued on the night of the crash.



Debris is cleared from the scene of Flight 3407's crash near Buffalo, New York, in February.



Continental Connection Flight 3407, operated by regional carrier Colgan Air, plunged into a house in Clarence Center, New York, on the night of February 12, killing all 49 on board as well as one man in the house.



In a story Monday, The Wall Street Journal cited investigators as saying the crash resulted from pilot Marvin Renslow's incorrect response to the plane's precarious drop in speed: He overrode an emergency system known as a "stick pusher," which sends the plane into a dive so it can regain speed and avoid a stall.



The Journal's report said Colgan had not provided Renslow with hands-on flight-simulator training for a stick-pusher emergency.



Colgan, in rebuttal, issued a statement saying Renslow had received classroom instruction for such an emergency.  Watch a Colgan official respond to questions »



The company also emphasized that the Federal Aviation Administration does not require pilots to receive a stick-pusher demonstration in a flight simulator.



"The FAA generally trains to standards of routine line operations. They don't focus on the edges of the envelope," stall recovery expert Doug Moss told CNN.



Colgan further admitted that during his career, Renslow failed five "check rides" -- occasional tests of pilot proficiency -- including two that Colgan said he did not disclose on his application with the airline. His most recent failed check ride occurred 16 months before the crash.



"In the cases while with Colgan, he received additional training and successfully passed the check rides," the airline said.



Colgan stressed that despite his performance on check rides, Renslow nonetheless ultimately passed his pilot exams and had "all the training and experience to safely operate the Q400," the airplane involved in the crash.



Colgan further insisted that pilot fatigue was not a factor in the crash, noting that Renslow had "nearly 22 consecutive hours of time off before he reported for duty on the day of the accident."



In its statement, Colgan did not specifically address potential illness-related fatigue in 24-year-old co-pilot Rebecca Shaw, who, according to The Wall Street Journal report, said before takeoff that she probably should have called in sick.



The National Transportation Safety Board begins a three-day hearing on the crash on Tuesday. Renslow's history as well as pilot training broadly will be examined.

***

Karachi, Pakistan (CNN) -- Do not mistake eight-year-old Bilal Ahmed's skin-and-bones body, his beguiling smile and his big beaming eyes for weakness.





Bilal changes when he steps into a boxing ring.





When the pint-sized Pakistani fighter climbed into a shabby old ring at an outdoor youth center, his smile turned into a stone cold scowl.





At the sound of the bell that marked the start of round one, his tiny fists at the end of his stick-like arms turned into pain-inflicting projectiles, pounding away at his opponent.





"I want to hit my opponent," says Bilal, minutes before the fight. "All I think about is winning."





Bilal is obsessed with winning because, to him, boxing is more than a sport. It's the one chance he has to escape Lyari, one of the poorest, toughest and most dangerous neighborhoods in the sprawling southern port city of Karachi.





Drug and gang violence is rampant here, killing nearly 100 people this year alone.





"There is shooting at night," Bilal says. "I wake up and go to my mom. When I grow up I'm going to take my family away from here."





But for Lyari's boys, the future is often bleak. Many here blame the government for failing to keep neighborhoods safe and a broken school system for robbing children of the chance to succeed.





For decades boxing has given thousands of Lyari's kids what the government has not -- a safe place to grow, learn and chase a dream.





African immigrants brought boxing to Lyari in the 1940s, when Karachi was still part of British-ruled India. More than 70 years later, 22 boxing clubs, run by volunteers and private donations, have made this neighborhood Pakistan's boxing factory.





"This is the second Cuba," says the head of the local boxing association, Asghar Baloch, referring to the Caribbean nation that has produced some of the best boxers in the world.





"If these kids weren't here, they would be with guns and arms," he says. "If we continue our positive activities, we will get positive results."





Positive results at Lyari's boxing clubs aren't necessarily trophies and victories in the ring. They're polite, healthy children who laugh and play, children who finish school.





But on this night it's all about winning for Bilal, who's taking on a bigger and taller opponent at an important tournament.





His opponent overpowers him in the opening round but Bilal stands his ground.





Round two is too close to call but Bilal wins the third and final round with lightning quick combinations and powerful right hooks.





The referee raises Bilal's arm in victory and back comes the big smile on the skinny little kid whose dream for a better life lives on.

***

(CNN) -- Who would open one of the world's biggest casinos in the depths of a global recession?



Big city dreams: Lawrence Ho's business portfolio in Hong Kong and Macau is growing.



Answer: Lawrence Ho, the scion of a casino business mogul who has clearly inherited his father's love of a calculated risk.



Ho's father Stanley is a man synonymous with the creation of Macau as the world's biggest gambling destination.



"Over the past 40 years he has put his thumbprints all over Macau. I think if you look at the major infrastructure projects, whether it's the airport, the ferry terminals, he was involved in building up a lot of those," Lawrence Ho told CNN.



But in opening City of Dreams in Macau earlier this year, Ho is trying to carve his own niche and continue to build up his own business empire.



"I think gone are the days when you can open a property and 'Bang!' you would steal significant market share from others," he told CNN.



"Before we opened we were, like the rest of the world, a little bit wary of the timing, but I think in hindsight the world economies are doing a lot better and Macau has seen its first year-on-year increase in July and August was a booming month. So I think all in all we couldn't be happier."



Ho's company, Melco-Crown Entertainment, is independent from his father's huge portfolio of businesses and the multibillion dollar City of Dreams project is a partnership with Australian James Packer, himself the son of a media tycoon.



Ho is respectful of his ailing father's achievements and the advantages that the family name has given him, but also the desire it fostered to forge his own success.



"The bigger the shadow the more we can feel the underdog syndrome. ... being his son opened many doors, but at the same time I grew up in a very big family with our own issues, but all in all certainly being his son has helped a great deal," he said.



There are no worries about interference from the mainland -- "I suspect that China definitely wants [Macau and Hong Kong] to do well" -- and Ho remains positive that Asia will see the quickest recovery from the downturn.



"A lot of the Asian countries and economies have handled the [economic] crisis this time a lot better than the Asian financial crisis 10 years ago," he said.



"So I think, all in all, Asia has managed to come out of this much quicker than the rest of the world. And really when people are feeling better they travel and they spend more, and you know we are in the business of providing leisure and entertainment."

***

WASHINGTON (CNN)  -- The Department of Homeland Security and FBI have issued security bulletins to raise awareness regarding "terrorist interest" in attacking sports and entertainment venues as well as luxury hotels.



The bulletins, which were sent to law enforcement Monday, said that authorities did not know of any credible or specific terrorist plots to attack U.S. stadiums, arenas or luxury hotels.



However, it said that terrorist groups such as al Qaeda view crowded stadiums and arenas as potential targets. It said hotels are also attractive targets for terrorists.



The Department of Homeland Security said it released the notes to assist law enforcement partners as they go about their daily duties.



"While DHS and FBI have no information regarding the timing, location or target of any planned attack, we believe it is prudent to raise the security awareness of our local law enforcement partners regarding the targets and tactics of previous terrorist activity," the department said.



The bulletins did not mention the recent arrest of three men in connection with what the Justice Department has said was a plot to detonate bombs in the United States. The men are charged with lying to federal agents during the probe of the alleged plot.



The bulletin on stadiums and arenas said that previous attacks against crowd gatherings have included improvised explosive devices and car bombs, "tactics that are also applicable to many stadiums and arenas. ...



"Detained terrorists have also discussed the use of aircraft and chemical weapons to attack stadiums and arenas. "



It said the al Qaeda training manual lists " 'blasting and destroying the places of amusement, immorality and sin ... and attacking vital economic centers' as a key objective."



The bulletins on luxury hotels said analysis of previous attacks abroad and thwarted plots showed that terrorists have used paramilitary and "small unit" tactics, explosives, improvised explosive devices and car bombs.



It said hotel owners can protect their properties by installing fencing or walls around the buildings and populated areas; implementing random screening of people and their possessions; and training security staff.

***

(CNN)  -- A superb second half goal from substitute Zlatan Ibrahimovic gave Barcelona a 1-0 win over arch-rivals Real Madrid to go back to the top of the Spanish La Liga on Sunday.



Both teams ended with 10 men after Barca's Sergio Busquets went just after the hour mark for a second yellow card, with Real losing Lassana Diarra in the dying moments for two yellows.



Ibrahimovic's goal was truly worthy of settling 'El Clasico' as the Swedish striker met a Daniel Alves ball from the right on the volley to leave Iker Casillas with no chance.



The 55th minute strike in the Camp Nou came shortly after he replaced the ineffective Thierry Henry and followed an opening half in which visitors Real were the more threatening.



Real had gone into the game with a one point lead in the standings over the defending Spanish and European champions and showed their quality on the break.



Cristiano Ronaldo, making his first start in two months, might have put the visitors ahead in the 20th minute but was denied by home keeper Victor Valdes, who knocked his shot wide with his legs.



Barcelona central defender Carlos Puyol also came to their rescue with two last-ditch challenges on Marcelo and Gonzalo Higuain from similar Real attacks.



But the Catalans made the breakthrough as Ibrahimovic went some of the way to justifying his massive transfer fee and soon afterwards midfielder Xavi came within a whisker of a second from long-range.



Further chances fell to Eric Abidal, who shot wide, and Argentine ace Lionel Messi, who was superbly denied by Casillas from close range.



A tiring Ronaldo was substituted and his replacement, Karim Benzema, fired over the top in the 80th minute as Real pressed in vain for an equalizer.



"This was a very good test," Barca coach Pep Guardiola told gathered reporters.



"It's always difficult against Madrid but even more so when you go in as favorite and them as a big underdog. That's when Madrid is most dangerous."



The three points leave Barcelona on top with 30 points from 12 games, two ahead of Real on 28. Sevilla, who drew on Saturday, have 26.



In other action on Sunday, Deportivo La Coruna had a hard-fought 1-0 win at Racing Santander to move level on points with fourth-placed Valencia.



Albert Lopo struck in the 76th minute to give the Galicians their eighth league success in 12 matches.

***

San Francisco (CNN) -- Intel, which dominates the PC market but has struggled to break into smartphones, is getting a hand from Google.





Upcoming versions of Android, the No. 1 smartphone operating system from Google, will be compatible with Intel processors, the companies announced at Intel's developer conference on Tuesday.





"We want to make Intel architecture the platform of choice for smartphones," Intel CEO Paul Otellini said onstage. "Every time we have collaborated with Google, good things have come out of it."





The partnership will aid Intel in delivering on its promise to finally release smartphones with its technologies by the middle of 2012.





Google may benefit from accommodating a company that has significant influence in computers, which is the market Google is struggling to break into with its Chromebook project. The two companies already collaborate on that laptop operating system.





"The partnership has been great," said Andy Rubin, Google's executive for mobile development, who took the stage at Intel's conference to announce the deal.





In his keynote, Otellini touted Intel's Ultrabook concept, which the company has been reportedly nudging partners to embrace. The laptop concept facilitates very thin, light and affordable computers with batteries that can last for about a full day on a single charge. They look similar to Apple's MacBook Air, which uses Intel's Core processor.





Otellini also discussed a new processor, slated for 2013, called Haswell. Devices with the chip can remain connected to the Internet in standby mode for 10 days before the battery depletes, he said. Haswell will be tailored to Ultrabooks and tablets running Windows 8, the new operating system Microsoft was showing at the same time at its own conference in Anaheim, California.





"Computing means a lot more than just computers," Otellini said. "Just as computing has evolved, so too has Intel's architecture."





Intel's recent focus on reducing energy consumption, thereby improving battery life, should bolster its efforts in smartphones, analysts say. The company is also working on more compact chips, which it is calling "3-D transistors" because of the unique way the microscopic parts are situated.





Google and Intel did not say which chip will power upcoming Android phones or which manufacturers have agreed to make devices for it. Most smartphones and tablets use chips designed by ARM Holdings, which are popular for their efficiency. The next version of Android for phones and tablets, called Ice-Cream Sandwich, will debut next month or in November, Google has said.

***

NAIROBI, Kenya (CNN) -- Pirates who hijacked a crude oil tanker off the coast of Kenya are approaching a Somali port, the U.S. Navy says.

An undated photo of the Sirius Star in South Korean waters.

The Sirius Star -- a crude "super tanker" flagged in Liberia and owned by the Saudi Arabian-based Saudi Aramco company -- was attacked on Saturday more than 450 nautical miles southeast of Mombasa, Kenya.

The crew of 25, including British, Croatian, Polish, Filipino and Saudi nationals, are reported to be safe.

U.S. Navy Fifth Fleet Cmdr. Jane Campbell said the super tanker weighs more than 300,000 metric tons and "is more than three times the size of a U.S. Navy aircraft carrier."

Oil industry insiders say a tanker of this size can carry up to 2 million barrels of oil, and the ship's operator, Dubai-based Vela International Marine Ltd, says it is fully laden.

A U.S. Navy spokesman said the tanker is approaching Eyl, Somalia, on the Indian Ocean coast. It is routine procedure for pirates to take hijacked ships to shore, where they will keep them while they discuss negotiations.

A multinational naval force including vessels from the U.S., the UK and Russia has been patrolling the Indian Ocean waters seas near the Gulf of Aden, which connects the Red Sea and the Arabian Sea, following a sharp increase in pirate attacks in the region.

"It was attacked more than 450 nautical offshore of Mombasa. This means that the pirates are now operating in an area of over 1.1 million square miles. This is a measure of the determination of the pirates and ... a measure of how lucrative piracy could become," Campbell said.

Campbell said the Navy does not expect to dispatch a vessel to aide the super tanker because it does not have dangerous weapons aboard like the MV Faina, a Ukrainian ship loaded with arms that was seized by pirates on September 25.

The UK Foreign Office confirmed two Britons were aboard and said it was seeking more information about the incident.

South Korean officials said on Sunday that armed gunmen hijacked a Japanese freighter and its 23-member crew off the coast of Somalia. The hijacking came as the Korean government was considering sending a warship to join those of other countries to combat piracy in the area.

A Russian patrol ship also thwarted an attack on a Saudi vessel.

Eleven vessels are currently being held by pirates hoping to secure ransoms for their release, according to The Associated Press. They include the MV Faina, which was hijacked along with 20 crew and a cargo of weapons and T-72 tanks.

Ninety percent of ships transiting the perilous seas are using a guarded corridor and there have been no hijackings inside the zone since it was set up on August 22, Danish Commodore Per Bigum Christensen told AP last week.

Around 20,000 oil tankers, freighters and merchant vessels pass along the crucial shipping route each year.

"Our presence in the region is helping deter and disrupt criminal attacks off the Somali coast, but the situation with the Sirius Star clearly indicates the pirates' ability to adapt their tactics and methods of attack" said U.S. Vice Admiral Bill Gortney, commander of the Combined Maritime Forces.

"Piracy is an international crime that threatens global commerce. Shipping companies have to understand that naval forces can not be everywhere. Self protection measures are the best way to protect their vessels, their crews, and their cargo."

CNN's David McKenzie contributed to this report

***

(CNN) -- Police in the Northern California town of Tracy are pursuing hundreds of possible leads in the disappearance of 8-year-old Sandra Cantu, a police spokesman said Wednesday.



Sandra Cantu, 8, disappeared on Friday, according to police in Tracy, California.



Police have received 477 tips since she disappeared Friday, 100 of them on Tuesday alone, Lt. Jeremy Watney of the Tracy Police Department told reporters.



"We're following up on all of them," he said. "It's extremely frustrating. We want her back safe. That's the bottom line.



"At this point, everything is still open."



Authorities Tuesday afternoon impounded and searched a car -- the fourth one to be seized -- that was parked near the mobile home park where Sandra lives and was last seen.



On Monday night, Tracy police and FBI agents searched six locations, some in the Orchard Estates Mobile Home Park and some in Tracy. All of the places were connected to two men who live in the mobile home park, officials said.  Watch CNN report on Sandra's disappearance »



Authorities have not called the men suspects and have not named them publicly. They did not say how or if they might be related to the case.



On Friday afternoon, Sandra came home from school, kissed her mother and left to play with a friend who lives a couple of homes away. A short time later she left that home to go to another friend's home, a spokeswoman for her family said Tuesday.



The girl, who was wearing a pink Hello Kitty T-shirt and black leggings, has not been seen since, said the spokeswoman, Lisa Encarnacion.



Her parents reported her missing about 8 p.m. Friday.



Officials said surveillance camera footage recorded the girl playing in the park.



A dozen agencies are involved in the search. The number of searchers swelled over the weekend, and a similar effort is likely Saturday and Sunday, Watney said.



Police have said they doubt she ran away.



The mobile home park has fewer than 100 units. There are about 80 registered sex offenders living in a five-mile radius around it.



Tracy is about 60 miles east of San Francisco, California.

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- Topps Meat Co. on Saturday expanded a recall of ground beef from about 300,000  pounds to 21.7 million pounds, one of the largest meat recalls in U.S. history.



The recalled products are all ground beef patties with various brand names.



In a statement, the Elizabeth, New Jersey, company said the hamburger patties may be contaminated with E. coli O157:H7, a bacterium that can cause severe diarrhea and cramps, as well as other complications.



A statement from the U.S. Department of Agriculture said 25 illnesses are under investigation in Connecticut, Florida, Indiana, Maine, New Jersey, New York, Ohio and Pennsylvania.



The ground beef products being recalled have a "sell by date" or a "best if used by date" between September 25, 2007, and September 25, 2008, Topps' statement said.  Watch the latest on the beef recall »



The packages also have the marking "Est. 9748" inside the USDA mark of inspection.



Tuesday, the company announced a recall of about 331,000 pounds of hamburger meat, according to the USDA.



"Because the health and safety of our consumers is our top priority, we are taking these expansive measures," said Vice President of Operations Geoffrey Livermore in the statement.



"Topps is continuing to work with the USDA, state departments of health, retailers and distributors to ensure the safety of our consumers. Additionally, we have augmented our internal quality control procedures with microbiologists and food safety experts. We sincerely regret any inconvenience and concerns this may cause our consumers," Livermore said.



This is the company's first recall in its 65 years of business, the statement said.



Consumers who find the products at home are asked to cut off the UPC code and return it to Topps for a full refund, then dispose of the product immediately, Topps spokeswoman Michelle Williams said.



The company said to avoid E. coli, consumers should wash hands thoroughly after handling the beef.



Topps set up a toll-free recall help line at (888) 734-0451.



Williams said because the products may have been produced up to a year ago, many of them have already been safely consumed.



Production in the ground beef area of the company's plant in Elizabeth has been shut down until all the investigations are complete, Williams said in a phone interview.



"We're working with the USDA and the CDC [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention] and conducting our own investigation," she added.



The products, all ground beef patties and hamburgers with various brand names, were distributed mainly in the northeastern United States, but went to retailers in many other areas of the country as well, Williams said.



While the sheer size of the recall is large, two other companies have been involved in larger recalls.



In 2002, Pilgrim's Pride recalled more than 27 million pounds of poultry, and Hudson Foods recalled 25 million pounds of ground beef in 1997. E-mail to a friend

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- New York suspended all construction crane activity in the city Friday after a crane collapse on the Upper East Side killed two construction workers.



Crane wreckage lies on Manhattan's Upper East Side on Friday in a photo by iReporter Michael Schuman.



Acting Buildings Commissioner Robert LiMandri announced the suspension, in effect until Monday, and unveiled a $4 million plan to assess high-risk construction activities, including crane operations, and make recommendations to improve safety.



"This year we have seen an increase in accidents and injuries related to high-risk construction activities," LiMandri said. "We must make sure that as construction activity in the city continues to increase, the department's ability to hold the construction industry to higher safety standards keeps pace."



Friday's accident was the second deadly crane collapse in the city in less than three months. Seven people were killed and 24 were injured in March when a construction crane toppled, plowing through several residential buildings.



Crane operator Donald Leo, 30, died in the initial collpase Friday morning. Construction worker Ramadan Kurtij, 37, died Friday afternoon of cardiac arrest after being rushed to the hospital. Another construction worker remained critically injured, a city official said.



New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg said the cranes in the two incidents were different types.



"Two crane collapses in a short period of time look like a pattern, but there's no reason to think that there's any real connection," he said.



On a radio program Friday, Bloomberg vowed that an investigation would be conducted and changes would be made if necessary.



"I don't need any developer or union leader or anybody else telling me about the consequences of slowing things down," he said. "Nobody wants this economy to grow more than me. But we're not going to kill people."



The accident happened shortly after 8 a.m. Bridget Barrett, who lives two buildings away, said she was just leaving for work.



"We heard a loud crash as I was walking down my stairwell. I went to the front door of the building, and it was all white smoke everywhere," she said.



"The crane had fallen in the middle of the street and was on fire. There was water spewing out of the apartment building all over the place.  And I dialed 911."  See photos from the scene of the collapse »



Witnesses said the cab and the arm of the crane crashed more than 20 stories to the ground, smashing the penthouse on a building across the street and gouging chunks out of balconies all the way to the ground.



"It sounded like a large metal structure slowly falling on itself, sounded like a prolonged car accident," said iReport contributor Daniel Miranda, who lives a block away. "Construction workers were peering over the edge. Some of them were crying out in grief."



A pedestrian had minor injuries, Bloomberg said at a news conference, adding that nearby buildings with about 160 apartments were evacuated "strictly as a precaution."  Watch how latest crane collapse raises questions »



The collapse occurred a day after a building inspector rescinded a partial stop-work order that had been issued April 24.



The order was issued after an inspection found that employees had been working without a permit and operating a crane in an "unsafe manner," according to the city's Building Department. No other details were available.



The collapse left a pile of wreckage at the foot of the Azure, an apartment building under construction at the northwest corner of East 91st Street and First Avenue, a mainly residential area on the city's Upper East Side.



The falling crane also damaged the Electra, a 20-plus-story building on the southwest corner.  See where the crane fell »



Michael Schuman, another iReporter, said he heard a loud crash, grabbed his camera and went to the scene, about five buildings away.



"I got there before the emergency vehicles. It looked like the crane had broken into three or four large pieces. I saw water pouring out

***

(CNN) -- Roger Federer takes on Robin Soderling, who knocked out tournament favorite Rafael Nadal in a fourth-round stunner, in the men's final of the French Open on Sunday.



Roger Federer screams in joy after beating Juan Martin del Potro to reach the French Open final.



A victory in Roland Garros would give Federer 14 Grand Slams, tying his career wins to American Pete Sampras.



The second-seed Federer lagged at first, but beat Argentine Juan Martin del Potro on Friday to make the final. Soderling advanced over Chilean Fernando Gonzalez.



Federer, 27, has a 9-0 record over the 24-year-old Swede going into the final.



The Swiss star has suffered emotional defeats recently.



At England's Wimbledon last year, he lost to Rafael Nadal after a five-year reign. The game, which ran about seven hours with a few rain breaks, was the longest-ever Wimbledon men's final.



Nadal also beat Federer in the Australian Open earlier this year.



Soderling stunned the top-seed Nadal by handing him a loss in the fourth round of the French Open.



The 23rd-seed Soderling was a rank outsider against the world number one who had never lost a match on the clay at Roland Garros and was a short-priced favorite to win a record fifth straight title.



In women's tennis, number one Dinara Safina was beaten Saturday in straight sets by fellow Russian Svetlana Kuznetsova in the final of the French Open at Roland Garros.



Safina, who has reached the top of the world rankings despite not having a major title to her name, looked completely out-of-sorts against her compatriot, who secured a comfortable 6-4, 6-2 victory in just over an hour.



The defeat was a crushing blow to Safina, 23, who has long had to contend with the accusations that she is not a worthy world number one -- and this third grand slam final defeat will do nothing to silence the doubters.



It was the second straight year she has lost in the final here, after going down in straight sets to Ana Ivanovic of Serbia last year.



It was also her second successive grand slam final defeat, having lost to Serena Williams in the Australian Open in Melbourne earlier this year.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- President Bush's top adviser on homeland security is stepping down after 4½ years on the job, the White House said Monday.



Fran Townsend served more than four years as homeland security adviser.



Homeland Security Adviser Fran Townsend turned in her letter of resignation to President Bush on November 6 and will be looking for new opportunities outside government.



"I'm going to just take another job doing 20-hour days, but this time in the private sector," said Townsend, who has spent 25 years working in law enforcement and government.



Bush praised Townsend's work Monday.



"Fran has always provided wise counsel on how to best protect the American people from the threat of terrorism," Bush said in a statement. "We are safer today because of her leadership."



Townsend's job, as the president's top adviser on fighting terrorism, involved identifying terrorist groups around the globe and assessing their threat, and finding ways to track and cut off their funding. She said that experience should will be useful in the private sector as well.



Townsend -- the mother of two, ages 6 and 12 -- said she first will look into public speaking, writing and board work before pursuing opportunities in global risk management for a large multinational corporation or financial institution.  Watch how Townsend is planning to use her skills »



She said she's been talking with the president about her planned departure for eight months.



Townsend's name had come up during the president's recent search for a new attorney general, but she was not considered. She said not getting the job "had absolutely nothing to do with her decision to leave."



She said Bush had wanted her to stay on in his administration.



"It was a hard decision as I have loved and will cherish my every minute of service," she said in an e-mail. "My family actually advocated that I remain and has always been supportive of my service so this was entirely my decision."



Townsend is part of the search committee to find a replacement by the beginning of next year. The president appoints the senior staff position, and it needs no Senate confirmation. E-mail to a friend



CNN's Suzanne Malveaux contributed to this report.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- One year before the FIFA World Cup kicks off, 26 teams of gay and lesbian footballers are battling for global supremacy in the Gay Soccer World Championships.



Players from the London Stonewall Lions hold the 2008 Gay World Soccer Championship trophy aloft



Co-ordinated by the International Gay & Lesbian Football Association (IGLFA), the tournament, which began on Sunday, is being hosted by the Federal Triangles club in Washington D.C., and supported by the local Major League Soccer (MLS) side D.C. United.



IGLFA spokesman Michael Pranikoff told CNN that the competition has been running annually since 1992.



"We started very small. There were just a few clubs from around the world. But we have gone from strength to strength. Last year the tournament was in London and sanctioned by the Football Association."



Pranikoff said there are no professional players involved, but the standard of play is strong and the teams in the top divisions are very competitive.



Although the tournament involves club sides -- rather than national teams, there is still a strong international feel with players from the U.S., United Kingdom, Ireland, Canada, Germany, Australia, Denmark, Belgium, Sweden, Argentina, Italy, and Norway all taking part.



The London Stonewall Lions are the reigning champions in the men's division and expected to figure in Sunday's final at Trinity Washington University, he said.



Despite the competitive nature of the event, Pranikoff said there are also less serious divisions where there is a more important message.



"When you are on the pitch it's all about the game. But it's also about providing an environment where people can be free to be who they are.



"It's a lot about camaraderie too. There are a lot of places in the world where gays and lesbians aren't accepted."



So, is the competition restricted to only gay and lesbian players?



Not at all, said Pranikoff. "It's very open, we don't discriminate."



He said gay, lesbian, bi-sexual and heterosexual players were all welcome to play.



Pranikoff said he is happy with how the 2009 event is unfolding, despite numbers being slightly down on what was expected -- due to the effects of the recession, swine flu and the upcoming Out Games in Denmark which has made attending the football tournament unaffordable for some teams.



"This year we didn't have as big a global turnout as we hoped for but there have been a lot of challenges -- so we're pleased to have 26 teams here."



Outside of organizing the current world championships, the IGLFA has also been involved in helping other organizations at stamping out homophobia, Pranikoff said.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Thousands of visitors lined Constitution Avenue in Washington on Saturday morning for the annual National Cherry Blossom Festival Parade.



The annual two-week National Cherry Blossom Festival runs through April 12.



"Jeopardy!" host Alex Trebek served as the parade's grand marshal, waving to crowds from the back of a convertible. "American Idol" finalist Kimberly Locke, the cast of the musical "Chicago" and D.C. Congresswoman Eleanor Holmes Norton were among the parade's stars.



The cherry blossom trees were a gift of friendship to the U.S. government from Japan in 1912, according to the National Park Service. Their blooming has come to represent the definitive beginning of springtime in the nation's capital.



The parade is part of the annual two-week National Cherry Blossom Festival, which is timed around the projected peak bloom period of the famous trees. This year, the trees reached their peak bloom this week, according to the park service.



Many high school groups and marching bands also participated in the parade.



Near the National Mall, large crowds mingled under the branches of the blossoming trees that line the Tidal Basin. On an unusually blustery day, the delicate pink and white blossoms blew from their branches like snowflakes.



"It's like being in a fairy tale," said Maria Podonyi, a visiting professor from Hungary. Podonyi brought her parents, who are visiting the United States from Hungary, to the festival.



"They haven't seen anything like this before," she said. "It's wonderful.



The festival is scheduled to run through April 12.

***

RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (CNN) -- The death toll in flood-ravaged southern Brazil has reached 116 and the first cases of a water-borne, potentially fatal disease are being investigated, the nation's Civil Defense agency reported.

People use a boat to navigate flooded streets in the Brazilian state of Santa Catarina last week.

The number of missing residents has increased to 31, the agency said. The previous tally was 19.

Nearly 79,000 residents have been left homeless, many of them in the hard-hit state of Santa Catarina.

Many of the deaths have been caused by mudslides.

Officials are now worried about disease, as 10 cases of leptospirosis are suspected, the state news agency reported.

Leptospirosis is an infection in rodents and other wild and domesticated animals, according to the World Health Organization. In humans, exposure through water contaminated by urine from infected animals is the most common form of infection. The disease is often found in flooded areas.

Ten people with symptoms are being treated in the cities of Blumenau and Ilhota, the state-run Agencia Brasil reported.

Symptoms usually occur 2 to 30 days after infection and consist of high fever, malaise, sharp and constant headache, intense muscular pain, fatigue and chills. Nausea, vomiting and diarrhea also are common. About 10 percent of patients develop jaundiced eyes after the third day, indicating the most severe cases.

Authorities also were warning residents in flooded areas to be careful with food and water they consume. Food that has been under water or moist should not be eaten unless it's in a sealed plastic bag or a can, officials said.

The health secretary for Santa Catarina said residents who drink contaminated water also run the risk of getting hepatitis A and diarrhea.

Rescuers also are at risk of disease and injury.

In the city of Maximus in Luis Alves state, eight rescuers were injured over the weekend, one of them gravely, Agencia Brasil reported.

Brazilian President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva said Monday that Santa Catarina will be rebuilt and become just as strong as it was.

"We cannot lose hope," Lula said. "We must be convinced that people will reconstruct the state of Santa Catarina. There is a national solidarity never seen before in the history of the country."

Lula flew over some of the flooded areas last week and proclaimed the disaster one of the worst in the country's history.

"I've never seen anything like this," he said Thursday.

He said last week he was releasing 1.97 billion Reals (more than US$850 million) in aid to the afflicted areas.

Officials have distributed 880 tons of food, nearly 1 million liters of water and 60 tons of clothing, toys and cleaning and personal hygiene material, Agencia Brasil said Monday.

The Civil Defense said seaplanes have flown 548 relief missions in seven days.

The disaster also is having an economic effect, with bridges, roads, houses and buildings destroyed. The Federation of Industries said the closed port in Itajai is costing $33 million a day. The port is the major terminal for frozen goods in Brazil and second in the transport of containers, Agencia Brasil said.

Port Superintendent Arnaldo Schmitt said last week part of the terminal could be back in operation in two weeks.

Weather conditions may not allow that to happen, though.

The Civil Defense issued an alert Monday for heavy rains in 14 states and the federal district.

***

(CNN) -- There is no reason to believe that Norway mass murder suspect Anders Behring Breivik is insane, District Court Judge Torkjel Nesheim said Monday.





There is also no evidence he had accomplices in the bomb and gun rampage in which he is accused of killing 77 people this summer, the judge said.





The judge ordered him held in custody for a further 12 weeks, with visits and correspondence controlled by the authorities for the first eight, and a ban on media for the first four.





More than 500 people packed into a court in Oslo, Norway, to see the suspect's first public appearance, said Irene Ramm, head of press for the Oslo court.





A woman whose daughter was killed in the massacre said she could not understand "how a human being could do something like that."





"That's why I had to be here today. I don't understand, so I had to see, had to be here," said the woman, who was identified only as "Carina" on Norway's TV2. "He looked cold, completely cold," she said.





He was not allowed to deliver a speech he had prepared, the station reported.





Breivik said he did not recognize the authority of the court on the grounds that he opposes the multi-cultural society it is part of, TV2 said.





He was stopped on several occasions when he started referring to himself as Commander of the Knights Templar, a title he used in his 1,500-page manifesto, the station reported.





"I interrupted Breivik during today's hearing because I only wanted to hear him about matters relating to today's hearing," Judge Nesheim said. "This was not the main trial where he gets to explain himself. I did not want to give him the opportunity to use this hearing as a platform for him to express his views."





Until now, the proceedings for Breivik have been held behind closed doors.





The hearing was to determine whether to keep Breivik in jail until his trial in the spring. Prosecutors expect it to begin in March or April, the judge said.





Survivors return to scene of island rampage





He is accused of killing dozens of people in a bomb attack in Oslo followed by a shooting rampage on nearby Utoya island. Eight people were killed in a bombing in Oslo; 69 young people were killed on Utoya island, in the deadliest attack in Norway since World War II.





The young people were attending a Labour Party youth camp. Most of the 700 campers ranged in age from 16-22, with some as young as 13.





Breivik has pleaded not guilty but admits carrying out the attacks, the judge said.





"The accused is still suspected on probable cause of criminal acts, as described in the charges. He has admitted the bombing in central Oslo and also the shooting on Utoya. The investigation has also confirmed this," Nesheim said.





He is described by authorities as a right-wing Christian extremist. The 1,500-page manifesto attributed to Breivik was posted on the Internet and is critical of Muslim immigration and European liberalism.

***

DORCHESTER, England (CNN)  -- Englishman John Webber thought nothing of the small, shiny cup, passed down from his junk dealer grandfather and stashed under a bed for years, until appraisers said it was an ancient Persian artifact.



The ancient Persian gold cup, thought to date from the third or fourth century B.C., fetched $100,000 at auction.



The 5½-inch gold cup, which experts have dated to the third or fourth century B.C., fetched $100,000 at an auction in Dorchester, southern England, Thursday.



The identity of the winning bidder wasn't immediately known.



The relic features the double faced ancient Roman god Janus, the god of gates and doors who always looked to both the future and past and is often associated with beginnings and endings. The cup has two faces with braided hair and entwined snake ornaments at the forehead.



Webber's grandfather, William Sparks, was a rag and bone man, the British term for a junk dealer, Duke's said, who established the iron merchants Sparks and Son in Taunton, Somerset, in southwestern England, in the 1930s.



Sparks acquired the cup along with two other pieces, also up for auction, in the 1930s or 1940s, the spokeswoman said.  Watch CNN report on the auction »



Before he died, Sparks gave the items to Webber, who didn't realize their value, the spokeswoman said.



"Because he mainly dealt in brass and bronze, I thought that was what it was made from," Webber told the Bournemouth News and Picture Service. "I put it in a box and forgot about it. Then last year I moved house and took it out to have a look, and I realized it wasn't bronze or brass.



"I sent it to the British Museum, and the experts there hadn't seen anything like it before and recommended I had it tested at a laboratory. So I paid quite a bit of money for it to be examined by a lab the museum recommended. And they found the gold dated from the third of fourth century B.C."



Webber, who is in his 70s, said he remembers the cup from when he was a small boy. "It's been quite exciting finding out what it was," he told the agency.



Webber brought the items to Duke's at the start of the year for potential sale, because he wanted to "realize some money," the auction house spokeswoman said.



A spokeswoman for Duke's Auction House, which is selling the cup, said the cup is believed to be from the Archaemenid empire in ancient Persia.



The other two items are a second century B.C. round gold mount with a figure, probably of ancient Greek hero Ajax, who besieged Troy, and a decorated gold spoon with an image of a Roman emperor.



"He had a good eye for quality over the years," said the spokeswoman, who asked not to be named, "and anything interesting he'd put aside."



Scientists analyzed trace elements of a gold sample taken from the cup to determine its age, and analysts from Oxford University concluded that they are consistent with Archaemenid gold and goldsmithing, Duke's said.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- The Senate Wednesday approved a bill to put new rules in place for intelligence agency eavesdropping on suspected terrorists.



Communication technologies like mobile phones have made the 1978 FISA bill out of date, supporters say.



The bill also effectively protects telephone companies from being sued for cooperating with a government surveillance program launched in the wake of the 2001 attacks on New York and Washington. The White House pushed hard for the provision, with a threat to veto the bill if it did not contain protection for phone companies.



The vote was 69-28, with Democratic presidential candidate Sen. Barack Obama of Illinois voting in favor. Republican candidate Sen. John McCain of Arizona was not present for the vote.



President Bush said Wednesday afternoon he will sign the bill, calling it "vital" and "long overdue."  Watch Bush praise the new FISA bill »



The bill, formally known as the FISA Amendments Act, updates the 1978 Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act. It will:



Opponents argued that the provision creating a judicial review of cases against the telecommunication companies is a sham.



The bill essentially grants immunity to the telecommunication companies, the opponents said, because all of the telephone carriers received government certifications saying their participation in the program was legal.



Obama was criticized for backing away from his early opposition to the bill by liberal bloggers and individuals commenting on his campaign Web site.



Before voting for the bill, Obama voted for an amendment offered by Sen. Christopher Dodd, D-Connecticut, that would have stripped the language granting immunity to telecommunications companies.



Civil liberties groups have vowed to fight the legislation in court.



"This fight is not over. We intend to challenge this bill as soon as President Bush signs it into law," Jameel Jaffer, director of the ACLU National Security Project, said in a statement issued minutes after the Senate approved the bill. "The bill allows the warrantless and dragnet surveillance of Americans' international telephone and e-mail communications. It plainly violates the Fourth Amendment."



President Bush acknowledged in 2005 that he ordered the secretive National Security Agency to intercept communications between U.S. residents and people overseas suspected of having ties to terrorism. The administration says the program was authorized when Congress approved military action against al Qaeda after the 2001 attacks.



CNN's Pam Benson contributed to this report.

***

YELLOWSTONE NATIONAL PARK, Montana (CNN)  -- The gray wolf was officially removed from the Endangered Species Act's "threatened" list Friday after three decades -- a decision that has stoked controversy among environmentalists and ranchers.



Federal officials estimate there are 1,500 gray wolves in Yellowstone National Park.



It means the wolves can be shot and killed once they step out of Yellowstone National Park as soon as the affected states establish a hunting season. However, state Fish and Wildlife officials can shoot the animals whenever they deem the wolves to be a problem.



The government delisted the wolves -- which were eliminated from Yellowstone decades ago before being reintroduced in the 1990s -- because they are now thriving in the park that is dominated by bison, elk and bighorn sheep.



"They're back here in the Northern Rockies; they're back here in Yellowstone," said Doug Smith, a biologist for the National Park Service in Yellowstone.



"That's something to celebrate given their history of human hatred."



But not everyone is happy about the animal being removed from the endangered list. Conservationists believe hundreds of gray wolves straying from Yellowstone in search of prey could soon be killed by hunters and ranchers.  Watch rancher say no wolf is "sacred" »



"We're not ready to pop the champagne corks and have a party," said Doug Honnold, the managing attorney for Earthjustice, a non-profit environmental law firm based in Oakland, California, that has threatened to sue the government.



"My biggest fear is we're going to go backwards instead of forwards."



It wouldn't be the first time. In the early 20th century, wolves were the targets of a massive government extermination campaign.



"It's harder to find an animal more persecuted than wolves. ... We did wolf extermination with a vengeance," said Smith.



But attitudes began to change in the 1980s. Elk and bison populations increased dramatically because there was no natural predator to keep their numbers in check. In 1995, Smith led a team to bring wolves back to the Rocky Mountain landscape. They transplanted dozens of wolves to Yellowstone from Canada.  See photos of Yellowstone's animals »



The project has been regarded as an overwhelming success.



There are now more than 1,500 wolves across Wyoming, Idaho and Montana, according to the government. That number convinced federal wildlife officials to remove them from the endangered species list.



Federal officials require each of the three states to maintain a population of 100 wolves, meaning a total of 300 wolves across all three states. The states have actually pledged to keep the population higher than that, at a rate of 150 wolves per state.



"We did a thorough analysis," said Ed Bangs, the wolf recovery coordinator for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. "The consensus [for recovery] is a population of 300 wolves and 30 breeding pairs."



He added, "The wolf population is fully recovered. We have more wolves than we ever predicted and we have fewer problems than we ever predicted."



Earthjustice says that's not nearly enough to ensure a viable population and they want to stop the delisting. "We're going to have hundreds of wolves die needlessly," said Honnold.



But many ranchers in the region just don't understand the fuss about the animals. They have complained for years that the wolves eat their livestock.



"There's nothing about a wolf that's sacred," said Bruce Malcolm, a cattle rancher and Republican member of Montana's House of Representatives.



He said he's lost nearly two dozen cows to the wolves in recent years. "I would have preferred that they never came here," he said.



If there's a winner with the controversy, it's Yellowstone. The wolves have pushed up attendance by more than a 100,000 visitors per year, according to a park study.



Smith, who has dedicated his life to the wolves, is philosophical about the debate.



"No one says living with wolves is easy," said Smith. "Living with wolves is a compromise.

***

(CNN) -- Jewish organizations called for a Romanian official to resign and face a criminal investigation after he wore a Nazi uniform during a fashion show over the weekend.





Radu Mazare, the mayor of the town of Constanta, wore a Nazi uniform during a fashion show over the weekend.





Radu Mazare, the mayor of the town of Constanta, and his 15-year-old son "entered the stage marching the clearly identifiable Nazi 'goose step,'" the Center for Monitoring and Combating anti-Semitism in Romania said in a letter to the country's prosecutor general.





The organization's director, Marco Katz, said Mazare had broken Romanian law and encouraged his son to do the same, "educating him to treat the law with contempt."





Katz said Mazare was sending a message "that to wear Nazi uniforms and to march the Nazi steps is legal and 'in vogue' in Romania."





He urged the authorities and the head of Mazare's Social Democrat party to show that message "will be strongly countermanded."





Mazare, 41, said he had not noticed the Nazi swastika symbol on the uniform before he wore it, according to the Romanian Times newspaper.





"I checked it before I put it on but the swastika was very small and I didn't see it," he said. "I really liked the look of the uniform after seeing it in the Tom Cruise film 'Valkyrie.' I bought it from a costume hire shop in Germany."





A top Nazi hunter said Mazare should quit.





"The proper thing for you to do is to admit your mistake, apologize for it and resign your position," Efraim Zuroff of the Simon Wiesenthal Center in Jerusalem wrote to Mazare. Zuroff sent CNN a copy of the letter.





He said it was no defense that the uniform was that of the Wehrmacht -- the army -- rather than the SS, the elite Nazi guard which took the lead in killing Jews during the Holocaust.





"The Wehrmacht played an active role in the mass murder of European Jewry and many other innocent victims. By dressing in a Wehrmacht uniform, you are expressing totally unwarranted support and nostalgia for an army which committed the most terrible war crimes and acts of genocide," the letter said.





"It would hard to adequately describe the depth of the pain that your appearance caused, not only to Jews and other victims of Nazism, but to any person of moral integrity who knows the history of World War II," Zuroff wrote.





Zuroff told CNN he did not expect Mazare to resign, or even to respond to the letter.





But he said he hoped the mayor might act on Zuroff's suggestion that Mazare create a Romanian-language edition of an acclaimed exhibition on the crimes of the Wehrmacht.





The Nazi uniform incident, which took place Sunday, was the first time Zuroff heard of Mazare, he said.





"He has a history of being outrageous, but his antics have never included something that I would deal with," Zuroff said.





"He's a real character, apparently. He's also very popular, which makes this much more difficult."





CNN attempts to contact Mazare were unsuccessful.





Romania was a Nazi ally from 1940 to 1944, under the leadership of a right-wing military government led by General Ion Antonescu.





At least 270,000 Romanian Jews were killed or died from mistreatment during the Holocaust, according to the Holocaust Encyclopedia.





The 1930 Romanian census recorded 728,115 people who identified themselves as Jewish, comprising approximately 4 percent of the population, the reference work says.





Antonescu was deposed in 1944 and Romania switched sides in World War II.

***

(CNN) -- The mayor of Gulfport, Mississippi, and his wife were arrested Wednesday on charges they defrauded the federal government and an insurance company of more than $220,000 in claims related to Hurricane Katrina, authorities said.



Gulfport Mayor Gregory Brent Warr, shown in 2005, says the charges "will not change my commitment" to the city.



Gregory Brent Warr and Laura Jean Warr were named in a 16-count federal indictment handed up last week by a grand jury, the Department of Justice said in a news release. They are accused of conspiracy, Federal Emergency Management Agency fraud, Department of Housing and Urban Development home grant fraud and insurance fraud, all arising from claims after Hurricane Katrina slammed into the Gulf Coast on August 29, 2005.



If convicted on each count, the couple would face up to 210 years in prison and up to $4 million in fines, prosecutors said.



"Understand that what has been alleged toward my wife and me has no connection to me as mayor," Brent Warr said in a statement issued Wednesday. "This has not and will not change my commitment to the progress and recovery of our city."



He said he pleaded not guilty, but said he will not speak further about the case.



"I am the mayor of Gulfport, and I will continue working to rebuild our city," Warr said. "We have hundreds of dedicated employees, department heads and directors, and everything we have achieved thus far is a result of their hard work and love for this city.



"For Laura and me, personally, this is a difficult time, but I will continue the work as mayor."



According to the indictment, the Warrs in 2005 applied for FEMA assistance regarding a Gulfport home, telling officials that home was their primary residence when it was not. In 2006, the indictment says, the couple applied to the Mississippi Development Authority for a Homeowner's Assistance Grant funded by HUD, again claiming they lived at the address.



The indictment also alleges the Warrs made misrepresentations to Lexington Insurance Company regarding personal property in the insured home, payment of rent for alternative living after Katrina and the extent of damage to the home.



The Warrs received a total of $222,798 "as a result of the said offenses, for which the defendants are liable," the indictment says.



The couple was released on bond and ordered to appear for trial April 6, the Justice Department said.



In his statement, Warr said the inquiry "has been going on for more than a year now, and we hope and pray for a much faster resolution."



City spokesman Ryan LaFontaine issued a statement saying that while he was not in a position "to speculate what is happening in the mayor's personal life ... I can tell you that as for the city, we are continuing to carry out the people's business.



"The mayor has indicated that he has every intention of coming to work tomorrow, and every day after that, as the mayor of Gulfport," LaFontaine said. "In the nearly four years that he has been here, Mayor Warr has created a framework and an agenda for the recovery of Gulfport. And he has assembled a very talented team of directors and employees that understand the enormity of the recovery challenges that lie ahead.



"Under his continued leadership, I'm very confident that this city will continue to move along the path that he has set," LaFontaine said. "The people of Gulfport don't care about the mayor's personal issues. They only care about what he's doing to fix their issues."

***

(CNN) -- Officials with the Iowa Lottery are seeking the winner of a $10.75 million Hot Lotto jackpot who has until 4 p.m. Thursday to claim it.





"Someone legitimately won this money and we want them to take it home," lottery CEO Terry Rich said in a news release. "But you must present the winning ticket to the lottery in order to claim the prize."





The ticket, which was bought December 29, 2010, at a QuikTrip in Des Moines, must be redeemed by 4 p.m. Thursday. The ticket matched all six numbers: 3-12-16-26-33 and Hot Ball 11.





Few financial advisers would consider the $1 spent on the ticket to have been a wise investment. The buyer overcame 1 in 10.9 million odds to win, said Mary Neubauer, a spokeswoman for the state lottery. If the ticket is redeemed, the winner would owe 25% in federal taxes and 5% in state taxes, she said.





But the possibility of taxes and the absence of a ticket haven't deterred the hopeful from lining up -- just in case. "We've been getting calls from the public all day long today," Neubauer said Wednesday night. "The closer that the deadline gets, the more people seem to be calling."





Huge-money ticket in Georgia goes unclaimed





Some of the calls are from people who say they may have lost the ticket, or put it through a washing machine, she said. They are walked through a series of questions to determine whether they may indeed be the winner. So far, no luck.





Other calls, she said, are from people who believe in the power of their own creativity. Once told they could not have been the winner, they call back again -- and again, each time with a different story, she said.





"That's why we keep emphasizing that it comes down to -- you have to have the winning ticket," she said.





If the prize goes unclaimed, the money would return to the 15 lotteries that offer the game -- in proportion to the percentage of sales that came from each state. "Iowa would get back about $1.3 million if this prize were to go unclaimed," Rich said.





States differ on how they would use the money. In Iowa, the money would go into the prize pools for future games.





Though a $77 million jackpot went unclaimed this week in Georgia, such cases are exceedingly rare, said Neubauer.

***

(CNN) -- The United States warned the Indian government about a potential maritime attack against Mumbai at least a month before last week's massacre in the country's financial capital left nearly 180 dead, a U.S. counterterrorism official told CNN.

Onlookers in Mumbai read messages posted outside the Oberoi Hotel, scene of one of the attacks.

U.S. intelligence indicated that a group might enter the country by water and launch an attack on Mumbai, said the source, who refused to be identified due to the ongoing investigation into the attacks and the sensitivity of the information.

Indian security forces have confirmed to CNN that not only did U.S. officials warn them of a water-borne attack in Mumbai -- they were told twice. The area entered a higher state of alert for a week, including tightened security measures at hotels, but those efforts were eventually reduced, Indian officials said.

Local fisherman in Mumbai said they witnessed a group of gunmen dock their boat Wednesday night, before heading toward the busy causeway.

Also, sources have told CNN-IBN that officials found phones and a global navigational device on an abandoned boat floating off the coast of Mumbai. The boat had been hijacked, intelligence officials told CNN-IBN. Watch Nic Robertson's report about U.S. warning

Four crew members who had been on board were missing. The captain was found dead, lying face down with his hands bound behind his back.

India has made clear that it believes last week's coordinated attacks in Mumbai originated in Pakistan, but the Indian government is under pressure to explain the lapse of security that allowed the siege to occur.

Indian police say 179 people were killed in the attacks on 10 targets in Mumbai. Most of the deaths occurred at the city's top two hotels, the Oberoi and the Taj Mahal. Watch report about nanny saving infant

Pakistani authorities say Islamabad has not received any evidence that militants from within its borders carried out the attacks, but have vowed to fully cooperate in the investigation. Suspicion has fallen on Lashkar-e-Tayyiba, a Pakistan-based terror group allied with al Qaeda, even though it has denied responsibility.  Watch how attacks could damage relations Â»

Pakistan banned the group in 2002 after an attack on India's parliament that brought the two countries to the brink of war.

Indian security forces say they arrested a member of the group in February, noting that the man was casing Mumbai for an attack.

U.S. counterterrorism officials continue to say signs are pointing to Lashkar-e-Tayyiba and they haven't seen anything to rule it out. However, they will not definitively say the group is responsible.

A team of FBI agents is in Mumbai to assist in the investigation, and U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice is heading to New Delhi on Wednesday to try to ease strained relations between the nuclear neighbors.  Watch Pakistan's PM say his country will defuse tensions Â»

At the center of India's investigation is the lone suspect in police custody, who Indian authorities say is Pakistani and trained by Lashkar-e-Tayyiba.

Indian officials have identified the suspect as a clean-shaven young man who was photographed during the attack on Mumbai's Victoria Terminus train station. One of the still images shows him walking with one arm outstretched and a gun in his other hand, lowered by his side. He is wearing a black T-shirt, cargo pants and a backpack.  Watch Anderson Cooper talk with Fareed Zakaria about the attacks Â»

Indian police say the other nine attackers were killed in three days of battles with police and the Indian military.

CNN's Senior International Correspondent Nic Robertson contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Pakistan bounced back to win the third Test against England by four wickets at the Oval in London as veteran batsman Mohammed Yousuf completed a successful return to international cricket on Saturday.





The tourists, whose country has been devastated by floods, reduced England's series lead to 2-1 ahead of the final match at Lord's starting next Thursday as Yousuf's experience proved vital.





Recalled after receiving an indefinite ban by the Pakistan Cricket Board in March following his role in the disastrous tour of Australia, the former captain contributed 56 in Pakistan's first innings of 308 and then played another solid hand in the successful chase for 148 on the fourth day.





Pakistan lost an early wicket and then Yousuf came to the crease at 57-2 after Imran Farhat fell to Graeme Swann for a quickfire 39. The 35-year-old helped Salman Butt (48) put on an invaluable 46 before the captain was also dismissed by the spinner.





Pakistan's nerves showed as Azhar Ali was run out for five, then James Anderson claimed his second wicket as he bowled Yousuf for a patient 33 and Swann trapped Kamran Akmal leg before wicket for a duck without offering a shot.





Umar Akmal (16) and Mohammad Amir (4) then guided Pakistan to a morale-boosting victory following two heavy defeats as their team mirrored the three-wicket win over Australia last month when chasing 180.





"The boys showed a lot of character," Butt told reporters. "It was a very good effort from the whole team, no one individual can be singled out. Yousuf brought class and calmness to the middle order. The dressing room is confident in this holy month of Ramadan, we would like to draw this series 2-2."





The 18-year-old Amir was named man of the match after becoming the youngest player to take five wickets in an innings in England, claiming figures of 5-52 as the hosts were bowled out for 222.





England added just one run to their overnight total before Amir dismissed last man Stuart Broad for six.

***

(CNN) -- Britons, Germans and other tourists on the Spanish island of Mallorca "can feel safe because they aren't targets of the ETA terrorist band," which recently bombed the popular resort, Spain's interior minister said Tuesday.



Police cordon off the route leading to the location of the blasts in Palma de Mallorca.



"People should feel safe because security forces are on top of this," Interior Minister Alfredo Perez Rubalcaba told a nationally-televised news conference in Madrid.



Rubalcaba's comments followed the Sunday explosions on Mallorca of what he said were four small ETA bombs that caused no injuries, and two weeks after an ETA car bomb killed two Civil Guard officers on the same Mediterranean island.



But Rubalcaba said police aren't sure if the ETA militants behind the bombings remain in hiding on the island or have left, and he warned repeatedly that the Basque separatist group could attack again.



"We are on maximum alert in Mallorca and the rest of Spain," Rubalcaba said. "ETA, when it can, attacks, so you can't rule out that they won't attack again. We try to prevent them from doing so."  Watch background behind ETA's decades-long struggle »



The island's regional government told CNN on Monday that since the bombings, there have been no "significant" tourist cancellations.



Tens of thousands of Britons and Germans are vacationing on Mallorca, as is Spain's King Juan Carlos and the royal family.



ETA is blamed for more than 800 deaths in its long fight for Basque independence.



Police initially attributed three small bombs on Sunday to ETA, which is listed as a terrorist group by Spain, the United States and the European Union.



But Tuesday, Rubalcaba confirmed that police believe a fourth bomb also was ETA's work. Some local authorities initially thought it might have been just an accidental gas explosion.



Three of the bombs exploded in the restrooms of restaurants and a bar in the main city, Palma de Mallorca, and the other was placed in the restroom of an underground commercial area beneath a main square.



Rubalcaba revealed that at least one of the bombs was in a male lavatory; previously it was reported they were all in women's restrooms.



Rubalcaba said one of the three warning calls on Sunday preceding the attacks came from near Bordeaux, France --- ETA's traditional rear-guard base. The warning calls, he added, provided only scant details about the bombs' locations to police.



The four small bombs were activated by timers, and one of them was hidden in a bar that had been closed since Friday.



Rubalcaba reiterated the government's position that "these attacks don't do anything but strengthen our determination. Those who placed the bombs will spend long years in jail and recent experience says they will."



ETA has been battered over the past 16 months by arrests of four suspected top ETA military chiefs and dozens of militants.



Hours before Sunday's bombs, ETA claimed responsibility for a series of bombings across Spain in June and July: the one that killed two Civil Guard officers, another that killed a police officer, and another that heavily damaged a Civil Guard barracks, slightly wounded dozens, including children.



In a statement released to the Basque newspaper Gara, ETA said those attacks were in retaliation for the Socialist government's crackdown on its ranks.



The group said, "What ETA has been looking for during long decades is a negotiated political solution."



But Rubalcaba recently ruled out a resumption of negotiations that his government tried without success in 2006 during an ETA cease-fire.



Spanish media last week cited numerous politicians and analysts who suggested that ETA's recent spate of violence might be trying to force the government back to the negotiating table.

***

(CNN) -- No longer able to fit into a booth at a restaurant and too embarrassed to ask for seatbelt extensions on an airplane, Maggie Sorrells was desperate to lose weight.



Maggie Sorrells lost 300 pounds and went from wearing a size  5X or 64 in men's clothing to a size 6.



The day she stepped on a hospital scale and realized she weighed 440 pounds she knew she had to do something.  Name: Maggie Sorrells Age: 32 Hometown: Franklin, Tennessee Occupation: Receptionist in doctor's office Height: 5 feet 6 inches Heaviest weight: 440 pounds Current weight: 140 pounds Pounds lost: 300 pounds  Defining moment The moment I saw that I weighed as much as I did, it scared me, and I knew I had to do something about it.    How did you finally lose the weight? Diet: Weigh Down Workshop, a faith-based weight loss program. I ate whatever I craved, but only when I was truly hungry, and then I ate a lot slower, so I could tell when to stop.



Exercise: Nothing out of the ordinary, occasionally I'd go for a walk, but never because I felt like I had to.



How long did it take you to lose weight? Four years with two pregnancies within the same time period. One month after I lost 300 pounds, I became pregnant for the third time with my son.



How has this changed your life? Drastically, the way I eat, the way I live my life. I am able to move better. I feel better emotionally and physically. I'm just a much happier person.



I love to hike and I could never go when I was big. I almost killed myself going a half-mile. My chest would hurt and I would think I was having a heart attack. Just after we had our daughter, we went hiking all day and climbed rocks.



I also love the beach. I'm no longer ashamed to go to the beach or wear a bathing suit.



Do you have any tips for other people who want to lose weight? Yes, don't think about how much weight you have to lose because you'll get overwhelmed and discouraged. Set small goals, like 15 pounds. There were times I wanted to give up and there were days I felt like I couldn't do this. Food was my drug. Take [weight loss] in small increments because when you lose 15 pounds you'll be excited and before you know it you'll lose 50.

***

(CNN) -- U.S. Air Force officials called off their response late Friday afternoon at a Tucson, Arizona, base after reports that an armed man had entered an office building, the U.S. military branch said in a statement.





Earlier in the day, a U.S. military official told CNN that a gunman was believed to be holed up in a building at the Davis-Monthan Air Force Base.





This precipitated the Air Force to call for a lock-down -- which began at 10:30 a.m. -- "following the unconfirmed sighting of" such a man.





No shots were ever fired and law enforcement teams are on site, said the official, who had direct knowledge of the situation from conversations with base officials but did not want to be identified.





In fact, at 6 p.m., Col. John Cherrey -- who commands the Air Force's 355th Fighter Wing -- told reporters that no gunman or weapon was ever found. He added that the building, where the gunman was once thought to have entered, has been secured after authorities went through it room-by-room.





The announcement came about two hours after the Air Force stated that its officials had "terminated" their response to the incident. All base personnel were leaving via a "controlled release."





"With the help of the Tucson emergency services communities, Airmen were successful in maintaining the safety and security of the Desert Lightning Team," the Air Force said, alluding to the name used for Air Force personnel based in the arid southern Arizona locale.





Earlier, Tucson Police Sgt. Maria Hawke said in an e-mailed statement that members of the department's SWAT team, hostage unit and bomb squad are near the site on a "stand-by" basis in case they are needed. But she said that they are "not actively engaged in any enforcement, investigative or other activity."





And Manuel Johnson, a Phoenix-based spokesman for the FBI, added that some agency personnel have been dispatched to the base to help, if needed.





Shortly before noon Friday, Staff Sgt. Caitlyn Jones confirmed that there was a security situation at the base and that it was on lock-down mode.





"It has been reduced to a single point of entry," she said.





Borman Elementary School, which is located inside the base, was put on lock down at 11 a.m., said Karen Bynum, executive assistant to the Tucson school district's superintendent. Its 501 students were confined to their classrooms, with all perimeter doors locked.





But shortly after 4 p.m., off-base parents were allowed onto the base to pick up students at the school and Sonoran Science Academy, according to a statement from the Air Force. On-base parents were told to "take the most direct route" to locations where their children may be.





The incident occurs nearly two years after 13 people were killed in a shooting spree at the Fort Hood army base in Texas.





CNN's Barbara Starr, Terry Frieden, Tina Burnside and Alta Spells contributed to this report.

***

PARIS, France (CNN) -- The Paris suburbs were again rocked by riots after a second night of lawlessness Monday caused widespread destruction and left scores of police injured, according to French authorities and media reports.



Firefighters in a Paris suburb battle to control a blaze started after youths rioted Sunday night.



An angry mob repeatedly clashed with riot police and torched cars and buildings in the town of Villiers-le-Bel, north of Paris, after two teens on a motorcycle were killed following a collision with a police car Sunday night.



Rioters bombarded police with baseball bats, Molotov cocktail bombs and bottles filled with acid as the violence spread to the nearby towns of Longjumeau and Grigby Monday night.



The 15- and 16-year-old boys, both sons of African immigrants, according to police, died when their motorbike hit a patrol car in Villiers-le-Bel.



Some residents, populated largely by immigrants and their French-born children, accused police of fleeing the crash scene. However, three eyewitnesses, interviewed on TV, said the police stayed and tried to revive the two boys with mouth to mouth resuscitation.  Watch why a repeat of past rioting is feared »



More than 60 police officers were injured in Monday night's confrontation, with five kept in hospital in a serious condition, according to reports in a number of French newspapers.



A spokesman for the police authorities in the Val d'Oise prefecture refused to confirm the numbers of police injuries, telling CNN that police feared the information could further enflame the already tense situation.



The police spokesman said 60 cars, a library and car dealer's showroom had been set on fire in Villiers-le-Bel. He said a police station had also been damaged and 15 garbage cans torched.



Security was tightened Tuesday, with helicopters deployed to patrol over the town, the spokesman said.



Villiers-le-Bel was not among the districts hit by the weeks of nationwide rioting in November 2005, when disaffected youths nationwide set thousands of cars ablaze to protest against unemployment and discrimination.



Those riots were also sparked by fatalities, namely the deaths of two men of North African descent who were electrocuted while hiding from police in an electrical substation.



French president Nicolas Sarkozy, then serving as the interior minister, provoked controversy at the time by referring to the rioters as "scum."



Sarkozy, currently on a state visit to China, had urged residents Monday to "cool down and let the justice system determine who is responsible for what." A spokesman for the president's office told CNN Tuesday they were continuing to monitor the situation.



The prosecutor's office in the nearby town of Pontoise has already begun an inquiry into the deaths.



Police said the teens drove through a red light without wearing helmets and on an unregistered bike.



But Omar Sehhouli, the brother of one of the victims, told French media the police involved should be arrested. "Everyone knew the two boys here," he told French radio. "What happened, that's not violence, it's rage."



According to the initial findings from the French police watchdog, reported Tuesday in the daily newspaper, Le Figaro, the boy's motorbike was driving "at very high speed" and had failed to give priority to the police patrol vehicle.



The police car was driving normally at around 40 kilometers an hour, the newspaper reported the watchdog had found. E-mail to a friend



CNN's Jim Bittermann contributed to this report

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- Olga A. Mendez, a ground-breaking Puerto Rican politician from New York City, has died after a long battle with cancer, Mayor Michael Bloomberg announced.



Mendez, widely reported to be the first Puerto Rican woman elected to a state legislature in the mainland United States, was 84.



"Olga's election to the state Senate as its first Puerto Rican woman was a tremendous symbol of hope for a community that now had a seat at the table," Bloomberg said in a release Wednesday. "But Olga's life was an inspiration to countless others, because the doors she bravely pushed opened stayed open for everyone else."



Mendez served in the New York state Senate 13 consecutive terms, from 1978 until being defeated in 2004. A long-time Democrat, she had switched to the Republican Party in 2002 and failed to win re-election to her heavily Democratic 28th district, which included East Harlem and parts of the Bronx.



"Mendez was brash, bold and aggressive because she had to be," New York's El Diario newspaper said Thursday. "She cut her teeth in the Senate and became a battle-ready politician. And she balanced what few politicians were able to do well -- an on-the-ground constituency services with the ability to achieve critical legislative negotiations. This, in a Senate that was controlled by Republicans during the entire 26 years she served."



Bloomberg noted Mendez's bipartisanship.



"When I first entered public service eight years ago, Olga sat me down and impressed upon me -- in her inimitable way -- the importance of reaching across partisan lines to do what's right for your constituents," the mayor said. "That's a lesson I carry with me every day."



El Diario noted that "Mendez successfully fought for an increase in the state's minimum wage, ushered in legislation that provided basic rights to migrant farm workers and secured funding for senior citizen centers. She also fought for resources for early childhood development and gained bipartisan support for affordable housing and economic development initiatives in her district."



Born in Mayaguez, Puerto Rico, Mendez moved to the Mainland U.S. after receiving a bachelor's degree from the Universidad de Puerto Rico in 1950. She received a master's degree in psychology from the Teacher's College at Columbia University in 1960 and a doctorate's in educational psychology from Yeshiva University in 1975.



An early widow, she had no children.



Mendez underwent surgery for breast cancer in 1993.



"Olga didn't recoil from public life or attempt to hide her condition," Bloomberg said. "Instead, she shared her story and her struggle with others."

***

(CNN) -- Former President Alfonso Portillo of Guatemala faces money-laundering charges in the United States, according to a federal indictment unsealed Monday.





The indictment charges Portillo with embezzling tens of millions of dollars in public funds, "a portion of which he then laundered through bank accounts located, among other places, in the United States and Europe," the indictment says.





A grand jury indicted Portillo in U.S. District Court in New York.





Portillo engineered an embezzlement with co-conspirators that occurred from about 2000 through about 2003, the indictment says. Prosecutors allege the money-laundering took place through at least 2006.





Portillo was the president of Guatemala from 2000 to 2004.





Authorities in Guatemala started searching for him after the United States requested his extradition, a spokesman for the International Commission against Impunity in Guatemala told CNN en Español on Sunday.





They executed search warrants in four locations but had not found him as of Sunday night, officials said.





Portillo came into power promising to clean up corruption, but found his own government mired in the same accusations as his predecessors.





According to the indictment, in one instance in 2000, Portillo funneled $1.5 million worth of donations for a literacy project from Taiwan into accounts in Europe controlled by his ex-wife and daughter.





In that case, the indictment alleges, Portillo endorsed three $500,000 checks destined for a program to purchase books for libraries, but diverted the funds into a bank in Miami, Florida. That money was eventually laundered into his family's accounts in Europe, the court document states.





In short, "this money was diverted, in a series of transactions and transfers designed to conceal the sources and origin of the funds," the indictment states.





There was a second instance where Portillo allegedly embezzled money given to Guatemala by the Taiwanese, according to the document.





In addition, Portillo is accused of embezzling money from his defense ministry in 2001. With the help of others, Portillo made large cash transactions that ended up in accounts belonging to him and his co-conspirators, the document says.





Some of the money that Portillo took went to buy expensive watches and cars, the indictment says.

***

BAGHDAD, Iraq (CNN) -- At least 33 people were killed and 20 wounded in a suicide car bombing targeting a national reconciliation conference in Baghdad, an Interior Ministry official told CNN.



Abu Ghraib attack victim in Yarmouk Hospital in Baghdad, Amjad Hameed



The attack -- which occurred outside the municipal building of Abu Ghraib in western Baghdad -- also wounded 46 others, the official said.



The attacker was targeting the latest effort by the government to foster national reconciliation between religious and ethnic groups.



Sunni Arab and Shiite tribal leaders were attending the meeting, backed by the Shiite-dominated Iraqi government.



Another Interior Ministry official told CNN the attack occurred when people gathered outside as the conference in the building ended.



Al-Baghdadiya TV said two of its journalists were killed in the explosion. An Iraqi journalists' group confirmed those deaths and said a number of journalists were also wounded.



Along with meeting attendees and journalists, Iraqi soldiers were among the casualties.



No one has claimed responsibility for the strike, but in the past, such gatherings have been targeted by al Qaeda in Iraq, the anti-American Sunni Arab militant group.



Staffan de Mistura, special representative of the U.N. secretary-general for Iraq, deplored the attack and passed along condolences to grieving families. He said the bombing targeted the tribal leaders after their meeting, and called the strike a "horrible crime that is designed to sabotage reconciliatory efforts by the Iraqi people, who, I am confident, will continue on the road of dialogue."



The blast follows another huge attack on Sunday, when a man wearing an explosives-laden vest drove a motorcycle rigged with bombs into a group of police recruits in eastern Baghdad. That attack killed 30 people and wounded 61 others.



Most of the victims of Sunday's strike were police officers and recruits who had gathered outside a police academy on Palestine Street. The same academy was targeted on December 1 in a double bombing that killed 16 and wounded 46.



The violence came after Iraqi Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki on Saturday rallied sheikhs of the nation's tribes to participate in Iraq's government.



It was the latest official effort to further reconciliation among Sunnis, Shiites and tribes of different sects and bring some former members of Saddam Hussein's Baath party into the political fold.



After the invasion, the U.S.-led coalition decided to purge Iraqi institutions of Baathists, most of whom were Sunni Arabs.



Al-Maliki, who is Shiite, has been criticized in the past by minority groups for not fairly representing Iraqi's ethnic groups.



CNN's Yousif Bassil and Mohammed Tawfeeq contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Unsanitary conditions at a Colorado cantaloupe farm's packing facility are a possible contributing cause of one of the nation's worst outbreaks of listeria contamination in food, the Food and Drug Administration said Wednesday.





Meanwhile, a Centers for Disease Control official said it is too early to declare the outbreak over, but the number of new cases appeared to be diminishing.





"The peak in illnesses appears to have occurred from late August until the middle of September," said Dr. Barbara Mahon of the CDC, who added that additional monitoring will be needed for at least another two weeks.





The FDA said it was unable to pinpoint the definitive cause of the outbreak, which has been linked to 25 deaths so far.





An FDA letter to Jensen Farms of Granada, Colorado, however, cited violations in sanitary conditions that must be addressed. It said tests showed "widespread contamination throughout your facility and indicates poor sanitary practices in the facility."





The agency cited several likely causes of the spread of the Listeria monocytogenes bacteria at Jensen Farms.





The likely causes included packing equipment that "was not easily cleaned and sanitized" and the use of washing and drying equipment for cantaloupe packing as well as other raw agricultural commodities.





In addition, the agency said in a statement, the facility lacked a "pre-cooling step" to remove field heat from the cantaloupes before cold storage, possibly leading to condensation in the cooling process that promoted growth of the listeria bacteria.





A letter dated Tuesday from the FDA to Jensen Farms cited violations in sanitary conditions. The letter said tests at the facility found listeria bacteria contamination.





"These positive swabs were taken from different locations throughout the washing and packing areas in your facility, all of which were either food contact surfaces or areas adjacent to food contact surfaces," the letter said. "This significant percentage of swabs that tested positive for outbreak strains of Listeria monocytogenes demonstrates widespread contamination throughout your facility and indicates poor sanitary practices in the facility."





According to the letter, the company has 15 days to document steps it has taken to correct the problems. The letter also said the company notified the FDA on Monday that it agreed to inspection by the agency of its growing, packaging, and cold storage operations before it resumes food harvesting, packaging, or processing.





Jensen Farms also agreed to correct all objectionable observations noted during said FDA inspections, the letter said.





A total of 123 people in 26 states have been infected by the listeria outbreak, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention says. Additionally, a woman who was pregnant at the time of her illness had a miscarriage, the agency said.





The listeria outbreak is the deadliest food-borne illness outbreak in the United States since 1998.





Groups at high risk for listeria include older adults, people with weakened immune systems and pregnant women.





Jensen Farms issued a voluntary recall of its Rocky Ford brand cantaloupes on September 14. The tainted cantaloupes should be off store shelves, the CDC has said.





Cantaloupes from Jensen Farms should be disposed of immediately, even if some of them have been eaten, the agency recommended. If consumers are uncertain about the source of a cantaloupe, they are urged to ask their supermarket. If the source remains unknown, the fruit should be thrown out.





Refrigerating a cantaloupe will not kill the bacteria, which can grow at low temperatures, and consumers should not try to wash off the bacteria.

***

ATLANTA, Georgia (CNN) -- All Lyle Petersen wanted to do was get his mail.



Lyle Petersen,  a CDC expert who was infected with West Nile virus, says, "it will ruin your summer."



In the time it took him to walk down his driveway in Fort Collins, Colorado, chat briefly with a neighbor and return to his house, Petersen got infected with a potentially serious mosquito-borne illness called West Nile virus. Within hours of being bitten, he said, he began to feel symptoms he recognized.



And how was he sure so quickly? Petersen, as director of the division of vector borne diseases at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, is one of the foremost experts in the world on the condition. A blood test confirmed his suspicion.



"From my own experience, I can tell you it's not a very mild illness," Petersen cautioned. "It will ruin your summer."



Experts are expecting another epidemic of the disease this summer. The incidence of West Nile virus has remained the same for the past four years, and Petersen says he doesn't expect this year to be any different. It should reach its peak between mid-July and mid-September.  Health Minute: More on West Nile virus risk »



"People tend to discount this as a significant problem," Petersen said, "but more than 1.5 million people have been infected so far in the United States, and about 300,000 have had West Nile fever."



West Nile virus emerged in the U.S. nine years ago. The virus is spread by the bite of an infected mosquito. Mosquitoes contract the illness by feeding on infected birds.



The CDC reported that in rare cases, West Nile virus has spread through blood transfusions, organ transplants and breastfeeding. The disease is not spread through casual contact.



The symptoms range from mild to severe and typically develop between three and 14 days after a person is bitten.  Explainer: West Nile 101 »



Debbie Koma, a 50-year old hairdresser from Atlanta, Georgia, developed West Nile virus two years ago. She described it as "unlike anything that I ever had before. I was sick as a dog."



She recalled being hospitalized for three days with a high fever, a horrible headache and body aches. After 14 days, she was strong enough to get out of bed, but she says her strength didn't fully return for three months.



Petersen had a similar experience when he was stricken five years ago.



"I discovered I had West Nile virus because I am a long-distance runner," he said. "About halfway through one of my runs, I felt terrible. Within a couple of hours, I was lying in bed with severe headaches, eye pain, muscle pain and fever, which lasted about a week. I basically couldn't get out of bed for a week."



It wasn't just Petersen who became sick, but his daughter and the neighbor were complaining of West Nile virus symptoms hours after being swarmed by mosquitoes at the mailbox.



A medical doctor, Petersen actually tested his own blood in the laboratory and diagnosed his own illness.



Like Koma, he was sick for a couple of months. His chief symptom: severe fatigue. "I could barely walk up the stairs," he said.



"This is not a mild illness, and people should try to avoid it."



Petersen mentioned that some patients with West Nile virus can develop a severe neurological disease that can be fatal.



There is no effective treatment for the virus. In more serious cases, the CDC recommends that patients be hospitalized so they can receive supportive care with intravenous fluids.



Researchers are working to develop a vaccine, but Petersen notes that it will be years before it is available to humans.



The best way to stop the spread of West Nile virus is through prevention, he said.



"Wear mosquito repellent, especially around dawn and dusk, which are peak mosquito biting times," Petersen suggests.



He says bug sprays that

***

(CNN) -- Author Arthur C. Clarke, whose science fiction and non-fiction works ranged from the script for "2001: A Space Odyssey" to an early proposal for communications satellites, has died at age 90, associates have said.



Visionary author Arthur C. Clarke had fans around the world.



Clarke had been wheelchair-bound for several years with complications stemming from a youthful bout with polio and had suffered from back trouble recently, said Scott Chase, the secretary of the nonprofit Arthur C. Clarke Foundation.



He died early Wednesday -- Tuesday afternoon ET -- at a hospital in Colombo, Sri Lanka, where he had lived since the 1950s, Chase said.



"He had been taken to hospital in what we had hoped was one of the slings and arrows of being 90, but in this case it was his final visit," he said.



In a videotaped 90th birthday message to fans, Clarke said he still hoped to see some sign of intelligent life beyond Earth, more work on alternatives to fossil fuels -- and "closer to home," an end to the 25-year civil war in Sri Lanka between the government and ethnic Tamil separatists.



"I dearly wish to see lasting peace established in Sri Lanka as soon as possible," he said. "But I'm aware that peace cannot just be wished -- it requires a great deal of hard work, courage and persistence."



Clarke and director Stanley Kubrick shared an Academy Award nomination for best adapted screenplay for "2001." The film grew out of Clarke's 1951 short story, "The Sentinel," about an alien transmitter left on the moon that ceases broadcasting when humans arrive.



As a Royal Air Force officer during World War II, Clarke took part in the early development of radar. In a paper written for the radio journal "Wireless World" in 1945, he suggested that artificial satellites hovering in a fixed spot above Earth could be used to relay telecommunications signals across the globe.



He is widely credited with introducing the idea of the communications satellite, the first of which were launched in the early 1960s. But he never patented the idea, prompting a 1965 essay that he subtitled, "How I Lost a Billion Dollars in My Spare Time."



His best-known works, such as "2001" or the 1953 novel "Childhood's End," combined the hard science he learned studying physics and mathematics with insights into how future discoveries would change humanity.



David Eicher, editor of Astronomy magazine, told CNN that Clarke's writings were influential in shaping public interest in space exploration during the 1950s and '60s.  Watch how Clarke stands among sci-fi giants »



"He was very interested in technology and also in humanity's history and what lay out in the cosmos," Eicher said. His works combined those "big-picture" themes with "compelling stories that were more interesting and more complex than other science fiction writers were doing," he said.



Tedson Meyers, the chairman of the Clarke Foundation, said the organization is now dedicated to reproducing the combination of imagination and knowledge that he credited the author with inspiring.



"The question for us is, how does human imagination bring about such talent on both sides of the brain?" he asked. "How do you find the next Arthur Clarke?"



Clarke was knighted in 1998. He wrote dozens of novels and collections of short stories and more than 30 nonfiction works during his career, and served as a television commentator during several of the Apollo moon missions.



Though humans have not returned to the moon since 1972, Clarke said he was confident that a "Golden Age" of space travel was just beginning.  Watch Clarke talk about sci-fi vs. reality »



"After half a century of government-sponsored efforts, we are now witnessing the emergence of commercial space flight," he said in his December birthday message.



"Over the next 50 years, thousands of people will travel to Earth orbit -- and then, to the moon and beyond. Space travel and space tourism will one

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- When David Whitney traveled to Pakistan to shoot his film about a man forced to flee Afghanistan after falling foul of the Taliban he didn't expect fiction to turn into reality.



A still from "Kandahar Break." Production of the film was halted after the crew were fired upon by suspected Taliban militia.



But that's exactly what happened three weeks into shooting political thriller "Kandahar Break" in late 2008.



Gunmen attacked the first-time director and his crew near the Afghan border. Four Pakistani crew members were shot and wounded in the incident and the entire crew was forced to flee the region.



Pakistani authorities later told Whitney that the gunmen were affiliated with the Taliban and were in fact targeting the Western members of the team.



"I was very upset. It was terrifying to know that somebody was trying to attack us, trying to shoot us," Whitney told CNN.



With the help of local security forces the team was immediately evacuated to Islamabad and put on a flight out of the country in 24 hours.



Whitney had only managed to film three-quarters of the script and the film's future lay in the balance.



"When I heard that the crew members who had been shot were going to be fine I started to think like the businessman and the producer," says Whitney.



"I thought, 'How are we going to finish this film? We're not just going to give up.' And to a man everybody involved agreed to finish it."



After six months spent organizing financial backing, the original cast and crew flew to Tunisia to complete the movie and has been attracting interest from distributors.



Despite the danger caused by shooting so close to the actual conflict zone, Whitney says he would shoot in the region again if he had the chance.



"Every place you point a camera there's a great shot. You don't have to go very far to find fantastic authentic Afghan architecture and beautiful landscapes.



"All the people are in the same sort of authentic costumes, so you don't have the problem of trying to find authenticity -- it's all around you."



Whitney hopes the authenticity will help "Kandahar Break" enjoy the same level of success as Kathryn Bigelow's "The Hurt Locker" -- the first film about the Iraq war to make a profit at the U.S. box office.



Bigelow's thriller tells the story of an elite army EOD bomb squad who battle insurgents and each other, as they disarm a innumerable roadside bombs on the streets of Baghdad.



Bigelow shot "The Hurt Locker"  in Jordan, as close as she could get to the actual conflict zone. She also made use of  local actors.



The film is based on screenwriter Mark Boal's first-hand experiences gathered whilst embedded with a bomb unit in Iraq.



"Because it was based on real life, we wanted to keep it as realistic as possible and keep it accurate," Bigelow told CNN.



"I mean this is a conflict that's still on-going so we felt responsible to the troops still there and the situation on the ground."



The cast faced grueling shooting conditions: Temperatures ranged between 115 and 120 degrees Fahrenheit (46 and 49 degrees Celsius). It was even hotter in the authentic bomb suit worn by Jeremy Brenner, who plays Staff Sergeant James. The suit weighed 60 pounds.



"You really can't explain the heat and the weight of the suit," Brenner told CNN.



"That certainly helped the realism of it all. There were a few moments I felt like ... I've been as close as I could've come to war without actually being in the military.



"The heat was real, the dust was real, the costumes and everything was so real that the tension [was already there]," Anthony Mackie who plays Sergeant JT Sanborn told CNN.



"Kathryn would come to us before every scene and say, 'Remember at any moment you can die.' And we kept that in mind

***

(CNN) -- Troops in Jamaica captured an armed man Monday who had barged onto a Canadian airliner, robbed passengers and held six crew members hostage, Jamaica Information Minister Daryl Vaz said.



A hostage-taker commandeered a CanJet flight at Sangster International Airport in Montego Bay, Jamaica.



The crew members were not harmed, Vaz said.



The hijacking suspect, described as a "mentally challenged" man in his 20s, had demanded that the Boeing 737 be flown to Cuba. The military captured him around 7 a.m. local time.



The FBI helped Jamaican authorities handle the situation at the Jamaican government's request, a U.S. government source told CNN.



The CanJet flight from Halifax, Canada, had made a scheduled landing at Sangster International Airport in the Jamaican resort city of Montego Bay and was scheduled to continue to Santa Clara, Cuba.



Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper, who was in Jamaica, told reporters that he planned to travel to Montego Bay to meet with Jamaican Prime Minister Bruce Golding. Harper has been following the airplane security breach and may meet with the plane's crew later today.



"The hijacking is that from a mentally challenged youngster and not anything that would be of concern in terms of an international incident," Vaz said.



The suspect gained access to the plane Sunday night through the terminal in "a breach of security" that "will be investigated," Deputy Police Commissioner Owen Ellington told CNN.



The gunman fired a shot in the boarding bridge as he entered, said CanJet Airlines Vice President Kent Woodside. No one was hit.



CanJet Flight 918 was carrying 174 passengers and eight crew members, Woodside said. All the passengers were Canadian, he said.



The suspect took an undisclosed number of passengers and crew members hostage before releasing all the passengers and two crew members, said Elizabeth Scotton, a spokeswoman for the company that manages the airport.



Two of the six crew members who remained inside the plane Monday locked themselves in the cockpit, Vaz said.



The suspect's father and Golding, who flew in by helicopter, were among those who negotiated with the gunman before his capture. The country's minister of national security also was at hand.



The released passengers were taken to a hotel, and the airport was shut down for a time, Vaz said.



The airport reopened shortly after the standoff, Woodside said. A CanJet airliner was on its way to Jamaica, he said, to take passengers on to Cuba or back to Canada.



Christian Gosselin, a passenger on the flight, told his father that the gunman demanded cash from the plane's occupants. Vaz confirmed the account.



"The guy wanted to have all their money," said Gosselin's father, Alphonse. "He [my son] told his girlfriend to take all the money and just take her passport and credit card and put it in her back pocket."



Christian Gosselin was part of a 25-person wedding party headed to Cuba. He and his girlfriend were released by the hostage-taker, and they spoke to his father in New Brunswick, Canada, while waiting for another flight.



"I didn't ask them too many questions; I was more concerned for their safety," the father said. "They were a bit shaken up. It was quite an experience."



Another passenger, Brenda Grenier, called her husband and said the man apparently got aboard the plane as airport workers were loading bags.



Grenier and her daughter were safe, her husband said by phone from his home in Nova Scotia, Canada.



CNN's Joyce Joseph, Janet DiGiacomo, Jessica Jordan, Saeed Ahmed and Mike Brooks contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Douglas Cootey is replacing his lightbulbs with brighter ones, but not just to see better. The new broad spectrum lights simulate sunlight, and might help enliven his mood in the gloomy winter months.

A light box like the one shown here may help some people combat seasonal depression in winter.

Cootey, a stay-at-home dad in Salt Lake City, Utah, has struggled with depression for 16 years and shares his story with others on his blog, The Splintered Mind.

He said he started to notice last year that his depression was harder to manage in the winter. His challenge, he told CNN, is "keeping a positive and upbeat attitude in the face of a chemical onslaught induced by winter."

He realized that his symptoms fit those of seasonal affective disorder, a condition that typically generates depression during autumn and winter and then goes away in the sunnier months. In rarer cases, people can suffer from it only in summer.

"I set the clock back and look at this: I've been so unproductive," Cootey said. "Now that I know what's going on, I'm trying to counteract it.'

Between 4 and 6 percent of the U.S. population suffers from seasonal affective disorder, according to the Cleveland Clinic in Ohio, but 10 to 20 percent of the population may suffer from more mild winter doldrums. SAD is more common in women in their 20s, 30s, and 40s, the Cleveland Clinic says.

Some people may be genetically predisposed to SAD, but  the environment can trigger it as well, said Ignacio Provencio, a biology professor at the University of Virginia.  Learn about other mood disorders Â»

A recent study led by Provencio shows that a genetic mutation in the eye could play a role in seasonal affective disorder. The mutation makes a person with SAD less sensitive to light. The photopigment gene is called melanopsin, which helps detect colors.

"Being able to look at one's DNA and seeing that you're a carrier or contain two copies of this gene may be able to, in the future, allow one to predict whether or not they will be susceptible to this disease," Provencio said.

The information may also help predict which people with seasonal affective disorder will respond to light therapy, because the mutated genes involve light sensitivity, he said.

Light therapy works for some people, experts say, by mimicking outdoor light and promoting a biochemical change in the brain that improves mood.

The researchers looked at 220 people, including 90 nondepressed people and 130 people diagnosed with the disorder. In this group, seven people with seasonal affective disorder had two mutated copies of the gene.

The study results make sense to Dr. David Baron, chairman of Temple University's Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Science in Philadelphia. The study is "consistent with the literature on understanding genetics in vulnerability to illness," he said.

But Stephen Josephson, associate professor at Cornell University Medical Center-New York Hospital and Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, said the study points to a correlation but does not constitute definitive proof.

Although the specific causes of the disorder aren't known, some biological factors might contribute to it.

Circadian rhythm, which helps regulate the body's internal clock, may be disrupted with the drop in sunlight in fall and winter, MayoClinic.com says.

Other research indicates that the brain chemical serotonin and the sleep-related hormone melatonin may play a role, MayoClinic.com says.

Although seasonal affective disorder symptoms typically kick in around late autumn or early winter, some people experience "summer depression," accompanied by symptoms such as anxiety, insomnia, irritability, agitation, and poor appetite, according to MayoClinic.com.

Experts say seasonal affective disorder is more prevalent in places farther from the equator. Someone who has a genetic predisposition to SAD may not have problems if he or she lives in Singapore, for example, Baron said.

Some people with seasonal affective disorder use a light box, a device that shines a bright light similar to outdoor light, which a patient sits in front

***

Cairo (CNN) -- The Arab League and other world powers boosted pressure on the Bashar al-Assad regime to end its nearly nine-month-long crackdown on demonstrators, a relentless push against mostly peaceful citizen protest that has now claimed at least 4,000 deaths.





Nabil el-Araby, the secretary-general of the Arab League, said the Syrian regime can "avoid the dangers of a foreign intervention" if it agrees to an Arab League plan to defuse the grinding conflict.





He said the Syrian government hasn't accepted the league plan to send observers into the country to monitor the response to civil unrest. But he said the government has a chance to overcome the crisis by agreeing to the idea.





"The Syrian government is not complying with the Arab initiative plan and their inability to stop the violence is what led to the escalation of the procedures of the sanctions against it," el-Araby said in a written statement.





Earlier this week, foreign ministers from 19 Arab League countries voted to slap economic sanctions on the Syrian regime, including cutting ties with the nation's central bank, banning high-profile officials from visiting Arab countries and freezing government assets.





The number of deaths has reached at least 4,000 since the crackdown began in mid-March and could be much higher, Navi Pillay, U.N. high commissioner for human rights, said in Switzerland on Thursday.





The Local Coordination Committees of Syria, an activist group, said 4,744 people have been killed, including 843 from the army. The group said at least 23 people had been killed in the country on Thursday.





The U.S. Treasury sanctioned two high-ranking Syrians and two government controlled entities on Thursday for their role in the crackdown. One of the people is Mohammad Makhlouf, al-Assad's uncle and father of long-serving financial adviser Rami Makhlouf. The other is Aus Aslan, a Syrian general.





The sanctions are the latest of several imposed by the United States, the European Union, and Turkey.





"It has never been more critical to escalate pressure on the Syrian government to immediately cease all violence against its own people and isolate the regime from the international financial system," said Treasury Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence David S. Cohen. "We will continue to work closely with our partners in Europe and around the world to hasten a transition to democracy in Syria."





A league official told CNN on Thursday it is targeting 17 senior Syrian regime officials for a travel ban to member states.





One of them is President al-Assad's brother, Maher Hafez al-Assad, the commander of the country's 4th Army Division, according to a senior Arab League official directly involved in negotiations with the Syrians.





The preliminary list also includes Defense Minister Emad Dawoud Abdulla, Interior Minister Mohamed Ibrahim Al Shaar, intelligence chief Abdulla Fattah Quedsia, and military intelligence chief Rostom Ghazali. The source doesn't want be named because of his direct involvement in the talks.





Syrian citizens blame the military and security apparatus for the casualties. The Syrian government insists that armed groups are responsible.





The instability is affecting non-Syrians. Kuwait urged its citizens in Syria to leave and said those planning to travel there should not because of "the unstable security situation," the state-run media said on Thursday, citing a statement from the Foreign Ministry.





El-Araby has said a committee examining how to implement the sanctions will focus on protecting civilians while targeting the government.





An Arab League committee led by economic ministers will meet in Doha, Qatar, on Saturday to discuss implementing sanctions, the source said. It will pass along its ideas to the league foreign ministers meeting in Cairo next week, the source told CNN on Thursday.





The source also said a ban on Arab airlines traveling in and out of Syria will start on December 15.





Syria announced that it has suspend its membership in the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership until the European Union backs down on the sanctions imposed on Syria.





But European Union foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton told the EU Foreign Affairs Council on Thursday that the group is pleased

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Virginia hasn't backed a Democrat for president in 44 years, but economic concerns and changing demographics are giving Sen. Barack Obama a chance to steal the once reliably red state from Republicans.



Sen. Barack Obama waves as rain falls on a rally in Fredericksburg, Virginia, in late September.



Polls earlier this year showed Sen. John McCain, the Republican presidential nominee, leading Obama, his Democratic rival, in Virginia by a healthy margin.



A Virginia Commonwealth University poll taken May 12-18 had McCain leading 47 percent to 39 percent.



But as the financial crisis has shaken voters' confidence in the economy, Obama has begun to open a lead in the state, as he has done in other battleground states.



The latest CNN poll of polls has Obama leading McCain 49 percent to 45 percent. A CNN/TIME/Opinion Research Corporation poll conducted September 28-30 shows Obama with an even bigger lead over McCain, 53 percent to 44 percent. The CNN poll's margin of error was plus or minus 4 percentage points.



Polls show that voters have more confidence in Obama to handle the economic crisis than they do in McCain, and are more likely to blame Republicans for the recent turmoil than Democrats.



Beside an advantage on the economy, Obama is also benefiting from a demographic shift that has reshaped Virginia politics.



For the last 10 presidential elections, Republicans have been able to bank on Virginia delivering its 13 electoral votes to the GOP. President Bush won Virginia by 8 percentage points in both 2000 and 2004, and President Bill Clinton was never able to capture the state when he ran in 1992 and 1996.



But the explosive growth of Northern Virginia in the last decade has changed the state's electorate. Drawn by government jobs in nearby Washington and high-tech jobs in the Dulles corridor, the growing population in Northern Virginia is more liberal than the mostly rural southern portion of the state, which has remained reliably Republican.



In 2000, Bush carried Northern Virginia 49 percent to 47 percent, but in 2004, Sen. John Kerry, the Democratic presidential nominee, carried the area 51 percent to 48 percent.



Virginia "is not as red as people think," said Doc Thompson, a conservative talk show host for WRVA radio. "A third of the population in Northern Virginia is pretty liberal. A lot of people are buying into [Obama's] notion of change."



Virginia Democrats have been able to exploit the changes in the electorate into statewide electoral success after years in which the Republicans had a virtual lock on the state.



In fact, Virginia Republicans have not won a statewide race since Mark Warner, a former mobile phone company executive, captured the governorship for the Democrats in 2001 by emphasizing economic growth.



Democrat Tim Kaine, who was Warner's lieutenant governor, succeeded Warner in 2005. And in what may have been the most surprising result of the 2006 election cycle, Democrat Jim Webb defeated the incumbent Republican George Allen in the race for one of Virginia's seats in the U.S. Senate.



The trend favoring the Democrats is expected to continue this year, which is expected to help drive Virginia Democrats to the polls.



The extremely popular Warner is almost certain to win this year's race against another former governor, Republican Jim Gilmore, to replace Virginia's long-standing Republican senator, John Warner, who is retiring. (The two Warners are not related, and John Warner was unopposed in 2002.)



A Washington Post-ABC News poll conducted in late September found Warner leading Gilmore by 30 points, and Warner's victory would give Democrats control of both of Virginia's seats in the U.S. Senate for the first time since 1970.



While conservatives may be demoralized by Gilmore's poor showing, McCain may also face eroding support from Virginia conservatives for his recent proposals for the government to become heavily involved in the U.S. economy, said Thompson, the radio talk show host.



During Tuesday night's presidential debate, McCain suggested that the government directly buy up to $300 billion in home mortgages to help homeowners facing foreclosure.



Thompson said

***

(CNN) -- A 14-year-old Filipino-American boy abducted in July by suspected Islamic militants in the Philippines is free, officials said.





Kevin Lunsmann was reunited with his mother, the U.S. Embassy in Manila said Monday, without offering additional details.





"It was a tough time. It was a tough five months," Kevin's father, Heiko, told CNN affiliate WSET, from the family home in Lynchburg, Virginia. "I'm just so happy."





Heiko Lunsmann said the boy had plotted his escape for a while and eventually seized the opportunity some time late last week while his guards slept.





He "was spotted alone" Saturday about six miles southwest of Lamitan City on the island of Basilan, a stronghold of the Islamic militant group Abu Sayyaf, the official Philippines News Agency said.





Army officials turned him over to American forces in the southern Mindanao region, the Philippine government said in a statement to CNN affiliate TV 5.





The Philippine Inquirer quoted the Lamitan city mayor, Roderick Furigay, as saying Kevin walked for two days, surviving on candies his captors presumably gave him and on coconuts that he retrieved by climbing trees.





"In this holiday season nothing makes me happier than knowing that an innocent victim is returned to his family in time for holiday celebrations," Harry Thomas, the U.S. ambassador to the Philippines, said in a weekend statement.





"If ever we are to be inspired by the human spirit, we should take comfort in the courage, commitment and love that the Lunsmann family exhibited during this trying ordeal," Thomas added.





Fourteen gunmen snatched Kevin, his mother, Gerfa Yeatts Lunsmann, and his 19-year-old cousin, Romnick Jakaria, in July while they vacationed on the island of Tictabon, authorities said. The abductors forced them to board awaiting boats, which then sped off in the direction of Basilan.





Kevin's mother was released by her captors in October. Jakaria was released last month, according to the news agency.





Basilan serves as a base for Abu Sayyaf, which wants to establish a separate state for the Philippines' minority Muslim population. The U.S. State Department considers the group a terrorist organization and says it is linked to al Qaeda. The Philippines government has been fighting to contain the militants.





Abu Sayyaf has been blamed for several terrorist attacks in the Philippines, including the bombing of a ferry in 2004 that left about 130 people dead, as well as past kidnappings.





Basilan's governor called on authorities Sunday to prosecute the alleged kidnappers of the Lunsmann family, according to the news agency.





"The prosecution of kidnappers by a court of law will put a stop to kidnappings," the news agency quoted Jum Akbar as saying.





Thomas, the U.S. ambassador, said the crime will not go "unpunished."





Gerfa Lunsmann was adopted by Americans when she was 9 and grew up in Virginia. She eventually married a German citizen. Both she and the son, Kevin, are U.S. passport holders.





Kevin's father told WSET that the boy will eventually share his story of escape, but did not say when.





"I can tell you a lot of things, but I only know that he is a hero," he said.





Read more about this story from CNN affiliate WSET.

***

Washington (CNN) -- Two men who worked as security contractors for the company formerly known as Blackwater have been charged with murder in the killings of two Afghan men, federal prosecutors announced Thursday.



Christopher Drotleff and Justin Cannon are charged with two counts of second-degree murder and one count of attempted murder each in connection with the May shootings in Kabul. The 12-count, 19-page indictment returned by a federal grand jury in U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia also includes weapons charges against the two men.



The indictment was returned Wednesday but unsealed Thursday.



Both men were in Afghanistan working for the security company Paravant, a subsidiary of Xe, the military contracting firm formerly known as Blackwater Worldwide. FBI agents have arrested both men, the Justice Department announced.



Drotleff, Cannon and two other contractors, Steven McClain and Armando Hamid, were involved in the May 5, 2009, shooting that left two Afghan civilians dead and another wounded. The men had been hired by Paravant to help the U.S. Army train Afghan troops.



The contractors said they were driving their interpreters on a busy Kabul street called Jalalabad Road at around 9 p.m. when a car slammed into one of their two cars.



"I immediately thought we were under attack," McClain said in May.



The contractors got out to help their colleagues, and the vehicle that had struck the car did a U-turn and headed back at them, the men said. The contractors fired at the oncoming vehicle.



"The car was coming at us," Cannon said in May. "At that point we attempted to stop and immobilize the vehicle and we engaged it in small arms fire. And the car didn't stop, it just kept going."



The incident spotlights the issue of the role and conduct of U.S. security contractors in Afghanistan. A similar issue arose in Iraq after a September 2007 confrontation involving then-Blackwater contractors that left 17 Iraqi civilians dead.



Blackwater lost its contract there after Iraq's government refused to renew its operating license. The company then changed its name to Xe, and it continues to receive multimillion-dollar contracts in Afghanistan.



In the wake of the shooting, all four men lost their jobs with Paravant for violating the company's alcohol policy.



The contractors said they had not been drinking and had not had a drink since their arrival in November.



"We feel that Blackwater wanted to shift the blame from Blackwater itself to these men as if they were acting on a lark," attorney Daniel J. Callahan said in May. "Off duty, with weapons, weapons of their own, and while drinking. And I think the intent is to use these men as scapegoats."



Callahan, who has advised the men but has not been formally retained by any of them, did not immediately return a call Thursday seeking comment on the charges.



In a written statement Thursday, Xe said it had "immediately and fully cooperated with the government's investigation of this tragic incident and terminated the individuals involved for violating company policy."



Also Thursday, Xe announced it has settled seven lawsuits that accused it of crimes in cases not related to the Afghanistan shooting.



The lawsuits accused Blackwater security guards of widespread illegal activity, including fostering "a culture of lawlessness" among its guards. A lawyer representing the plaintiffs, Susan Burke, said neither she nor anyone else involved in the settlement was allowed to discuss it publicly. It was not clear how much the settlement was for.



One lawsuit, filed by Burke in 2007 on behalf of families of several Iraqis killed or wounded in the September 2007 shooting in Baghdad, Iraq, said that a quarter of Blackwater security guards in Iraq use steroids and other "judgment-altering substances."



The lawsuit also accused the company of war crimes, wrongful death, assault, negligent hiring and emotional distress. The plaintiffs included two wounded survivors of the Baghdad shooting and the families of five people killed in the incident.



Blackwater denied the accusations. Last week, a federal judge dismissed manslaughter charges against five Blackwater security guards involved in the killings, finding that prosecutors wrongly

***

(CNN)  -- Robin Dehaven usually replaces windows. On Thursday morning, after a small plane crashed into an Austin, Texas, office building, he was breaking them, having rushed into the burning structure to help people escape.





Dehaven, an Army veteran who works for a glass company, was driving to a job when he witnessed the plane crash. With the building in flames and emergency personnel still minutes away, Dehaven drove his truck to the parking lot.





People in the building were trapped, screaming for help.





"[Other people who'd gathered] said they needed my ladders on my truck, because there were people stuck on the second floor," Dehaven told CNN's "The Situation Room."





He took a ladder off his truck and put it up to a window of a smoke-filled area where five people were trapped.





"The people were kind of in a panic, wanting to get out quickly, of course, so I climbed up into the building with them," Dehaven said. He then broke a nearby window under which the ladder could have better footing, and he helped the five escape, he said.





See iReport photos and videos from the scene





Dehaven was one of several people who rushed to the site to help, local reports and the Texas governor's office said.





"In true Texas form, first responders and everyday citizens responded to today's plane crash with selfless acts of heroism, securing the area, evacuating the building and controlling the fire, and are to be commended," Texas Gov. Rick Perry said in a written statement Thursday.





Authorities said they believe pilot Joseph Andrew Stack III, 53, of Austin, intentionally crashed the small aircraft into the building, where nearly 200 Internal Revenue Service employees worked. Authorities said Stack apparently had a grudge against the IRS.





The remains of two people were found in the building after the crash, and 13 other people were injured -- one seriously -- authorities said. The identities of the dead weren't released as of Thursday evening.





Witnesses described a scene of panic, fire and smoke. Lyric Olivarez, who was working in a nearby building, told CNN affiliate KXAN that she felt her building shake when the plane crashed.





"It sounded like an explosion, but it felt like an earthquake," Olivarez said. "Someone came into our office and said there was a bomb in the building next door. We had no idea it was a plane at the time."





When she and others ran outside, they saw the neighboring building in flames.





"People on the second and third floors were busting out windows, screaming, 'Help me! Help me! Get me out of here!' waving handkerchiefs or whatever they could find," Olivarez told KXAN.





"Not before long, the entire parking lot was filled with smoke, and people praying and crying," she said.





"I just saw smoke and flames," said CNN iReporter Mike Ernest. "I could not believe what I was seeing. It was just smoke and flames everywhere."





Dehaven said that as he was driving before the crash, he could see the plane flying low, approaching the building.





"I saw it turn and start heading down like it was diving to come in for a landing, but there's no landing [strip]," he said. "So I knew it was going to crash."





He said his 6½ years in the Army, with two tours in Iraq, helped him Thursday.





"I've had some experience in triage and battlefield, with ... gunfire," he said. "My first thought [was] maybe I can help, because I'm more used to dealing with traumatic situations like that.





"I have a clear head and a calm head to try to help those people, and luckily I did."

***

(CNN) -- Len Gengel cries between sentences. "It's my daughter's birthday today," he says, choking back tears.





"We should be celebrating," he says. "Instead, I'm talking to people all day long, making sure they continue on the search and rescue. That's my objective today: to keep that search and rescue going."





Gengel's daughter, Britney, is one of four students from South Florida's Lynn University who are missing amid the rubble of Haiti's Hotel Montana. Two faculty members from the university also remain missing.





Britney, a sophomore journalism major with jet black hair and a bright smile, turned 20 Thursday. She had traveled to Haiti with 12 Lynn University students on a humanitarian mission to feed the poor. Eight of the students were rescued last week.





An hour before the magnitude-7.0 quake, Britney called her mother. "Brit said she found her calling, that she knew what she wanted to do for the rest of her life," her father said, pausing to catch his breath.





"Who knew an hour later that was going to happen? It's so hard to talk about. ... Think of the worst day of your life and then times that by 1,000."





Crews have spent days searching mounds of rubble, 30 feet high in places, that was the Hotel Montana, popular with tourists and visiting officials.





Lynn University, which hired a search crew immediately after the quake, initially told the Gengel family that their daughter had been rescued. The family then flew from their Massachusetts home to South Florida for what they thought was going to be a reunion.





"We have spent a week here in Florida in a living hell," the father said. "It's just one of the dirtiest tricks life can play on you, to take someone from you and then call and say they found her and she's on a helicopter and she's gonna be OK. And then to be told 10 hours later ... that they had bad intel -- they don't have her."





Lynn President Kevin M. Ross said Thursday evening that he is still optimistic "that a miracle is found."





"We still have hope at Lynn University," he said. "The search and rescue will continue."





He also called upon the U.S. government to ensure that every person "lost in this tragedy are returned to their loved ones."





"We need a commitment to return the missing to the families," Ross said.





The university has been updating families regularly on the search efforts. Students have also rallied on campus, raising money for relief efforts in Haiti. T-shirts for sale have a simple message: "Lynn United."





Len Gengel said that his daughter was in Room 300 and that a CBS news crew showed him photographs of what was believed to be the room.





"She's in the back right-hand corner," Len Gengel said. "Her roommate was at the pool when this happened. My daughter was either showering or resting."





On a Facebook page dedicated to Britney, one message says, "Everyday miracles happen, I think today would be a perfect day to have one."





Her father says his family has been touched by the thousands of messages they have received: "The outpouring of support and love has just been amazing."





He says he's heartened that eight of the Lynn students were rescued. He continues to pray for others missing at Hotel Montana and across Haiti. But on this day, his thoughts are focused on the girl who brought him so much joy when she entered this world 20 years ago today.





"At this moment, we're trying to prepare ourselves for the worst, but we're hoping and praying for the best," he said. "We're devastated. Our hearts are broken. They're just broken."

***

(CNN)  -- The Texas Department of Public Safety took the unprecedented step Thursday of telling college students not to visit Mexican border cities during spring break because they are just too dangerous.





Several universities issued similar warnings last year, but this was the first time the Texas law enforcement agency had issued the specific advisory against travel, said spokeswoman Tela Mange. In the past, she said, Texas authorities had just urged students to be careful.





"Because of the increased violence, we decided to step it up a little bit and say, 'Parents, bad idea,'" Mange said.





DPS Director Steven C. McCraw said, "Parents should not allow their children to visit these Mexican cities because their safety cannot be guaranteed."





The State Department renewed a travel alert to Mexico last month, citing increased violence in the country -- border areas in particular.





"Recent violent attacks have caused the U.S. Embassy to urge U.S. citizens to delay unnecessary travel to parts of Michoacan, Durango, Coahuila and Chihuahua ... and to advise U.S. citizens residing or traveling in those areas to exercise extreme caution," the alert says.





More than 16,000 people have died in Mexico since President Felipe Calderon declared war on the drug cartels shortly after assuming office in December 2006. Ciudad Juarez, in Chihuahua state across the border from El Paso, Texas, is the most violent city in the nation.





"The situation in the state of Chihuahua, specifically Ciudad Juarez, is of special concern," the alert says.





Two U.S. citizens were abducted and killed in Chihuahua, the State Department said.





"Mexican authorities report that more than 2,600 people were killed in Ciudad Juarez in 2009," the report states. "Additionally, this city of 1.3 million people experienced more than 16,000 car thefts and 1,900 carjackings in 2009. U.S. citizens should pay close attention to their surroundings while traveling in Ciudad Juarez, avoid isolated locations during late night and early morning hours, and remain alert to news reports."





But the problems are not limited to Juarez, the State Department says.





"Mexican drug cartels are engaged in violent conflict -- both among themselves and with Mexican security services -- for control of narcotics trafficking routes along the U.S.-Mexico border," the report says. "In order to combat violence, the government of Mexico has deployed military troops throughout the country. U.S. citizens should cooperate fully with official checkpoints when traveling on Mexican highways.





"Some recent Mexican army and police confrontations with drug cartels have resembled small-unit combat, with cartels employing automatic weapons and grenades. Large firefights have taken place in towns and cities across Mexico, but occur mostly in northern Mexico, including Ciudad Juarez, Tijuana, Chihuahua City, Nogales, Matamoros, Reynosa and Monterrey. During some of these incidents, U.S. citizens have been trapped and temporarily prevented from leaving the area."





A number of areas along the border continue to experience a rapid growth in crime, with robberies, homicides, petty thefts and carjackings increasing during the past year nationwide, the alert says. The State Department reports notable spikes in Chihuahua, Sinaloa, and northern Baja California.





"Ciudad Juarez, Tijuana and Nogales are among the cities which have experienced public shootouts during daylight hours in shopping centers and other public venues," the alert says.





CNN's Arthur Brice contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Veteran striker Raul Gonzalez scored his 71st Champions League goal to help Schalke beat holders Inter Milan 2-1 on the night and 7-3 on aggregate to reach the semifinals of the competition on Wednesday.





Already in the driving seat after their stunning 5-2 first leg win at the San Siro, the German Bundesliga side never looked likely to relinquish their advantage and eased through to the last four, where they will now face Manchester United.





Raul opened the scoring on the stroke of half-time, controlling an inch-perfect pass from compatriot Jose Manuel Jurado, before rounding goalkeeper Julio Cesar to slip the ball home.





However, the Italian side levelled the scores just four minutes later when Thiago Motta was left unmarked from a corner to head home.





Benedikt Hoewedes then had a header ruled out for offside, but the Schalke defender was not to be denied and he hit the winner with nine minutes remaining, firing home after latching onto Raul's pass.





Schalke coach Ralf Rangnick told reporters: "We have produced two great performances against Inter.





"If you only allow the Champions League winners a couple of chances, you know you have played well.





"Each player worked hard for each other and that was the key to our success," he added.





Schalke will host United in Gelsenkirchen on April 26 in the first leg, with the return at Old Trafford on May 4.

***

(CNN) -- United Airlines and US Airways have joined American Airlines in charging passengers to check bags on certain flights.



Passengers check in at the United Airlines counter at the Miami International Airport Thursday in Miami, Florida.



Citing higher fuel prices, United Airlines said Thursday it will begin charging domestic passengers $15 each way for one checked bag.



The Chicago, Illinois-based airline said the fee to check a second bag will be $25 each way. The fee to check three or more bags, overweight bags or "items that require special handling" will increase from $100 to $125 or from $200 to $250, depending on the item, United said in a statement.



The $15 charge will apply to customers who purchase a ticket on or after Friday for travel within the United States, and who buy on or after August 18 a ticket to or from Canada, Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands.



The $15 service fee will not apply to customers flying in United First or United Business or who have premier status with United or Star Alliance airline network, the carrier said. iReport.com: How do you feel about the new fee?



For itineraries that include international flights (except Canada), checking a first and second bag will continue to be free, United said. The cost to check more than two bags or items that are overweight or require special handling varies by destination.



US Airways, meanwhile, said it will begin charging passengers $15 for their first checked bag for travel on or after July 9. The airline said it also has recently started charging passengers $25 for second checked bags. The new policy applies to flights in the United States as well as flights to and from Canada, Latin America and the Caribbean.



Some airlines have been adding fees to once-free benefits, such as snacks. Despite this cost-cutting, airlines are finding it harder to survive as they get squeezed by soaring fuel costs.



"With record-breaking fuel prices, we must pursue new revenue opportunities while continuing to offer competitive fares, by tailoring our products and services around what our customers value most and are willing to pay for," said John Tague, United's executive vice president and chief operating officer.



United said it estimates that the $15 fee will apply to one out of three customers, and the potential revenue from baggage handling service fees, including those for checking a first and second bag, will be approximately $275 million a year.



The move comes a month after American Airlines announced a $15 service charge for the first checked bag.



Delta, Continental and Northwest told CNN they are not charging for passengers' first checked bags. However, a spokesman for Northwest said the airline is well aware of changes in the industry.



"We are always keeping an eye on what our competitors are doing," the spokesman said.

***

(Entertainment Weekly) -- Spike Lee's last film, the gratifyingly tense and tricky "Inside Man," was celebrated -- rightly -- for the way that Lee finally jumped, feet first, into the studio-genre-movie game.



Director Spike Lee poses for a shot during the filming of "Miracle at St. Anna" in Rome, Italy.



He cooked up a gourmet-popcorn heist thriller and stamped every moment with his personality. Lee, until now, has never made a movie -- good or bad -- that wasn't unmistakably his.



His latest, "Miracle at St. Anna," is the first Hollywood feature to tell the story of the African-American soldiers who fought in the U.S. armed forces during World War II , and as such it's a movie with a monumental mission. Unfortunately, that's more or less the only monumental thing about it.



"Miracle" isn't powerful, it's muddled and diffuse, and the disappointment of the film begins with what a hard time I had finding Spike Lee in it.



Based on a 2002 novel by James McBride, who also wrote the screenplay, the movie has a drifting, scattershot structure and no real organizing tone or style (if you wondered what Lee's frozen-figure-on-receding-background shots might look like in a wartime setting, then keep wondering).



The bizarrely contrived framing device is set in the 1980s, when a postal worker named Hector Negron (Laz Alonso) mutters in anger at an old John Wayne war flick on TV, then shoots and kills a man who shows up to buy stamps. (He surely has his reasons, but does he really get away with stashing a loaded Luger under his post-office window each day?)  Watch Spike Lee talk about the film »



After his arrest, Hector won't talk, but a reporter finds a clue in the form of a priceless artifact hidden in his apartment: the head of a statue that once adorned a bridge in Florence that was wrecked by bombs during World War II.



From this labored and gimmicky setup, the film flashes back to the itch and fear of battle, as Hector, along with other members of the all-black 92nd Infantry Division and its ''Buffalo Soldiers,'' stalks the Tuscan countryside.



It's September 1944, and as they try to cross the Serchio River, the men are ambushed. The sequence has thunderous explosions, jittery editing, blown-up bodies -- everything but the virtuosity of staging that might have made the chaos and carnage revelatory instead of just a Saving Private Ryan rehash.



Four members of the division end up stranded behind enemy lines, all but abandoned by a racist commander. In addition to Negron, there's Staff Sgt. Aubrey Stamps (Derek Luke), a college-educated stoic devoted to his service; Sgt. Bishop Cummings (Michael Ealy), furious at the world and a loose cannon, with no loyalty to the country he's fighting for; and Pvt. Sam Train (Omar Benson Miller), a starry-eyed oversize simpleton who rescues, and befriends, an Italian urchin (Matteo Sciabordi).



The dramatic focal point, if you can call it that, is the war of wills between Stamps and Cummings. These two play out a version of the assimilate-versus-agitate debate that has echoed through many decades of African- American life, though this one would be more convincing if Ealy, a dynamic actor, had been asked to project his anger more in period, with a little less proto-gangsta recklessness.



The men arrive at a picturesque village, where they mingle with the locals and Stamps and Cummings stoke their rivalry over Renata (Valentina Cervi), a married woman who is lovely in a saintly way. The film then veers into an endless, murky subplot about the Italian resistance from which it never recovers.



"Miracle at St. Anna" wants to do too many things at once to do any of them with much verve. It aspires to be a war epic, but it's dominated less by combat

***

BLUE BELL, Pennsylvania (CNN) -- Janice McFadden's story hardly stands out.

Applications for tuition-free courses have flooded  in at Montgomery County Community College.

The Pennsylvania woman was laid off in November after working at the same company for nearly 20 years. Now, as she looks for a job, McFadden worries about losing her home and uprooting her 8-year-old daughter.

But when McFadden talks about the future, she has found some cause for hope.

In January, the 43-year-old enrolled in the tuition assistance program at Montgomery County Community College in Blue Bell, Pennsylvania.

The program offers county residents who have been laid off since September 2008 the opportunity to take 12 college credits -- usually four courses -- for free.

McFadden said the program will allow her to reassess her options while she improves her marketability and salary potential.

"I have all of the capabilities, but I don't have that piece of paper, which is a requirement for a lot of jobs," said McFadden, who is taking night courses in economics and English composition. "I never thought that I would go back to school, all this time, and I'm glad I did."

She is one of more than 1,100 Pennsylvanians taking tuition-free community college courses as they search for a job. Many are concentrating on new job skills, such as computer programming and accounting, to retrofit their rÃ©sumÃ©s so they can compete in a turbulent job market.

"The response was incredible," said MCCC President Karen Stout. "The day after we announced the program, our call center lines were clogged up. We had more than 300 calls in the first two or three days, and we had information sessions that had standing-room-only attendance."

It's a trend echoed at community colleges across the country. George Boggs, president of the American Association of Community Colleges, said he has heard from 75 college presidents reporting double-digit enrollment increases this semester.

"Community colleges are a big part of the solution to this economic downturn," Boggs said. "We are the institutions that are on the ground bringing these individuals into our institutions and preparing them for a new career."

Boggs pointed to programs in hard-hit industrial manufacturing states, such as Michigan, Ohio and Pennsylvania, as being particularly geared toward mid-career students.

Many community colleges have cut or frozen tuition for laid-off workers, established scholarship programs or offered financial assistance to pay for textbooks and transportation costs.

However, the spike in applications has put a burden on some schools that already are struggling to keep tuition low and upgrade their facilities.

"Many [community colleges] are reporting that it is the highest-ever enrollment that they have had," Boggs said. "And several are reporting a waiting list of students that they can not accommodate.

"It wouldn't surprise me to hear that about a half-million students are being turned away from our community colleges today."

At MCCC, enrollment is up 10 percent since spring 2008. But the school has been able to place the new students in courses that aren't at capacity.

"We are worried about our bottom line, especially in this economic environment," MCCC President Stout said. "But we do have classes that are scheduled to go that have open seats. So basically, these were empty seats that we're filling with unemployed workers."

If unemployment continues to rise -- in Pennsylvania the jobless rate is 6.7 percent -- Stout wants to continue offering tuition-free classes. And even once these mid-career students get back on their feet, she's hoping to see them around campus still.

"Our goal is that these students want to come back and be lifelong learners -- that they understand that in today's economy, you have to continue to keep your job skills relevant and up to date," Stout said. "None of us can be complacent about our own learning."

Her plan may be working. Much to Janice

***

(CNN) -- American Airlines announced Tuesday it will resume commercial flights into Port-au-Prince, Haiti, on Friday, making it the first airline to do so.



Commercial flights ended on January 12, when a 7.0-magnitude earthquake killed more than 200,000 people and damaged many of the country's buildings, including some at Toussaint Louverture International Airport, in the capital.



The first flight will depart Miami International Airport in Florida at 6:40 a.m., arriving at 8:35 a.m. in Port-au-Prince, American Airlines said in a news release.



"This is that crack in the dam that we so badly needed and our passengers so badly wanted, to start moving regularly scheduled traffic into and out of Haiti," spokesman Tim Smith told CNN Radio.



"We'll start out with three main flights a day from south Florida, two from Miami and one from Fort Lauderdale. Then we'll also fly a JFK New York flight into Haiti four days a week."



Smith said that, despite damage to the airport, the airline was prepared to deal with passengers.



"One of the things we did very soon after the earthquake is that, as we were going in carrying relief supplies, we also sent in some American employees and folks from a construction firm that we worked with on the mainland to actually begin working to repair our facilities there at the Port-au-Prince terminal."



Haitian customs officials will work out of a cargo facility because of damage at the main terminal, Smith said.



"These flights serve as major milestones toward helping the country rebuild," Peter Dolara, American's senior vice president for Mexico, the Caribbean and Latin America, said in the news release.



"With commercial air service restored, we can better connect loved ones and provide consistent transportation to and from Haiti."



Also beginning March 12, American Eagle will commence new service into Port-au-Prince from San Juan, Puerto Rico, and daily flights from the Dominican Republic cities of Santo Domingo and Santiago.



"We have begun our journey to recover from the catastrophic earthquake, but with support from companies like American Airlines, we hope it won't be nearly as long," said Ralph Latortue, consul general of Haiti in Florida.



American has served Haiti since 1971 and employs more than 100 people in Port-au-Prince, according to the airline.



Since the day after the earthquake, American Airlines and American Eagle have continued flying into and out of Haiti -- carrying relief workers, medical personnel, humanitarian aid and evacuating hundreds of people.



A spokeswoman for Spirit Airlines, which had a daily flight from Fort Lauderdale to Port-au-Prince, said the company was working to gain approval to resume its flights beginning Friday.



"We're awaiting the response from the airport," said spokeswoman Misty Pinson.



A spokesman for Delta Air Lines said it was working with Haitian authorities to reinstate service "as quickly as possible."



The work on the American Airlines terminal was carried out by Odebrecht, a Sao Paulo, Brazil-based construction company that built American's terminal at Miami International Airport, said spokeswoman Renata Pinheiro.



A cargo building that was undamaged by the earthquake was transformed into a terminal, and immigration and customs services were located there, she said.



A terminal that suffered only minor damaged was fixed. "It wasn't a reconstruction of the airport itself, it was really making it operational," she said about the effort.



The company's workforce of 75 included 30 Haitian baggage handlers who "became construction helpers," she said. "Odebrecht's people trained them to do welding and painting. The really cool thing that we're super happy about is the fact that the whole thing came about in just three weeks."



Among the toughest challenges was finding construction supplies, the company said in a news release. Odebrecht solved that by obtaining materials in Puerto Rico and sending them by barge to the Dominican Republic, then moving them by truck to the Haitian capital.



"This has been a genuine labor of love

***

(CNN) -- Michael Jackson's impact on pop culture is indelible. But perhaps his biggest legacy will be how he changed the music industry.



Jackson's impact on the music business still reverberates today.



"As a performer he changed history ... his singing, his songwriting, his choreography, his dancing, his business acumen," said Howard Bragman, a public relations expert who worked with Jackson to launch the singer's shoe line with L.A. Gear.



"He rewrote the history of the entertainment industry in his time," Bragman said.



Jackson crossed color lines and broke down barriers between musical genres. He followed in the footsteps of Elvis and the Beatles to create a transnational fan base that prefigured the era of globalization. And Jackson became a canny power broker who helped lead artists from stage performers into major boardroom players.



"That gets lost in the last five and 10 years, with all the litigation battles -- what he did the first 30 years to set the landscape for these other artists," said James Walker, an entertainment attorney. "Michael transcended race before Michael Jordan, before Oprah, before Tiger Woods, before Barack Obama.



"You can't underestimate what his did for black artists -- and artists as a whole -- as a business man," Walker added.



His 1982 album "Thriller" has sold more than 50 million records worldwide -- a record that, considering the decline of record sales in the wake of new media, is likely to stand for some years to come.



"Records just don't sell that much anymore. The industry has changed. ... Now it's in shambles because of technology," said Gideon Yago, head of the IFC Media Project and a former correspondent for MTV News.



Videos that accompanied the album became landmarks that set the industry standard, as MTV and cable television began to proliferate, creating ready outlets for a growing marketing tool. At the time, Jackson's label had to fight to get onto MTV, which then featured only rock artists.



"Walter Yetnikoff (former president of CBS records) drew a line in the sand and said, 'We believe in this guy and you're going to play his videos or we're going to pull all our videos,'" Walker said.



"What he did was so cutting-edge regarding videos; he defined the video age as we know it," said Tommy Mottola, who succeeded Yetnikoff as head of CBS.



Though his personal finances were in disarray at the end of his life, Jackson made some canny business decisions at the height of his power -- most notably buying half the Beatles music catalog in 1985 for $47.5 million.



"When you look at his royalties and his copyrights, he's probably got a half a billion to a billion (dollar) catalogue," Walker added.



The current value of his estate is unclear. His debts stood at about $500 million, according to a Wall Street Journal story earlier this month.



As the music industry model moved more toward live events in the face of dwindling album sales, two billionaire businessmen stepped in to bank on Jackson's comeback with a series of concerts scheduled in London.



Tom Barrack, head of hedge fund Colony Capital, teamed with Philip Anschutz, owner of AEG Live, to plan a third-act comeback for Jackson, with a sold-out 50-date stand at AEG Live's O2 arena scheduled to begin next month. Future business plans included a world tour, a Broadway musical and even a "Thriller" casino.



"You are talking about a guy who could make $500 million a year if he puts his mind to it," Barrack told The Los Angeles Times in an article last month. "There are very few individual artists who are multibillion-dollar businesses. And he is one."



Billboard magazine estimates $85 million in ticket sales from the sold-out concert series. Additional packages, merchandise and secondary market sales could have raised the total to $115 million. AEG Live declined to comment.



"There will be a process put

***

Anatalya, Turkey (CNN) -- Lapped by the pristine waters of the Mediterranean Sea, the Turkish coastal city of Antalya attracts millions of sun-seeking tourists each year, beguiling them with its sweeping scenery, picture-perfect beaches and blazing sunshine.





It is this abundance of sunlight -- Turkey receives greater annual solar radiation energy than Spain and Germany according to estimates by the Joint Research Center of the European Commission -- that has prompted Antalya's local authorities to push ahead with plans to harness the city's solar potential.





"We aim to make Antalya the leader of solar power generation of Turkey and to promote it to the world as 'The Solar City,'" says Antalya's mayor Mustafa Akaydin.





The declaration comes as the sun-soaked city, located some 700 kilometers south of Istanbul, starts rolling out its ambitious plans to use solar power to generate electricity, emulating the successful example of cities like Barcelona, Spain, which has put in place regulations requiring solar panels to be fitted to all large new buildings.





In April, the city opened the "Antalya Solar House," an ecological research and educational center designed by architectural firm Temiz Dunya to raise awareness about the benefits of renewable energy and promote eco-tourism.





The zero-emission structure, which was built with ecological materials, generates most of its energy using photovoltaic panels (22kW in total) as well as a windmill and heat pumps.





'Living' buildings could inhale city carbon emissions





These systems are supplemented with gray-water recycling -- re-use of used water from bathtubs, showers and so on. -- and passive solar heating features such as a greenhouse to collect heat during the winter months. It also has a green roof that facilitates rainwater harvesting and acts as heat insulation.





"The building is also very significant because it is Turkey's first energy positive building," says architect Mehmet Bengu Uluengin, the designer behind the Solar House. "It actually produces more energy than it consumes."





The architect says the structure has fascinated the local population while helping to change perceptions that buildings can only be big energy consumers.





"The idea that having a building that not only provides its own energy but actually gives some back is a totally new phenomenon for Turkish people," says Uluengin, who is also a professor at Istanbul's Bahcesehir University. "They like it, they find it very intriguing."





Local authorities expect around a thousand people to visit Solar House each month, including students, green investors and hotel owners. They say the project is just the first part of a long-term initiative to turn Antalya into a climate-friendly city -- other initiatives include a waste management facility that will convert the city's sewage into biogas.





"Antalya has already been the pioneering city of green energy (in Turkey)," says Akaydin. "We are trying to make Antalya the leader of agriculture, tourism, park and garden lighting, energy generating and (solar) panel producing."





While educating the local population about achieving energy efficiency, Uluengin says the technology used in the Solar House can also help Antalya -- Turkey's biggest coastal resort and home to several five-star hotels -- to become an ideal destination for eco-conscious tourists.





"There are several hotels which are considering green energy to attract customers," he says.





"A hotel which can say that ... if you're staying here your carbon footprint is zero for the duration of your stay -- this is becoming very interesting for people worldwide," he adds.





For the moment, however, sunny Antalya is still far from being branded a green resort -- local authorities estimate that eco-visitors account for just 1% of the city's tourism.





Mayor Akaydin says that Turkey is missing a trick by failing to exploit its clean energy capabilities.





"Turkey has a very big potential in solar and wind energy. Unfortunately, the insufficient and wrong policies of the government prevent the promotion of them," he says.





Turkey's geothermal potential





Despite receiving plenty of sun, Turkey has been remarkably sluggish

***

New York (CNN) -- State police in Florida planned Monday to further investigate a single-vehicle crash involving pro golfer Tiger Woods, they said.



That followed a police announcement Sunday that Woods had canceled a third interview with investigators.



Woods suffered minor injuries in the accident, which occurred early Friday in his luxury neighborhood near Orlando. In a statement issued Sunday afternoon on his Web site, Woods offered no details of his wreck, except to say he had cuts and bruises and was "pretty sore."



"This situation is my fault, and it's obviously embarrassing to my family and me," he said. "I'm human, and I'm not perfect. I will certainly make sure this doesn't happen again."



CNN senior legal analyst Jeffrey Toobin spoke about why Tiger Woods might be delaying talking to police.



CNN: Why do you think Tiger Woods has canceled three interviews with police?



Jeffrey Toobin:  Tiger Woods is under no legal obligation to speak with police. The Fifth Amendment gives everyone an absolute right to refuse to talk to them. He may be counting on the fact that if no new news emerges, everybody will move on.



CNN: Can the police do anything about it if Woods continues to refuse to talk to them?



Toobin: The police don't have a lot of options.  If someone doesn't want to talk to you, you as a police officer can't do anything about it.  In theory, they could get a search warrant, but you need probable cause that a crime took place, and at this point, I don't see anything that would justify it.



CNN: The Florida Highway Patrol says the delay is surprising because the accident is so minor. What does Tiger Woods gain by not talking to them?  Toobin:  Woods may not talk to them because there is possibly something unpleasant and embarrassing that he doesn't want to share with them, and he has that right.  Based on what is publicly known, Woods has a public relations problem much more than a legal problem. He's arguably the most famous athlete in the world, and his team's overall strategy is a gamble that his general statement of responsibility won't be overtaken by events or other disclosures.



CNN:  Tiger Woods said today that he won't be attending his golf tournament in California this week because of injuries sustained in the car crash, and has cancelled his scheduled press conference as host of the event. Does this fit in with the strategy you think his team has adopted?  Toobin:  I think the decision not to attend the tournament shows how serious this event is, in Tiger's life as well as his work.  Again, this is more a personal and business problem than a legal problem, but he needs to figure out a way to show the public what happened, or explain why he won't be talking about what happened. Obviously he doesn't have that answer yet.



CNN: A story in last week's National Enquirer alleged that Woods has been seeing a New York night club hostess. The woman has denied any affair with Woods to The Associated Press. She's also apparently retained attorney Gloria Allred. Why do you think she's retained an attorney?



Toobin:  The woman may go public to repeat ... what she's said to the AP and publicly deny the affair, or perhaps to say that she was libeled by the Enquirer. Gloria Allred's clients tend not to disappear from the news media.

***

HARARE, Zimbabwe (CNN) -- A child cries from hunger, but no tears come from her swollen eyes.





A Zimbabwean family bury their relative, who died of cholera, 25km from Harare, Zimbabwe.





Malnutrition has left this baby born in Zimbabwe fighting for her life. She is the face of an unfolding crisis in a country once known as Africa's bread basket.





Today a loaf of bread costs $35 million worthless Zimbabwean dollars, and people are forced to sift through garbage piles for any morsel of food. Others huddle for warmth around a fire burning inside the shell of a broken-down van.





All of these images were captured on video recently smuggled out of Zimbabwe by Solidarity Peace Trust, a South African human rights group.  Watch the disturbing images »





Zimbabwe's government maintains that the situation is being exaggerated by the West in an effort to exert pressure on President Robert Mugabe to leave office.





But the World Health Organization (WHO) says the desperate situation has triggered a widening cholera outbreak that has killed 775 people and infected more than 15,000.





"You have to eat in the same place you sleep right next to the buckets, the same buckets that we used as toilets," one cholera patient says on the video. "There is no water to bathe."





And little to eat. Women foraging for food in the bush find dry branches with only a few berries.





"This packet of juice will be my supper tonight," one woman says.





Zimbabwe's main opposition leader Morgan Tsvangirai -- who is still trying to form a unity government with Mugabe under a recent power-sharing deal -- said the situation can only be addressed once a "legitimate government" is in place.





"Once there is a legitimate government, it is up to that government to deal with the problems the country is facing, which are quite wide-ranging," Tsvangirai told CNN on Wednesday.





"But the immediate intervention of the health crisis has exacerbated the situation to the extent that it has now become an international crisis."





The WHO says the current cholera outbreak in Zimbabwe has a high fatality rate because sufferers are either not able to reach health centers in time or that the health centers lack the capacity to treat the cases.





"The epidemic is clearly on the increase," Dr. Eric Laroche, a WHO official in Harare, told CNN on Wednesday. "I think it's going to last for several months."





In addition to the WHO, the Red Cross has responded to the outbreak and is sending staff and medical supplies into Zimbabwe.





Zimbabwe's main hospitals have all but shut down and the small clinics equipped by international aid organizations are overcrowded and unable to cope with the thousands of cholera patients. Health workers inside Zimbabwe believe scores are dying at home.





Laroche said the WHO is receiving cooperation from the government, but the health care system is abysmal.





"The quality of the care, the supplies that come inside Zimbabwe, also need to be restored," Laroche said. "So there's a lot of work to do, because the health system is collapsing for the time being."





One Zimbabwean health care worker, who would not show his face on the video, said he fears the death toll will skyrocket.





"People are dying even at the health institution," he said. "It's beyond control. We are going to witness so many deaths in the coming weeks."





He expressed frustration that so many people are dying from cholera, a disease that "is both preventable and curable."





"Nobody should die from cholera," he said. "We are quite unfortunate."





Zimbabwe, already experiencing an economic crisis, was struck with the raging water-borne cholera in August. Health experts say the battle against the disease can only be won if Harare has adequate water-treating chemicals and disposes of refuse properly.





Zimbabwe's information minister Sikhanyiso Ndlovu said Tuesday that the country has enough chemicals to purify water and enough money to buy pipes to mend sanitation

***

(CNN) -- River waters spread over highways and farms, towns and parks in Washington on Thursday, shutting down traffic on a 20-mile stretch of heavily traveled Interstate 5 between Seattle and Oregon and threatening the federal roadway north of Seattle.



Rescue boats are sent out Wednesday in Pierce County, south of Seattle, Washington.



"If you're trying to do commerce between Portland (Oregon) and Seattle, there is no way right now," said Bob Calkins, a spokesman for the Washington State Emergency Operations Center in Camp Murray, near Tacoma.



"That's the major way into Washington state from Oregon."



Flooding south of Seattle near Chehalis covered parts of I-5 with 30 inches of water, prompting its closure until at least Monday, state transportation officials said. And state and local roads were also victims of the water.



"The problem is, the one real good detour is just as flooded," Calkins said.



North of Seattle, a levee failure in Arlington brought the Stillaguamish River up to the edges of I-5, which remained open although some access ramps were closed, transportation officials said.



The rain also caused Amtrak to suspend service between Seattle and Portland until Saturday, "with no alternative transportation," the rail line said Thursday on its Web site. iReport.com: Are you there? Share pics, video



Across the state, a number of rivers had crested, but flooded roads remained hazardous.



The risk of landslides was high, leading to the closure of all passes across the Cascades, officials said.



A meteorologist for the National Weather Service in Seattle said 15 inches of rain that began Monday had ended.



The rainfall swept across virtually all of the state, but its biggest effects occurred along the western half of Puget Sound, Calkins said.



The swollen Puyallup River threatened the city by the same name, but Loretta Cutter, sprang into action.  Watch how Washington copes with wicked weather »



The administrator of a group home and a longtime resident there helped evacuate 47 residents from the Valley Community Inn, a home for the mentally challenged and developmentally disabled, to a shelter at a nearby church. And she made sure her husband and a grandson left their one-story rambler house and got safely situated.



"It's a situation you don't realize you are going to be in; it's always someone else," she said from the shelter at the Sunrise Baptist Church in Puyallup, a few miles east of Tacoma. "It was pretty traumatizing to all of us."



Cutter is one of 40,000 western Washington state residents in at least 19 communities whom authorities asked to leave their homes Thursday amid heavy flooding along the region's rivers and streams.



Only 260 of them sought shelter Wednesday night at the 39 shelters for people, Calkins said.



In addition, seven livestock shelters and two pet shelters were set up, he said.



Meanwhile, the torrential downpours of the past few days transformed Thursday into drizzle, common in western Washington, which typically gets less rainfall in any given year than does Miami.



"It just drizzles every day, or so it seems, whereas in Miami, when it rains, it's a bellywasher," Calkins said.



This week's flooding was worsened by a warm spell that melted up to 7 feet of snow that had fallen around Puget Sound, he said.



Health authorities have issued occasional boil-water orders, but that's not what worries Calkins.



"The larger issue is, as people go to their homes, they may be walking through floodwater that is contaminated by sewage," he said.

***

KFAR CHABAD, Israel (CNN) -- Thousands of mourners and emissaries from the ultra-Orthodox Jewish Chabad movement poured into an Israeli village Tuesday for the funerals of two people killed in the Mumbai terrorist attacks.

Israeli girls mourn Rabbi Gavriel Holtzberg and his wife Rivkah, who were killed in the Mumbai attacks.

There was a feeling of pain and anger at the funeral in Kfar Chabad, a village of 900 families just outside Tel Aviv. Speeches at the funeral said the gunmen sought out the Chabad House in Mumbai and targeted the victims because of their faith.

The two people laid to rest Tuesday were Chabad House directors Rabbi Gavriel Holtzberg and his wife, Rivka.

They lived and worked at the house in Mumbai, which served as both a home and Jewish center -- a place open to anyone who wanted a place to pray, eat kosher food, or celebrate Jewish holidays.

Three former Israeli prime ministers were at the funeral: Ehud Barak, who is now the defense minister; Shimon Peres, currently the Israeli president; and Benjamin Netanyahu, leader of the Likud Party.  Watch Israeli funerals for those killed in Mumbai Â»

After the funeral, the bodies of the Holtzbergs were buried on the Mount of Olives in Jerusalem. Another victim from Chabad House, kosher supervisor Rabbi Leibish Teitelbaum of New York, was buried there earlier.

Separate funerals were held for Teitelbaum and another kosher supervisor at Chabad House, American-Israeli Rabbi Bentzion Kruman. They died in the siege along with Israeli grandmother Yocheved Orpaz and Mexican citizen Norma Shvarzblat Rabinovich.

The building, also known as the Nariman House, was the local headquarters of the Chabad community, a Hasidic Jewish movement.

The Holtzbergs had two children, one of whom was in the house when terrorists stormed in. A woman who worked as a nanny and cook at the house managed to escape with the 2-year-old boy, Moshe.  Watch report about nanny saving infant Â»

The couple's other son was not in Mumbai at the time, according to Rabbi Yehuda Krinsky, chairman of the educational and social services arms of the Chabad-Lubavitch movement. The child has Tay-Sachs, a terminal genetic disease, The Associated Press reports.

In an emotional scene before flying from India to Israel on Monday, the boy repeatedly cried for his mother at a memorial ceremony at a Mumbai synagogue.

His cries were played repeatedly on Israeli TV stations. "You don't have a mother who will hug you and kiss you," Rabbi Kotlarsky said, adding that the community would take care of the boy, AP said. "You are the child of all of Israel."

The only other surviving member of the family, Moshe's brother, has Tay-Sachs, a terminal genetic disease, and is institutionalized in Israel, AP added. The Holtzbergs' eldest son died of the disease.

The Holtzbergs went to Mumbai five years ago to serve the city's small Jewish community and the thousands of Israeli visitors and business people who frequent the area, according to Chabad.org, the ultra-Orthodox group's Web site.

About 5,000 Jews live in India, according to the American-Israeli Cooperative Enterprise. About 3,000 of them live in Mumbai, The Jewish Press reported. iReport.com: Share tributes to those who died

The Holtzbergs operated a synagogue and taught Torah classes. The rabbi also conducted weddings for local Jewish couples.

Gavriel Holtzberg, 29, was born in Israel and moved to Brooklyn, New York, when he was 9. He studied in New York and Argentina and traveled to Thailand and China as a rabbinical student. His wife, Rivka, 28, was a native of Israel.

In Mumbai, they ran the headquarters of the Chabad community, a Hasidic Jewish movement. The center, in a building known as the Nariman House, was open to anyone who wanted a place to pray, eat kosher food or celebrate Jewish holidays.

In footage filmed two years ago by the Chabad movement, Gavriel Holtzberg said anybody who visited the center was welcome. His wife said its doors were always open and that it

***

(CNN) -- Jennifer Schuett's search for the man who snatched her from her bed when she was 8, sexually assaulted her and left her for dead on top of an ant hill ended Tuesday with the arrest of a suspect.



Jennifer Schuett, 27, was abducted and left for dead at age 8. A suspect was arrested Tuesday.



Now begins another chapter in Schuett's 19-year quest for justice.



Standing in front of the television cameras, Jennifer Schuett blinked back tears.



"This is a huge day for me," she later told CNN over the phone. "And I want to see this through the end. The rest will come out during the trial."



Schuett, 27, joined a multi-agency team of investigators in her hometown of Dickinson, Texas, as they announced the arrest earlier in the day of Dennis Earl Bradford, a 40-year-old welder, in Little Rock, Arkansas.



The arrest came after new DNA testing and other evidence made it possible to identify Bradford as the suspect.



Schuett's boyfriend and two police investigators who kept the case alive stood beside her. Fighting tears, she thanked them for their support.



"Throughout this journey, I've had two main goals," she said. "And they were to find the man who kidnapped, sexually assaulted and attempted to murder me 19 years ago so that he could not hurt anyone else. And to use my voice in telling my story to as many people as I possibly could over the years in hopes that I may encourage other victims of violent crimes to stand up and speak out against criminals."  Watch Schuett explain why she's speaking out »



She continued, "Today, I can say very proudly that I have accomplished both of these goals."



Schuett spoke with CNN two weeks ago about her 1990 ordeal. CNN normally does not identify victims of sexual assaults. But Schuett decided to go public with her story and her name to increase the chances of finding and prosecuting her attacker.



Schuett was in her bed when a man crept in through a window on August 10, 1990. She remembers waking up in a stranger's arms as he carried her across a dark parking lot. She said he told her he was an undercover cop and knew her family.



He drove her through the streets of Dickinson, pulling into an overgrown field where, she said, he sexually assaulted her.



She passed out. When she regained consciousness, she was lying on top of an ant hill with her throat slashed and her voice box torn. She spent about 14 hours in the field before she was found and rushed to the hospital in critical condition.



"Three days after the attack, I started giving a description. The doctors told me I would never be able to talk again, but I proved them all wrong," Schuett said. She believes she got her voice back so she could tell her story.



At the news conference, a driver's license photo of the suspect was shown next to the 1990 sketch based on her description. There was a clear resemblance.  Watch the sketch artist's memories of Schuett »



Shauna Dunlap, a spokeswoman for the FBI's Houston office, said Bradford lived in North Little Rock, with his wife and two children -- a boy, 12, and a girl, 15. He also has three adult stepchildren.



Bradford worked as a welder for United Fence in North Little Rock. A company representative said Bradford had been working there for 10 years and was a "good guy" who had mended "his old ways" and "changed his life." He wouldn't go into specifics about what those "old ways" were. Court documents give some indication.



In 1996, Bradford was accused of kidnapping, sexually assaulting and cutting the throat of a female victim. He was initially charged with attempt to commit first-degree murder, but prosecutors amended the charges to rape and kidnapping.



A Garland County Circuit Court jury found him guilty of kidnapping but was not able reach a verdict on the rape

***

Cairo (CNN) -- Syria has accepted "in principle" an Arab League plan to permit observers into the country to verify whether the regime has taken measures to protect civilians, a senior Arab diplomat said Friday.





Questions remained, however, about the exact nature of the mission, if it proceeds. Originally, 500 observers were believed to be destined for Syria, but U.S. State Department spokesman Mark Toner said Friday afternoon that the proposed number had been reduced to 40.





Syria requested amendments to the plan Thursday night, a day after Arab league representatives approved it, the Cairo-based regional alliance said on its website.





Nabil el-Araby, secretary-general of the Arab League, said the league is studying the letter from Syrian Foreign Minister Walid al-Moallem that included changes regarding the protocol and duties of the observers.





Eighteen of the alliance's 22 member nations voted to suspend Syria's membership in the league on Saturday. But the group, which met again in Rabat, Morocco, on Wednesday, gave Damascus three days to implement a protocol to allow observers to enter the nation.





"Our mission will be to portray the truth about the nature of the injuries (and) numbers of casualties and assess the hospitals, to see what they need and how well-prepared they are to accommodate the injured," said Dr. Ibrahim Zafarani, a former member of the Muslim Brotherhood and founding member of the Arab Doctors Association who said he'd volunteered to be an observer.





It is the latest diplomatic effort to resolve the crisis in Syria. International pressure has been mounting on President Bashar al-Assad over his regime's bloody crackdown on pro-democracy protesters, amid concerns that violence in Syria is escalating.





World support and confidence in the Syrian regime have continued to dwindle in recent weeks. France's top diplomat called the state of affairs in embattled Syria "no longer tenable" Friday and wants the U.N. Security Council to step up and grapple with the eight-month-long crisis in the turbulent Arab nation.





"Despite all the calls that were made to that regime" for peaceful initiatives to end the raging street violence, French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe said in the Turkish capital of Ankara, "the regime did not want to know anything. Still this morning, in the north of Syria, several villages were bombarded by the Syrian army."





British Foreign Secretary William Hague will meet Monday with representatives from the Syrian National Council and National Coordinating Committee for Democratic Change, two groups opposed to President Bashar al-Assad's government, a foreign office spokeswoman said Friday.





The Local Coordination Committees of Syria, another activist group, said that at least 19 people were killed Friday by security forces and the army, among them four children. This is in addition to 26 killed by security forces Thursday, on top of scores killed earlier in the week, according to the organization.





Eight people were killed in the southern region of Daraa, where about 20 people also were wounded when security forces fired at mourners. There were five deaths in Hama, in the west, four in the Damascus suburbs and two in Homs, also in the west, the Local Coordination Committees said.





The state-run Syrian Arab News Agency, meanwhile, reported the killings of two law enforcement members in Hama, the injuries of two in Daraa and the arrests of 10 "terrorists" in Idlib province.





CNN is not able to independently verify claims of fighting and casualties because the Syrian government has restricted international media access to the country.





Well over 3,500 people have been killed and thousands have been jailed in cities across the country, according to U.N. estimates. French and Turkish officials have been outspoken in their criticism of the Syrian regime's behavior, and some key international diplomats, such as Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov, said Thursday that the ongoing attacks on government buildings in Syria "look like a civil war."





News agencies have been quoting Juppe as saying it is "too late" for Syria to make the reforms the regime has promised. At the same time, he urged opposition protesters to shun

***

Atlanta, Georgia (CNN) -- Staring at the throngs of media representatives who came out to hear and see her Friday, Jessica Colotl took another step into the fight for her future.





The undocumented student from Mexico whose case has become a lightning rod in the immigration debate had been released on $2,500 bond just a couple hours earlier. The 21-year-old student at Kennesaw State University in Georgia surrendered Friday morning to authorities in response to a warrant for her arrest issued Wednesday night by the Cobb County Sheriff's Office.





Standing nervously before the crowd, Colotl fought back tears when people cheered for her. The media bombarded her with questions as she tried to give voice to her struggle.





Just a week earlier, she'd been released from a deportation facility in Alabama after being stopped in March for a minor traffic violation.





"If I were to be deported, I'd have to start all over again," she said. "I'm hoping for the best."





The sheriff's office said she gave a false address when stopped for that violation, a felony charge that her attorney denies.





A spotlight has been trained on Arizona since Gov. Jan Brewer signed into law a bill that requires law enforcement officials to seek proof of legal U.S. residency from anyone whom they have stopped on suspicion of having violated the law.





But advocates working with Colotl point out that a little-understood program already gives local authorities in many states the latitude to act as immigration officials -- a right that is often abused, they say.





"The future of Arizona already exists in Cobb County and Gwinnett County [also in Georgia]," said Jerry Gonzalez, executive director of the Georgia Association of Latino Elected Officials.





Near him were other Colotl supporters, some holding signs reading "Education not deportation."





Under the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement 287(g) program, state and local law enforcement can partner with the federal agency to gain some immigration enforcement authority in their own jurisdictions. If they conclude that someone is in the country illegally, they can turn that person over to ICE. Last year, a change to the partnership program prioritized the detention and arrest of those who have allegedly committed crimes.





The Cobb County Sheriff's Office is one of 71 law enforcement agencies in 26 states that have entered into this partnership program, according to the ICE website.





Labeling the program a "civil rights disaster," Mary Bauer, legal director of the Southern Poverty Law Center, said it "leads to racial profiling, distracts police from looking for real criminals and destroys families."





The American Civil Liberties Union of Georgia called Friday for an end to the program.





"Jessica's case is yet another outrageous example of the unaccountable local enforcement of immigration laws in Cobb County gone awry," said Azadeh Shahshahani, ACLU of Georgia's national security/immigrants' rights project director.





Colotl's legal problems started in late March when her car was stopped on the Kennesaw State campus.  Born in Mexico but living in the United States since she was 11, she could not produce a driver's license, so she handed over as identification an expired passport from Mexico.





She was arrested the next day and turned over to immigration officials. She spent more than a month in the Etowah Detention Center in Alabama.





Friends came out in force and marched on campus in her defense. Earlier this month, she was released, and her deportation was deferred for a year, which will allow her to finish her studies. She hasn't returned to classes yet, but looks forward to earning her degree.





"I'm just trying to live the American dream and finish my education," she said.





Calling Colotl "a symbol of what's wrong with the immigration system," immigration attorney Charles Kuck thanked ICE for allowing his client to stay in the country for a year to finish her studies. He then set out to educate people about the challenges facing Colotl, providing a reason why she did not have a license.





"Jessica can't start the process to become a U.S. citizen because she

***

(CNN) -- California corrections officials released a startling new prison mug shot of Grammy-winning music legend Phil Spector, convicted last month of second-degree murder and serving 19 years to life in prison.



Phil Spector's prison mug shot, taken June 5, shows him without a hairpiece.



Spector, 69, is being held at North Kern State Prison, where he is being evaluated before receiving a permanent prison assignment, corrections spokesman Gordon Hinkle said. The process could take up to 70 days.



The mug shot, which shows a bald-pated Spector, was taken on June 5 as part of the routine intake process.



California prison inmates are not permitted to wear wigs under Title 15, Article 5, Section 3062 of the state's prison regulations, which addresses inmate hygiene. Corrections officials also are concerned that wigs can be used to hide contraband.



A judge in Los Angeles sentenced Spector last month to the maximum sentence for second-degree murder in the February 2003 shooting death of actress Lana Clarkson.



Spector, 69, won't be eligible for parole until he is 88 years old.



Clarkson, 40, was found dead, slumped in a chair in the foyer of Spector's Alhambra mansion with a gunshot wound through the roof of her mouth.  View a timeline of the case »



Spector's retrial began in October and ended in April. It took jurors 30 hours to convict him.



His first murder trial in 2007 ended in a mistrial when the jury deadlocked 10 to 2 in favor of conviction after 15 days of deliberations.



Clarkson starred in the 1985 B-movie "Barbarian Queen" and appeared in many other films, including "Deathstalker," "Blind Date," "Scarface," "Fast Times at Ridgemont High" and the spoof "Amazon Women on the Moon." She was working as a VIP hostess at Hollywood's House of Blues at the time of her death.



At both trials, Spector's attorneys argued Clarkson was depressed over a recent breakup and her flagging Hollywood career. They said she grabbed a .38-caliber pistol and killed herself while at Spector's home.



But prosecution witnesses painted Spector as a gun-toting menace. Five women took the stand and testified he threatened them with firearms. His driver testified he heard a loud noise and saw Spector leave the home, pistol in hand, saying, "I think I killed somebody."



Spector's professional trademark was the "Wall of Sound," the layering of instrumental tracks and percussion that underpinned a string of hits on his Philles label, named for Spector and his business partner, Lester Sill, in the early 1960s.



CNN's Alan Duke contributed to this story.

***

(CNN) -- An Oscar nomination, abs of steel and five leading roles in a 10-month span typically denotes Hollywood golden boy.





Despite critical acclaim and a smoldering stare, Ryan Gosling still manages to fly under the radar with most of the moviegoing masses.





The actor has already received praise for his performance as the press secretary/spin doctor to Gov. Mike Morris (George Clooney) in "The Ides of March," which hits theaters Friday. And his role as heartthrob Noah Calhoun in 2004's "The Notebook" will continue to haunt mediocre boyfriends everywhere.





Yet Gosling's movies, many of which are smaller films, don't always resonate at the box office.





Consider this our public apology to you, Gosling, for not rewarding your hotness and all around good-guyness by making you a mega-star by now. We've loved you since you started out as a Mouseketeer on Disney's "The Mickey Mouse Club," though we assure you it was in an age-appropriate way.





So if his rocking bod and humble nature -- he told CNN that women are disappointed when they realize he's not Ryan Reynolds -- aren't enough to draw crowds, what is?





Don't ask Clooney, Gosling's "March" co-star and director.





The Los Angeles Times explored the likeness between the two leading men in September.





Despite being adored by fans and critics, Clooney and his films don't always garner commercial success either, as the article pointed out. Remember "Leatherheads," "The Men Who Stare at Goats" and "The American"? Each of those Clooney-starrers reportedly grossed between $31million and $35 million domestically, which is considered low these days for an A-lister.





But like his "March" co-star, as Gosling sets hearts afire while his movies fail to do the same, the media only becomes more infatuated with the 30-year-old actor.





First there was that amateur video of Gosling breaking up a New York street fight that surfaced in August. Then those heartwarming photos of the actor carrying his tired pooch around hit the Web. And what about that time he told UK paper The Times, via the New York Daily News, "I'll make movies until I make babies." Are you swooning yet?





"He is willing to show real vulnerability and ugliness," movie buff Leslie Henstock told MSNBC's Today.com. "There are moments in 'The Notebook' when he is absolutely tragic, begging, weak. He has a journey."





It's safe to say Gosling has perfected the sexy, yet vulnerable persona.





So much so that you'd be hard-pressed to find someone who didn't fall just a little bit in love with him after seeing "Crazy, Stupid, Love."





Speaking of that July release, with help from Steve Carell and Emma Stone, that flick brought in about $82 million domestically, making it Gosling's highest-grossing film by more than $40 million since "The Notebook."





Frankly, "Crazy, Stupid, Love" -- Gosling's first mainstream film since the 2007 dud "Fracture" -- featured the actor's six-pack so prominently, it's a wonder it didn't break box-office records.





Meanwhile, with a 93 out of 100 rating on Rotten Tomatoes, "Drive" was expected to find major box-office success upon its September release. However, the movie, which Gosling said was crafted to resemble a violent "Pretty in Pink," has raked in $21 million domestically so far. It cost about $15 million to make.





And December's "Blue Valentine," co-starring Michelle Williams, brought in $9.7 million domestically after costing about $5 million to produce.





So will the numbers continue to catch up with the hype surrounding the release of "The Ides of March" this weekend?





At this point it may not even matter because Gosling will continue to heat things up.

***

(CNN)  -- Far too many passengers are being stranded on board commercial flights in the United States in delays, an air passengers' rights group said Wednesday.



Delta Air Lines, JetBlue, Continental Airlines, and US Airways received an overall grade of "F" on the air travel consumer report card.



FlyersRights.org, in issuing what it calls an air travel consumer report card, said there were more than 1,200 tarmac strandings -- in which passengers are locked in planes on the runways -- in 2008.



Delta Air Lines had the greatest number of tarmac delays longer than three hours. Southwest Airlines was rated the best for handling delays by letting customers get off delayed planes, as well as providing food, water and other items.



The longest delay the organization found was a January 2008 Delta flight from Atlanta, Georgia, to Florida, in which passengers waited on the tarmac for more than 10 hours without food and water.



"Too many Americans have been locked inside sealed airplanes, trapped in tubes on the tarmac, for three hours or more," said FlyersRights.org Executive Director Kate Hanni. "It's time for Congress to give airline passengers the legal right to get off planes stuck on the ground for three hours or more."



Hanni -- who has been lobbying for an airline passengers' bill of rights -- also said America's economic situation has exacerbated the problems consumers face on the airlines because of layoffs.



"Airlines are trying to maintain or increase their profit margins," she said. "They have decreased all of their goods and services related to flying."



She added that a timely flight is "not just a matter of passenger convenience, it's a matter of public safety."



"I wonder if heroic Captain Chesley 'Sully' Sullenberger and his crew could have performed as they did after seven, nine or even 12 hours on the tarmac?" Hanni asked, making a reference to the US Airways crew that made an emergency landing in New York's Hudson River in January.



Hanni started her organization after she was stranded on the tarmac on an American Airlines flight in Austin, Texas, for more than nine hours in December 2006. Mark Mogel, the group's research director, said FlyersRights.org has about 24,000 members, many of whom donate money, services and lobbying help.



The report card is based on government statistics, press reports, airline Web site data, reports on the group's hotline, and eyewitness accounts from January to December of 2008.



It surveyed 17 airlines for various kinds of tarmac delays, their menu and contracts of carriage and customer service commitments and issued grades for these separate factors and an overall grade.



As for the menu, Mogel specified that the menu grade is based on quantity, not quality. The survey was looking to see whether there would be food on board during a tarmac delay.



Delta Air Lines, JetBlue, Continental Airlines, and US Airways received an overall grade of "F" and American Airlines received an overall grade of "D."



United Airlines, Airtran and American Eagle got a "C." Alaska Airlines, Northwest Airlines and Frontier Airlines got a "B," and Southwest received an "A."



Five other airlines -- Atlantic Southeast, Comair, ExpressJet, Mesa and Pinnacle -- didn't get an overall grade because some categories couldn't be completed.



"The fact that some airlines have received A's and B's and others D's and F's on this report card also shows that providing decent customer service and avoidance of strandings is both achievable and should not place an undue burden on the airline industry or lead to higher ticket prices," the report's executive summary said.



CNN's Joe Sterling contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- The cell phone video stutters as it records the movement of soldiers and Syrian militia on the streets from an upstairs window. A whispered commentary describes the scene. Another video shows vehicles riddled with bullet holes, shattered apartments, glass shards and concrete lumps mixed with patches of blood. In yet another, protesters flee as heavy-caliber weapons fire ricochets off buildings.





All are scenes purportedly filmed in recent days in Homs, Syria's third-largest city. Security forces have sealed off entire neighborhoods; others are blocked by barricades thrown up by protesters. At night, street rallies take place in areas "liberated" from government control. The many videos uploaded on social media sites, as well as residents' accounts, suggest some neighborhoods in Homs -- at the heart of opposition to the regime of President Bashar al-Assad -- are beginning to resemble Sarajevo at the height of the Bosnian civil war.





That resistance is now becoming more organized and armed. Army deserters calling themselves the Free Syrian Army are helping with the defense of districts opposed to the regime. Some opposition activists say it's time for the international community to declare a no-fly zone over Syria, as it did in Libya, to blunt the regime's overwhelming military advantage. (There is no sign that Western powers are willing to do this.)





Confrontations are also taking on sectarian overtones that could lead to a wider explosion of communal violence. There have been sectarian shootings and assassinations of prominent local people outside their homes. Residents say the government has begun deploying largely Alawite militia in Sunni neighborhoods such as Khaldiye, Bab Sbaa, Bab DreÃ¯b and Bab Amro. Though Syria is majority Sunni, its leadership tends to belong to the Alawite sect.





Homs has long been a divided city, with Alawites living in the south and a rapidly growing Sunni population predominant in other neighborhoods. Opposition activists claim that the regime is trying to incite sectarian strife in an effort to divide opponents and show what civil war in Syria might look like.





Residents of Homs who recently fled to neighboring Lebanon, and don't want to be identified due to security concerns, say that sectarianism is neither endemic nor widespread, but admit that tensions between communities are increasing. They say that they want a united Syria but accuse the al-Assad regime of stoking sectarian flames.





The unrest is not confined to Homs. There are daily reports of protests, deaths and clampdowns by the security forces in the suburbs of Damascus, in Daraa to the south (where the unrest began in March), and elsewhere.





Army defectors who have reached the relative safety of Lebanon speak of exhaustion after months on the streets, in some cases being ordered to fire on unarmed demonstrators. CNN spoke to one soldier in a hospital in northern Lebanon. "Too much killing, we were always in the streets," he said. State media report ambushes of security personnel by armed gangs on a regular basis, though other accounts suggest these ambushes may often be clashes between defecting conscripts and elite units loyal to the regime. Even so, the U.S. ambassador to Syria, Robert Ford, told Reuters last month that the military was still "very powerful and very cohesive."





Against this background of growing violence, the Syrian economy is suffering -- its oil revenues declining just as government spending spirals.





The government has announced spending will increase 60% in 2012 -- much of it going for subsidies as it tries to tamp down the unrest. Analysts say the state has little chance of improving tax revenues to cover this spending.





International sanctions, including those against oil exports and Syrian banks, are adding to the pain. Last week, the European Union followed the U.S. in freezing transactions with the Commercial Bank of Syria, which handles all letters of credit for the regime. The Syrian economy is growing more and more isolated from international trade -- and sources of hard currency.





Last month, the Syrian government banned a wide range of imports in an effort to save dwindling foreign exchange reserves, before the economy minister reversed the ban two weeks later "due to the legitimate demands of citizens, as it