(CNN) -- Muzak, the company that put pop, string-filled arrangements of rock songs in your elevator, filed bankruptcy papers Tuesday after it missed a $105 million payment to creditors.



The Muzak company is best known for background music piped into places such as elevators.



The pipeline of easy listening will continue to flow as Muzak restructures its debt during the Chapter 11 process, the company said.



"Muzak is a solid business with an outstanding customer base, but we are burdened with substantial debt obligations established over a decade ago," Muzak CEO Stephen Villa said.



Muzak's cash flows doubled in the last three years, Villa said, "demonstrating that our business continues to perform well even in today's challenging environment."



Along with its ubiquitous elevator offerings, Muzak and its 14 affiliates -- all privately owned -- produce on-hold messages and install sound systems, digital signs and drive-thru systems for retail businesses.



Bankruptcy documents showed Muzak owes its largest creditor -- U.S. Bank, as indentured trustee -- about $370 million, nearly all of it due this year.



Muzak spokeswoman Meaghan Repko said the filing was voluntary and in cooperation with the creditors.



The weakened global economy was not a factor, she said, noting the company's profits have been rising in recent years.



The Chapter 11 protections will allow Muzak time to restructure the debt, which was incurred a decade ago, she said.

***

(CNN) -- The chief operating officer of the National Children's Museum was arrested Tuesday and is charged with distributing child pornography over the Internet, authorities said.

Robert A. Singer is accused of sending images depicting child pornography to people he believed to be a 12-year-old girl and her 33-year-old mother, according to a statement issued by U.S. Attorney Michael Garcia of the Southern District of New York.

In reality he was communicating with an undercover detective for the New York Police Department.

Some of the pornographic images were sent from Singer's computer at the museum, according to an affidavit filed in support of the charges by a special agent who investigates child pornography and child exploitation for U.S. Immigrations and Customs Enforcement.

The Washington museum posted a message on its Web site saying officials there are "horrified" by news of Singer's arrest. They reported that he has been suspended from his post, effective immediately, and is barred from the property.

Singer, 49, was arrested at his home in Falls Church, Virginia, by federal agents, according to the prosecutors' statement. Authorities allege he engaged in several instant messaging "chats" and e-mail communications with the undercover detective, posing as the woman and her daughter, from August  to September.

He is charged with five counts of distributing child pornography in interstate commerce. If convicted on each count, he would face a sentence of up to 140 years in prison -- up to 20 years for the first count and up to 40 years for each additional count, prosecutors said.

Singer allegedly initiated contact with the undercover detective, posing as the mother, in an America On Line chat room called "Cuties." The chat room attracts people who "are known to trade in pornographic images, including child pornography," according to an affidavit filed in the case by a special agent who investigates child pornography and child exploitation for U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement.

"On five separate occasions in August 2007, Singer sent several images of child pornography over the Internet to the mother and the daughter, including images depicting sexual acts between minors and adults and images depicting known victims of child exploitation," prosecutors said.

In his communications with the supposed daughter, Singer pretended to be a 15-year-old boy, authorities said. In August 2007, he sent her two images featuring child pornography, according to the affidavit, with the instruction, "just delete it when you are done."

A search of Singer's AOL account activity showed that from July to September, he sent about 80 images featuring child pornography to people including the detective, authorities said in the statement. Also, the search revealed that he had received about 10 images and one video depicting child pornography.

Singer was expected to appear before a U.S. magistrate judge later Tuesday.

He is identified in the complaint as a spokesman for the National Children's Museum, but a spokeswoman who asked not to be identified said he was promoted to chief operating officer within the past few months. He has been employed by the museum for four years, she said.

In a written statement, the museum said it was notified by the Department of Homeland Security and ICE of Singer's arrest. "We are horrified by the charges," the statement said. "This news is deeply upsetting to the National Children's Museum family."

"As its essence, the National Children's Museum is about enriching the lives of children," the statement said. "We are educators, child advocates and parents. Anyone who does anything that might endanger the welfare of a child has no place here. Harming children is against everything we stand for as an organization and as individuals."

The museum, formerly known as the Capital Children's Museum, has been closed to the public since 2004, and operates from administrative offices, the statement said. A new facility is being built and is scheduled to open in 2012.  E-mail to a friend

***

LA PAZ, Bolivia (CNN)  -- Bolivian President Evo Morales nationalized the Chaco petroleum company Friday, taking over the BP subsidiary with the military on standby.



Bolivian leader Evo Morales speaks before parliament Thursday in the capital, La Paz.



"With this decree," Morales said in a nationally televised address from an oil field in Cochabamba, "we nationalize all the petroleum business in Chaco for all Bolivians."



Chaco is jointly owned by Pan American Energy and the Bolivian Pension Fund, each with a 50 percent stake, BP spokesman David Nicholas said from Great Britain. BP owns 60 percent of Pan American Energy, and Bridas Corp. owns the other 40 percent, Nicholas said



Nicholas declined comment on the nationalization.



"We are aware of the presidential decree but cannot comment," he said. "We support Pan America's energies with any discussions they have with the Bolivian government."



Morales wore a white safety helmet with the words "Chaco nationalized" printed on the front when he made his announcement. The Bolivian president guaranteed the petroleum workers that their jobs will be safe.



Formed in 1997, Chaco employs about 90 Bolivians, the company says on its Web site.



Chaco is dedicated to the exploration and production of hydrocarbons, BP says.



Morales decreed in 2007 and 2008 that the government should nationalize various petroleum companies.



His actions Friday came less than 48 hours before Bolivians vote Sunday on a new constitution that would give the central government more power and control.

***

(CNN) -- A Belgian city has decided to go "veggie" for a day in an effort to highlight the environmental and health costs of eating meat.



Stock breeding is a significant contributor to global greenhouse gas emissions.



The city authorities in Ghent, some 50 kilometers (30 miles) west of Brussels, have declared Thursdays "Veggie Day," (Veggiedag) and are asking residents to get involved and opt for vegetarian meals at least one day a week.



It says Ghent is the first city in Europe to try such a scheme.



According to the city's campaign publicity, eating less meat can help to minimize the ecological footprint of your food because stock breeding has a detrimental impact on the environment.



It points to data from the United Nations which says livestock is responsible for generating around 18 percent of the world's greenhouse gas emissions.



It is also hoped that Veggie Day will have a positive health impact in the fight against diet-related illnesses such as obesity, cancer and diabetes.



On Wednesday organizers provided residents with meat-free recipes and a list of vegetarian restaurants at a "launch party" in the center of the city. Ghent claims to have more vegetarian eateries per inhabitant than Paris, London and Berlin.



Demonstrations were also on offer to people looking for green cooking tips.

***

Reuters is a global information company providing material tailored for professionals in the financial services, media and corporate markets. Its information is trusted and drives decision making across the globe.

In October 1851 Paul Julius Reuter, a German-born immigrant, opened an office in the City of London which transmitted stock market quotations between London and Paris via the new Calais-Dover cable. 18 months earlier he had used pigeons to fly stock prices between Aachen and Brussels, a service which operated for a year until the gap in the telegraph link was closed.

Reuters, as the agency soon became known, eventually extended its service to other European countries. It also expanded the content to include general and economic news from all around the world. In 1865 Reuters was first in Europe with news of President Lincoln's assassination in the United States.

As overland telegraph and undersea cable facilities developed, the business expanded beyond Europe to include the Far East in 1872 and South America in 1874. In 1883 Reuters began to use a "column printer" to transmit messages electrically to London newspapers and in 1923 pioneered the use of radio to transmit news internationally. In 1927 it brought in the teleprinter to distribute news to London newspapers.

Today Reuters has over 16,900 staff in over 94 countries across the globe, and is the world's largest international multimedia news agency, with 196 bureaux serving approximately 131 countries.

In 2006 Reuters filed over two and a half million news items, including 656,500 alerts, from 209 countries around the world, published in 18 languages.

Although Reuters is best known as the world's largest international multimedia news agency, more than 90% of its revenue derives from its financial services business. Some 370,000 financial market professionals working in the equities, fixed income, foreign exchange, money, commodities and energy markets around the world use Reuters products.

The company supplies news -- text, graphics, video and pictures -- to media organizations across the globe. It also provides news to businesses outside the financial services sector, as well as direct to consumers. E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- Comedian Jay Leno's plan to hold a free concert for the jobless of Detroit, Michigan, drew criticism from a politician in the city.



A Detroit politician believes Jay Leno should change the location of his free show for the city's unemployed.



Detroit City Councilwoman Martha Reeves likes the idea, but she said the "Tonight Show" host needs to change the location.



"When I heard Jay Leno say Detroit is one of his favorite places and he's going to do a free concert for the people laid off, to people who don't have any money right now, given the economic state we're all in, I was elated," Reeves said. "Then he said Auburn Hills... and that's not Detroit."



Auburn Hills is a well-to-do suburb of Detroit, but is located in Oakland County, which has had its share of economic troubles as well.



The free comedy show -- called "Jay's Comedy Stimulus Plan" -- is set for April 7 at the Palace of Auburn Hills, which holds about 24,000 people.



"I thought I might try to get a word to him that we have a Ford Field, we have a Cobo Hall, we have wonderful theaters here, the Fox Theater," Reeves said. "He could come and present something to Detroit as he said."



Free tickets for the show will be given out beginning Monday at 10 a.m., according to Leno's Web site.



Leno, host of NBC's Tonight Show for more than 15 years, has a new job himself. He will move from late night to a 10 p.m. show.

***

ZURICH, Switzerland (CNN) -- As I watched Cristiano Ronaldo receive the FIFA World Player of the Year award in Zurich, I couldn't help feeling a deep sense of satisfaction, as the 23 year-old Portuguese international once again proved all his doubters wrong.



Cristiano Ronaldo shows emotion after being named the FIFA World Player of the Year for 2008.



Especially the ones in England.



In the days leading up to the awards ceremony, there were various rumors circulating that the Manchester United star was going to be pipped by Leo Messi on Tuesday night.



I was asked several times in London whether I really thought Ronaldo was going to win. Whether he really deserved it.



It was as if many in the British press didn't want him to take home another award.



Do you think Cristiano Ronaldo is shown enough respect? Tell us in the Sound Off box below.



The fierce attack on his lifestyle by the tabloids after he crashed his Ferrari last week just accentuated the fact that in the UK, he still has earned little respect.



Never mind that he was about to become the first Premier League Player to win this prestigious award. Never mind he has been the competition's biggest ambassador and promoter overseas. Too many in the English media, he was still a diver on the field, and a petulant rock star off it.



Now I am not going to sit here and say that my compatriot Cristiano is perfect. He isn't and he makes mistakes. But the same can be said about Wayne Rooney or any of the other English internationals.



When Rooney charges down the referee and shouts obscenities in his face without even being booked, as was the case in last weekend's match against Chelsea, is he called arrogant or petulant? No. When he goes seven or eight matches without a goal, is he suddenly branded overrated? No.



So all I am asking for here is a little respect. If Ronaldo was English, I am sure in the eyes of the British press he would be virtually untouchable, but although he's not, just give him a break. After all, he had an incredible 2007/2008 season which saw him score 42 goals in 49 matches and win virtually every major trophy on offer.



And he's a great ambassador for the game.



Pedro Pinto is a CNN sports correspondent based in London.

***

(CNN) -- Croatians voted Sunday in support of their country's bid to join the European Union, paving the way for the southern European nation to become the alliance's 28th member.





According to official results, posted on a government website, about 66% of voters backed Croatia's entry into the EU and 33% sided against the move. Turnout was about 44%.





Already a member of NATO, Croatia is now poised to join an EU bloc that includes its neighbors Slovenia and Hungary. It is one of five nations listed as "candidate countries" on the European Union's website.





Last December, Croatian leaders signed an accession treaty paving the way for the nation's entry.





European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso called that signing "an outstanding moment for the European Union -- and for Croatia."





"Today, we all acknowledge the hard work Croatia has done and its crowning success," Barroso said in a December 9 statement. "Croatia is the best proof of how strong and successful the transformative power of our enlargement policy can be."





Years after initiating its bid, Croatia is on pace to "rightly join our union" on July 1, 2013, the European Commission president said.





In that statement, Barroso alluded to the economic crisis affecting much of the eurozone, including bailouts of Greece, Ireland and Portugal. But he insisted that these issues should not halt the European Union's expansion.





"Enlargement, provided that all the relevant conditions are met, will ... continue to serve as an anchor of stability, a driver of democracy and the rule of law," he said. "We should therefore not let the economic crisis overshadow this very important European policy."

***

KABUL, Afghanistan (CNN) -- Five people connected to an Afghan presidential candidate have been released after being kidnapped the day before, an official with the candidate said.



Five of Dr Abdullah Abdullah's campaign workers were kidnapped and later released.



The group of five, who worked for Dr. Abdullah Abdullah, were in a two-car caravan in northwestern Afghanistan on Wednesday when they were abducted, said Sayed Ahmad Samey, the security chief of Badghis province. Elders negotiated for their release, Samey said.



The workers have now been freed and are in a good condition, according to Sami Panah of Abdullah's campaign office.



Abdullah is a former Foreign Minister who is seeking to unseat incumbent President Hamid Karzai in the August 20 election. This is not the first time that Abdullah's supporters have been targeted.



One of the presidential hopeful's campaign workers was wounded by an unknown gunman in late July. A month earlier, gunmen in the province of Kapisa killed another of Abdullah's campaign managers in a midnight attack.



Hundreds of U.S. Marines and Afghan soldiers have headed to southern Afghanistan to secure polling stations and protect citizens during the elections.



It will be the nation's second presidential election since the fall of the Taliban regime in 2001.

***

Port-au-Prince, Haiti (CNN)  -- The scene was horrific, the stench unmistakable. Sadly, it was nothing new here. But because it unfolded so many days after the earthquake that took at least 112,000 lives, it was shocking.





Three bodies trapped in a crushed taxi. A man, two women. Set ablaze.





Even for those who have witnessed so much these past 13 days, the torching of the Toyota in the capital's central plaza Monday was difficult to take in. It highlighted one of Haiti's many quandaries: how to dispose of bodies.





The taxi had been smashed by collapsing concrete during the devastating earthquake, and the bodies were decomposing in tropical temperatures, the smell unbearable to the thousands who have temporarily sought shelter under tarpaulins and tents across the street at the Champs de Mars plaza.





The foul smell prompted people to dig the car out of the rubble, but those living on the street in the area said disposal trucks never arrived to take the bodies away.





"They couldn't find anyone to dispose of the bodies so they had to burn them," said Gidel Fellmon.





In the days after the January 12 quake, Haitians and rescue and relief crews have struggled to find proper disposal methods for bodies. Thousands of corpses have been pulled from the rubble and burned. Bodies have been bulldozed and dumped into open pits.





Find loved ones in Haiti | Full coverage





At one of the capital city's cemeteries, people opened up old crypts and shoved corpses into them before resealing them. Workers loaded bodies -- piled on the sides of roads -- into the basket of a front-loader tractor, which then deposited them into blood-stained dump trucks, according to CNN correspondents.





On Monday, as the taxi burned, people stood stoically around the charred flesh and exposed bones.





Two pairs of shoes lay in the car's twisted metal.





Interactive map: Where to find aid

***

(CNN) -- Investigators have found the bodies of three small children and the father who allegedly abducted them from their home in Columbus, Georgia, two weeks ago, the FBI said Wednesday.



Eddie Harrington threatened to kill his children before disappearing with them, police say.



"It is my sad duty to report that deceased bodies of these children and Eddie Harrington were located this afternoon," said FBI Special Agent Gerald Green.



A coroner would confirm the identities, he added.



The remains were discovered in a wooded area of Columbus by a person walking nearby, Green said.  Watch the FBI say the bodies were in a car »



Eddie Harrington, 28, whom police described as depressed, took the children March 5, police said.



Before he left, Harrington sent a letter indicating his intent to kill his twin 23-month-old girls, Aliyah and Agana Battle, and his son, Cedric Harrington, 3, officials said.



The day before Wednesday's grisly discovery, the children's mother told CNN's Nancy Grace that Harrington had threatened them  before.



"He's just told me he'll do anything to keep me at that time, and he said that he was going to take them and ... kill himself and the kids," Agena Battle said.



"But then later on, he told me that it was just to prove to me that, you know, what he'll do for me."



Battle also described the moment earlier this month when she knew something was wrong.



"I got home and I realized that the kids weren't there, and Eddie wasn't there either, and when I looked on the dresser and read the note, that's when I realized that my kids are in trouble," she said.



A week ago, a tearful Battle publicly begged her boyfriend not to harm the children.



"I am asking the public to please help me. I want my children home where they belong, with me," she said at an FBI news conference.



"Please, if you see Eddie, the car or the children, please call 911. Please help me and keep them in your prayers."  Watch the mother's tearful plea »



A child abduction alert was issued in Georgia after the children disappeared.  "We have great concern for the safety of these children," Green said at the time.  It was unclear what sparked Harrington's decision to take the children, authorities said. E-mail to a friend

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- Thirty people joined National Park Service rangers Saturday in climbing to the crown of the Statue of Liberty, the first tourists to go into the landmark's crown since the 9/11 attacks.



Chris Bartnick, 46, and daughter Aleyna, 8, of Merrick, New York, look out from the statue's crown on Saturday.



The New York Harbor monument was closed after the terrorist assaults on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon for safety and security reasons, the Interior Department said.



"Once again, Americans can climb to Lady Liberty's crown and gaze out over New York Harbor, where so many of our ancestors first saw the New World and first breathed the fresh air of freedom," Interior Secretary Ken Salazar said as he welcomed visitors back on the Fourth of July holiday. "This is a celebration of America and the joy of being an American."



Visitors on Saturday were grateful they could go inside the landmark.



"It's just basically safety for our country and at least they opened it," visitor Ira Semapadilla told CNN affiliate NY1 before the visit. "That's one thing that I was like, wow, I'm never going to experience it. ... They ruined it for us.



"Now that it's going to open again I'm excited, and I'm just really looking forward to being in there."  Watch as CNN's Susan Candiotti treks to top »



Gov. David Paterson, D-New York, Gov. Jon Corzine, D-New Jersey, and New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg joined Salazar at the reopening ceremony.



Even with the reopening of the monument, only a rare few will get to scale the 354 steps to the crown.



Only 10 visitors are permitted to ascend the steps at any one time, meaning about 240 people can make the climb during the park's 8:30 a.m. to 6:15 p.m. hours of operation.



The opportunity to climb Lady Liberty will end again in two years, when work will begin on further safety and security upgrades.

***

(CNN) -- Explorer Dennis Schmitt found an island nearly two years ago near Greenland.

Fishermen pass by Greenland's Ilulissat fjord in this September 2004 picture.

Such a discovery would usually elicit curiosity, even wonder perhaps, but it evoked mixed feelings for the explorer.

The island was once thought to be a peninsula attached to Greenland by an ice shelf or a glacier. But such a large amount of ice melted, it revealed the distinct island.

"I very quickly realized two things," he told CNN's Anderson Cooper during a visit to the island earlier this year. "One [was] that this was going to be significant because it was going to be an example of climate change."

"The other thing was that it meant it was really happening. It wasn't a joke. It wasn't just statistics. It was really happening."

He calls his discovery Warming Island.

Many climatologists and scientists say arctic ice melt and other changes in the Earth's climate are the result of an increase in the world's temperature, a trend widely called global warming.

Many global warming experts say the phenomenon, if unchecked, is capable of altering the world's climate and geography. In the worst-case scenario, experts say oceans could rise to overwhelming and catastrophic levels, flooding cities and altering seashores.

Other scientists and observers, a minority compared to those who believe the warming trend is something ominous, say it is simply the latest shift in the cyclical patterns of a planet's life.

Most of the scientific community believes that some warming is occurring across the globe and through some layers of the atmosphere. But why it is occurring and what that means for the future is scientifically and politically contentious.

The Earth's temperature averages about 60 degrees Fahrenheit (about 16 degrees Celsius).

The average surface temperature has warmed one degree Fahrenheit (0.6 degrees Celsius) during the last century, according to the National Research Council.

The temperatures were relatively unchanged from 1880 to 1910, according to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. They rose till about 1945, cooled until about 1975 and have risen steadily to present day.

There are several possible reasons for the warming, scientists say.

A change in the Earth's orbit or the intensity of the sun's radiation could change, triggering warming or cooling.

The reason most cited -- by scientists and scientific organizations -- for the current warming trend is an increase in the concentrations of greenhouse gases, which are in the atmosphere naturally and help keep the planet's temperature at a comfortable level.

The amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, for instance, has increased by 35 percent since the dawn of the industrial age, according to the United Nations' Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, commonly referred to as the IPCC.

The presence of methane is now 151 percent above pre-industrial levels, but the rate of increase has slowed in recent decades, according to the EPA. Meanwhile, nitrous oxide increased by about 18 percent during the past 200 years.

Many scientists and experts who have studied global warming believe the increase is primarily the result of human activities, like the burning of fossil fuels, emissions from vehicles and the clearing of forests.

"For the last 30 years, there's no way there's anything natural that can explain it," Stephen Schneider, a professor of environmental studies at Stanford University in California, said.

"A vast bulk of the knowledgeable and honest community ... will say the science is settled and humans are at least a majority of the reason behind the warming," he added.

Many scientific organizations share Schneider's view, ranging from the national academies of the countries that comprise the G8 to the National Research Council, the American Meteorological Society and the American Geophysical Union.

But there are those who do not share his view, and among the skeptics is Richard Lindzen, a professor of atmospheric sciences at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

"We've suddenly taken to reading tea leaves," he said. "When we saw cooling from 1940 to 1970,

***

London, England (CNN) -- Ozzy Osbourne, the former front man of rock group Black Sabbath, says that after decades of living a life of drugs and sex, he's lucky to be alive today.





Speaking to CNN's Max Foster, Osbourne described in detail how he often played a dangerous game when it came to using drugs and having promiscuous sex.





"With the sexually transmitted disease, what I was doing is playing Russian roulette with sex," says Osbourne.





"With the drugs, it nearly killed me on a daily basis -- I did a lot of heavy drug taking for a long time and I survived it by the grace of God.





"You might not be as lucky as me -- I'm living on borrowed time."





In his autobiography, "I am Ozzy," Osbourne discusses his past, his family and his time with Black Sabbath.





Answering a viewer's question on whether he realized his power to change people's lives, Osbourne replied with shock.





"When you're on the inside looking, you don't see it that way," Osbourne said.





"But I suppose you're right. I do -- I do have the power to change people's lives."





What does he remember about Black Sabbath?





"We were just four kids from Aston in Birmingham who had a good idea and it worked out fine."





Osbourne also discussed the current state of the music industry and the "manufacturing" of artists today.





"It's completely different -- they're manufactured people now... like ice cream.





"Every now and then somebody comes out and I really like them -- I really like this Lady Gaga."

***

(CNN) -- Two monorail trains at Walt Disney World collided early Sunday, killing a 21-year-old driver.



A 2 a.m. ET monorail crash at Disney World killed one person, a park spokesman said.



A witness said one of the trains rammed into the back of a stationary train about 2 a.m. at the resort's Ticket and Transport Center.



There were eight people on board at the time, the Orange County Sheriff's Office said.



A second employee was taken to a hospital to be checked; the six guests -- members of a single family -- were evaluated by paramedics at the scene and released. Disney World officials said none of the seven was injured.



Authorities identified the driver as Austin Wuennenberg, a senior at Stetson University studying computer science.



"It's a terrible day for us," said Mike Griffin, Disney's vice president for public affairs. "Our hearts go out to Austin and his family."



A statement from Wuennenberg's family said, "He always enjoyed his work at Disney, and especially enoyed his work as a monorail pilot. He has many great friends who he has positively influenced; everyone will truly miss this dynamic young man."



The theme park is working with county authorities and the U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration in the investigation.



"The safety of our cast and our guests is legendary and it's our top priority," Griffin said. Disney World calls its employees "cast members."



The monorail was shut after the accident, Griffin said.



Images from the scene showed the front car of a train badly damaged where it hit the other train at a station.

***

Dhaka, Bangladesh (CNN) -- Thousands of anti-riot police were in the streets of Bangladesh's capital city Thursday as the opposition alliance launched a day-long general strike in protest of a fuel price hike.





The strike, occurring all over the country, paralyzed daily life as road communications were heavily disrupted and schools and business establishments remained closed on Thursday, the last working day of the week.





The usually busy streets of the capital, Dhaka, looked almost deserted as most means of public and private transportation remained off the roads.





The opposition group Bangladesh Nationalist Party and its allies, mostly Islamic parties, called the strike after the government raised the price of petroleum fuels and compressed national gas on Sunday.





Dhaka's police chief, Benazir Ahmed, said his department deployed 13,000 policemen alone in the capital to break up any opposition protests, and the home ministry also initiated mobile courts to try protesters summarily on the streets.





Police said that the strike was mostly peaceful apart from a few incidents of violence, but the opposition parties said the police and the ruling party men beat up their activists wherever they had tried to bring out a procession.





Police said they had arrested some 200 people from different parts of the country, but the opposition claimed that the number was at least 400.





The BNP acting secretary general, Mirza Fakhrul Islam Alamgir, said, "The government has increased fuel prices at a time when people's suffering has already peaked due to high inflation." But the government said it was an "issueless" strike.





The general secretary of the ruling Awami League, Syed Ashraful Islam, said it was illogical as the prices of fuel oils were still lower in Bangladesh (a liter of gasoline costs US$ 1.06) than in the international market.





"If the prices of fuel oils increase in the global market in the future, the government will increase the prices again because the government will need to pay huge subsidies otherwise," he added.





The fuel price hike, the second such rise in four months, triggered protests also by transport owners.

***

(CNN) -- Pop star Madonna and her adopted son met with the young boy's biological father in Malawi as the singer awaited a court decision on whether she could adopt a girl from the same country, her publicist said Tuesday.

Madonna holds her adopted Malawian son, David Banda, in 2007.

Liz Rosenberg said in a statement that Madonna and her son David met Monday with David's birth father, Yohanne Banda, for the first time since the young boy was adopted in 2006.

"Madonna is committed to maintaining an ongoing relationship with David's Malawian roots," Rosenberg said.

The publicist also confirmed, in the first public acknowledgment of what has been reported for weeks, that Madonna has filed an application "to adopt Mercy James, a 3-year-old girl Madonna met two years ago in an orphanage that she visited."

A spokeswoman for Malawi's attorney general told CNN that the singer appeared Monday in court in that country, one of the poorest nations in the world, for a hearing on whether she would be allowed to adopt the girl.

Madonna is to return to court Friday to hear the judge's decision in the matter, spokeswoman Zione Ntaba said.

The child's family will have to give their permission for the adoption to proceed, according to Martin Geissler, a reporter for the ITN television network who is in Malawi.

Madonna has been involved with Malawi for several years. She made a documentary, "I Am Because We Are," which highlighted poverty, AIDS and other diseases devastating that country's children. She also helps run a nonprofit, Raising Malawi, which implements initiatives to help the needy in the southeastern African nation.

***

(CNN) -- A search is under way for a pregnant 20-year-old Marine who has been missing from Camp Lejeune, North Carolina, since December 14.



Lance Cpl. Maria Lauterbach was eight months pregnant when she went missing on December 14.



Lance Cpl. Maria Lauterbach could give birth at any time, Onslow County Sheriff Ed Brown told the Jacksonville, North Carolina, Daily News on Monday.



The sheriff's department said Lauterbach's mother said that her daughter, of Montgomery, Ohio, had witnessed an incident at Camp Lejeune and was to testify about it.



Sheriff's department officials said evidence causes them to be concerned about Lauterbach's disappearance, WITN reported.



The Marine's car was found Monday at Jacksonville's bus station, Brown told the Daily News, and her cell phone had been found at Camp Lejeune's front gate on December 20.



Her mother reported her missing on December 19, and told the sheriff's department "that she was very suspicious that something bad may have happened to her daughter," the department said in a news release.  Watch Lauterbach's mom say what raised her concerns »



Investigators told the Marine Corps Times that a withdrawal from Lauterbach's bank account was made on December 14 and said there was "suspicious activity" on the account 10 days later. December 14 was also the last time Lauterbach's cell phone was used, authorities told the Marine Corps Times.



The Raleigh News and Observer, citing Brown, reported that the woman's mother said her daughter phoned home or her relatives up to 12 times a week and the mother became concerned when she did not hear from her daughter for five days.



A Facebook page established to help find Lauterbach says she was last seen December 14 in Jacksonville. "Call mom!!! You know the number," the page says. "All of us love you and we miss you. Please come home!"



The page contains pleas for contacts from fellow Marines and friends of Lauterbach in Ohio.



Lauterbach is a personnel clerk assigned to Combat Logistics Regiment 27, 2nd Marine Logistics Group, II Marine Expeditionary Force, the Marine Corps said. She joined the service on June 6, 2006. E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- Susan Atkins, a terminally ill former Charles Manson follower convicted in the murder of actress Sharon Tate, on Tuesday was denied a compassionate release from prison.



Susan Atkins, Califorina's longest-serving female inmate, is shown in her most recent mug shot.



Atkins, 60, has been diagnosed with brain cancer and has had a leg amputated, her attorney said. In June, she requested the release, available to terminally ill inmates with less than six months to live.



The California Board of Parole Hearings' decision -- posted Tuesday on its Web site -- came after a public hearing on Atkins' request. It means the request will not be forwarded to the Los Angeles Superior Court that sentenced Atkins.



The court would have had the final say on Atkins' release.



Her attorney, Eric P. Lampel, called the parole board's decision "unfortunate."



"[The board] ignored the vast majority of evidence presented," Lampel said. "There was a huge amount of pro-compassionate release testimony from many witnesses. It apparently fell on deaf ears."



Known within the Manson Family as Sadie Mae Glutz, Atkins and four others were convicted in connection with the deaths of five people, including Tate, in August 1969.



According to historical accounts of the murder, Atkins stabbed Tate, who was eight months pregnant, and scrawled the word "pig" in blood on the door of the home the actress shared with director Roman Polanski.



By her own admission, Atkins held Tate down and rejected her pleas for mercy, stabbing the pregnant woman 16 times.



Atkins' request roused long-dormant memories of the two-day killing spree that terrorized Los Angeles and left seven people dead. It polarized those who were involved in the case -- and even those who weren't -- over whether she should die behind bars.



Atkins told a 1993 parole board that Tate pleaded for her unborn child's life as she held her down.



"She asked me to let her baby live," Atkins said. "... I told her I didn't have any mercy on her."



Three of Tate's houseguests were also slain by the killers, as was a teenager visiting the home's caretaker in his cottage out back. Atkins was also convicted in the earlier murder of music teacher Gary Hinman.



One of the first people Atkins confessed to was Virginia Graham, who shared a cell with her before investigators determined the Manson Family was responsible for the murders. Graham said last month she believed Atkins should die in prison.



"She showed that poor woman absolutely no mercy, none," Graham said. "So why should anybody show her mercy at this time?"



Sharon Tate's sister, Debra, has staunchly opposed Atkins' release. "She will be set free when judged by God," Debra Tate has said. "It's important that she die in incarceration."



Los Angeles County District Attorney Steve Cooley said Monday he was strongly opposed to the release, saying in a letter to the board it would be "an affront to people of this state, the California criminal justice system and the next of kin of many murder victims."



Cooley noted in his letter that Atkins was initially sentenced to death, like others in the Manson Family, including its leader, Charles Manson. Their sentences were commuted to life in prison in 1972, when the U.S. Supreme Court struck down the death penalty laws as they were written at the time.



California Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger said Tuesday he was also opposed to releasing Atkins. "I don't believe in [compassionate release]," the governor told reporters. "I think that they have to stay in, they have to serve their time."



Even if Atkins is dying, Schwarzenegger said, "Those kinds of crimes are just so unbelievable that I'm not for the compassionate release."



Earlier, Suzan Hubbard, director of adult prisons in California, also recommended against granting Atkins' request.



Vincent Bugliosi, who prosecuted Atkins and other members of the Manson

***

(EW.com) -- The Kardashians are already a staple on E! Network.





But they've chosen the month of November to assert their dominance on the book world. Earlier this month, "momager" Kris Jenner's released her memoir. Kourtney, Kim, and KhloÃ©'s first novel, "Dollhouse," hits shelves today. And next week fans will be treated to the re-release of "Kardashian Konfidential."





"Dollhouse," the first fiction endeavor from the Kardashians, follows sisters Kamille, Kassidy, and Kyle Romero. And like all the other Kardashian books, I read it so you don't have to! Here's a short plot summary. Warning: spoilers ahead!





The Romero girls live in California where their mother, Kat, owns a family restaurant. Their father, David, made some shady investments prior to his untimely death and left his family broke. Kat remarried Beau, a retired baseball player, who has two children from a previous marriage. The girls are essentially trying to make ends meet by helping out at the restaurant.





Everything changes when Kamille is discovered by a modeling agent. She becomes famous overnight, and begins dating a professional baseball player she meets at one of her many red-carpet appearances. Their whirlwind romance eventually becomes a whirlwind engagement when Kamille and her fiance agree to have their pending nuptials and wedding filmed for a TV show.





Kassie just adds to the family drama after she gets pregnant after a one-night stand with Kamille's fiance. Ooops! And I'd be remiss without mentioning the taboo attraction between Kyle and her step-brother. Those are just the highlights, people. I won't spoil all of the novel for you.





"Dollhouse" is fiction, but there are clearly some parallels between the lives of the Kardashians and Romeros. And in light of Kim's divorce, it's entertaining to read about a celebrity fairy-tale wedding filmed for TV. (You'll have to read to see whether the marriage lasts longer than 72 days...) All in all, "Dollhouse" is just Kardashian camp packaged in a neat novel. It's completely ridiculous, but entertaining nonetheless. And with the Kardashians I wouldn't expect any less.





See the full article at EW.com.





CLICK HERE to Try 2 RISK FREE issues of Entertainment Weekly





© 2011 Entertainment Weekly and Time Inc. All rights reserved.

***

(CNN) -- The mountain gorillas in a national park in Congo appear to be hanging on well despite such dangers as civil warfare and poaching, according to an ongoing census.

Park rangers conducting the census in November.

Workers have identified 75 "habituated" gorillas in Virunga National Park, three more than there were in the last census nearly a year and a half ago, said Samantha Newport, the park communications director.

Habituated gorillas are those who are accustomed to contact with humans. They are easier to spot than non-habituated gorillas, thought to number around 120.

Newport said the census should be completed by around January 20 and officials hope that more habituated gorillas will be identified.

She said the fact that gorillas have survived amid civil war in the region is "nothing short of a miracle."

Laurent Nkunda's Tutsi armed force that had been fighting Congolese soldiers and their militia allies has had control of large swaths of the 8,000 square-kilometer park.

The gorilla section is in a strategically important area near the borders of Rwanda and Uganda.

Officials have long said that the 250-square kilometer gorilla reserve in the southern part of Virunga National Park is where around 200 of the world's 700 mountain gorillas live.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- A man dubbed "the Field Marshal" by one advocacy group for alleged third-world arms dealing has been arrested on charges that he conspired to illegally export U.S. F-5 fighter jet engines and parts to Iran.



An Iranian F-5 fighter jet lands in southern Iran during a military exercise on June 23, 2009.



Jacques Monsieur, 56, a Belgium native who currently lives in France, was arrested Friday in New York, officials said. An indictment also charges Dara Fotouhi, 54, an Iranian living in France, with participating in the alleged crime. Fotouhi remains at large, official said.



Monsieur pleaded not guilty at an arraignment Wednesday in Mobile, Alabama, where he is being held.



He and Fotouhi are charged with conspiracy, money laundering and smuggling, as well as violations of the Arms Export Control Act and the International Emergency Economic Powers Act.



According to the indictment and an affidavit filed in the case, both are experienced arms dealers who have been actively working with the Iranian government to procure military items.



The F-5 Freedom Fighter, also called the Tiger, is built by Northrop and is used by the U.S. military for training. It is also sold overseas as a combat aircraft.



The F-5 engine and parts are listed on the U.S. Munitions List and may not be exported from the United States without a license from the State Department, said John Morton, head of Immigration and Customs Enforcement, and they can not be exported to Iran without a license from the Treasury Department.



In a 2002 report by the Center for Public Integrity, a citizen advocacy group, Monsieur was nicknamed "the Field Marshal" for allegedly acting as a middle-man in numerous arms deals with war-torn countries.



The center's report said Monsieur is "believed to be among the biggest arms traffickers in Europe" and said he "violated a United Nations embargo by shipping arms to Bosnia and Croatia during the long, bloody conflict in those countries, with the approval, he later claimed, of both the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency and the ... French domestic intelligence service."



Morton said his agency launched an investigation in February when Monsieur contacted an undercover federal agent and indicated he wanted to buy engines for F-5 or C-130 aircraft for export to Iran. In subsequent e-mails to the agent, Monsieur requested engines for F-5 jet fighters.



Officials said the engines could be used as replacements in fighters sold to Iran by the United States before the imposition of sanctions in 1995.



In March, Monsieur met with the undercover agent in Paris and again requested engines and parts, the indictment alleges.



They met again in May in London, where Monsieur introduced Fotouhi as a business associate and again discussed the export of F-5 engines to Iran, according to the indictment. During this negotiation, it says, Monsieur and Fotouhi asked the agent if he could use U.S. shipping or export authorization documents that falsely indicated the items were going to Colombia.



In July, Monsieur and Fotouhi wired about $110,000 from a bank in the United Arab Emirates to one in Mobile, Alabama, the indictment says. "The two believed the funds would be used for the purchase of F-5 aircraft parts," Morton said. Monsieur indicated he would deposit an additional $300,000 as a down payment for the purchase of two jet engines.



"This is part of our long-standing efforts to ensure that sensitive military equipment is not exported in violation of U.S. law and against the international interests of the United States," Morton said.

***

(CNN) -- The son of a former Iranian Revolutionary Guard commander was found dead in a Dubai hotel room -- with his father's website calling the death "suspicious," though police insisted it was not.





Numerous Iranian media on Sunday reported the death of Ahmad Rezaie inside Hotel Gloria, a four-star hotel in the coastal United Arab Emirates city.





Khalil Ebrahim Al Mansouri, head of the Dubai police's criminal investigations department, said there is no criminal suspicion surrounding the man's death. Al Mansouri, quoting the dead man's brother, added that Ahmad suffered from epilepsy.





Yet Tabnak, a website owned by the dead man's father, Mohsen Rezaie, claimed that Ahmad "was killed under suspicious circumstances."





The same site noted that the death was "concurrent with the martyrdom of Mohsen Rezaie's comrades in arms" on Saturday, referring to an explosion at a military base near Tehran.





At least 17 people were killed in that incident, after a munitions depot accidentally caught fire, lawmaker Hossein Garousi told state media. Lt. Gen. Ramezan Sharif reiterated Sunday that the blaze was accidental and dismissed the possibility of sabotage.





The Tabnak report did not elaborate on what connection, if any, existed between Ahmad Rezaie's death and the deadly explosion.





Shahram Gilabadi -- a spokesman for Iran's Expediency Council, of which Mohsen Rezaie is secretary -- told Tabnak, "The death is currently being investigated."





The semi-official Mehrs News Agency reported that Ahmad Rezaie died from an electric shock.





Mohsen Rezaie served for years as head of Iran's powerful Revolutionary Guard. In 2009, he ran -- unsuccessfully -- as a conservative candidate along with others against incumbent President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad.





He continues to play a leading role with the Expediency Council, which mediates between the parliament and the non-elected Guardian Council led by Ayatollah Khamenei.

***

SAN FRANCISCO, California (CNN)  -- A wildfire threatened to decimate historic Angel Island, the largest in the San Francisco Bay, and a Marin County fire official warned it could take up to four days contain the blaze.



At 9:15 p.m. Sunday the fire was burning only on the southeast side of the island.



The fire, which began about 9 p.m. Sunday, had consumed about 250 acres of vegetation near the top of Mount Livermore's 788-foot peak, Battalion Chief Mike Giannini said Monday.



iReporter Bob Austrian, 45, of Tiburon, said he could see the blaze from his home about 4 or 5 miles from the island.



He noticed the blaze at 9:15 p.m. Sunday. It "started as a little red glow" on the southeast side of the island and worked its way over the top and around the side of Mount Livermore, he said early Monday morning.  Watch the island burn »



"It's still ripping right now," Austrian said at 5 a.m., noting that the blaze posed "quite a spectacle" with the town of Belvedere in the foreground and the Bay Bridge that connects Oakland and San Francisco serving as a backdrop.



Fire crews and equipment were being ferried to the island to battle the blaze, Giannini said. About 200 firefighters were already involved in the effort or en route, he said.



None of the blaze is contained, and Giannini said he expects the firefighting effort to last for three to four more days.



Austrian, who has visited the island at least a dozen times, said he's concerned that firefighters won't be able to douse the blaze. The island is mostly vegetation with a few historic buildings, foot trails and access roads. iReport.com: See, share images of the blaze



Even with the necessary manpower and firefighting resources, he said, it will be difficult to reach the actual blaze.



"It's just the saddest thing because there's no way to stop it," Austrian said.



Fire officials said earlier that all of the park workers and campers on the island were safe.



Angel Island -- a hilly grass- and forest-covered island -- is the largest in San Francisco Bay.



The island was used as a quarantine station for immigrants suspected of carrying diseases starting in the late 19th century.



It's now a place for hiking, biking, camping and boating.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Democratic presidential front-runner Sen. Barack Obama is in excellent health, according to a statement from his doctor, released by the campaign.



Besides being an "intermittent smoker," Sen. Barack Obama is in excellent health, his doctor says.



Obama, 46, last saw Dr. David Scheiner in January 2007, shortly before he declared he was running for president.



Scheiner, who has been Obama's primary doctor since 1987, observed that the Illinois senator's diet, weight, blood pressure and cholesterol were all healthy.



"In short, his examination showed him to be in excellent health," Scheiner said.



Obama "exercised regularly, often jogging three miles. His diet was balanced with good intake of roughage and fluids. ... On physical examination, his blood pressure was 90/60 and pulse 60/minute," Scheiner wrote.



The Illinois senator has been an "intermittent" cigarette smoker who has "quit on several occasions and is currently using Nicorette gum with success."



Sen. John McCain, the presumptive Republican nominee for president, released his health records last week.



McCain's doctors also described him as being in "excellent health," despite a history of skin cancer, and said there appears to be no physical reason why the 71-year-old candidate could not carry out the duties of the office.



Obama released a one-page statement from his primary care physician. He did not release any medical records or make his doctors available to the media.



By contrast, McCain made more than 1,000 pages of medical documents available to journalists, including CNN's chief medical correspondent, Dr. Sanjay Gupta. Four of McCain's doctors held a conference call with reporters after the records were made available.



McCain has had four malignant melanomas removed. Three of them -- on his left shoulder, left arm and left nasal wall -- were limited to the top skin layer and were not invasive. They were removed in 1993, 2000 and 2002.



But a fourth melanoma proved to be invasive and was removed from his left lower temple in 2000, said Dr. John D. Eckstein, an internist who has been overseeing McCain's treatment for 16 years at the Mayo Clinic's campus in Scottsdale, Arizona.

***

(CNN)  -- A man suspected of killing five members of his family and wounding another on Thursday committed suicide after police surrounded him in a house, police in Cleveland, Ohio, said Friday.



Police say Davon Crawford, 33, killed his new wife, her sister and three children.



Acting on a tip, police surrounded the house and then entered it after seeing a man who matched the description of suspect Davon Crawford briefly step outside, police spokesman Lt. Thomas Stacho said.



"They confronted the male hiding in a bathroom," Stacho said. "When he spotted the agents, then he took his own life."



Cleveland police launched a manhunt Thursday for Crawford, 33, suspected of killing his new wife, Lechea Crawford, 30; her sister, Rose Stevens, 25; and three of Stevens' children, Destiny Woods, 5, and 2-year-old twins Dion and Davion Primm.



A 7-year-old boy was shot and hospitalized, Julie Short, a spokeswoman for MetroHealth Medical Center, said Friday. The boy's grandfather told CNN affiliate WEWS that the boy was in stable condition and talking after having been shot in the shoulder.



A fourth child, a 12-year-old boy, managed to escape, WKYC reported.



The Cleveland Plain Dealer also reported that a 2-month-old girl, the daughter of Davon and Lechea Crawford, escaped the shooting unharmed and is being cared for.



Police began searching for Crawford, 33, Thursday night after receiving a call around 8 p.m. to the upper floor of a duplex.



"It looks like it was some type of domestic argument that sparked this tragedy," Police Chief Michael McGrath said Friday.



The CNN Radio Network contributed to this story.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- On Inauguration Day, there's one scene at the White House that won't be playing out exactly as it has during past transitions: the traditional moving of the outgoing first family's belongings.

President Bush walks out of the White House Oval Office on January 10.

Anita McBride, chief of staff to first lady Laura Bush, tells CNN that the Bushes have moved almost all of their belongings out of the White House ahead of schedule.

"There won't be ... the moving trucks for the Bushes coming here," McBride said, adding, "The only things really left for President and Mrs. Bush are their personal belongings and luggage that they'll take that day."

McBride said Mrs. Bush directed residence staff early -- in the summer of 2008 -- to prepare the White House for the personal transition.

"It's probably the librarian in her," McBride said of Mrs. Bush, a former librarian. "Maybe we've got a bit of a Dewey Decimal system of move-out process, but that certainly made it easier for the residence staff, and they very much appreciate it," McBride said.

The actual clearing out of the Bushes' belongings began over the summer, McBride says, when many items were packed and taken to Crawford, Texas. Then, during the Christmas holiday, the Bushes moved their personal things out of Camp David, the presidential retreat in Maryland, according to McBride.

That means on Inauguration Day, while President Bush and Mrs. Bush, along with President-elect Obama and his family, are at the Capitol, staff in the White House residence will have more time to unpack and prepare the Obamas' personal belongings.

"They have rehearsed this over the last few weeks, everyone has their marching orders, it will be all hands on deck," said McBride.

"The residence staff will be here that morning, and they know what their jobs are when the moving truck for the Obamas' move-in arrives," she said, adding, "Their things will be unpacked, and their clothes will be in their rightful place, and whatever furniture that they may have selected from the White House furniture collection will be in the place that they want it to be."

***

(CNN) -- An Australian pilot landed a company plane in the ocean off Darwin on Friday, in a water landing that prompted comparisons to last month's landing of a US Airways jet in New York's Hudson River.





The Australian pilot has been compared to U.S. hero Chesley B. "Sully" Sullenberger, pictured above.





The Australian pilot also encountered problems shortly after takeoff. The twin-propeller plane was carrying the pilot and five passengers when it went down shortly after leaving Darwin International Airport, said Neville Blyth, a senior transport safety investigator with the Australian Transport Safety Bureau.





All those aboard were unhurt and managed to walk to shore, he said. Pictures showed the men from the plane soaked and carrying bags and equipment as they walked through the water.





"It's essentially a good story," Blyth said.





The ATSB is deciding whether to investigate, he said, and the cause of the incident is still unknown.





The Piper Chieftain plane was on its way to the town of Maningrida, about 500 kilometers (310 miles) east of Darwin, according to its owner, Australian information technology company CSG. Watch the plane ditch in Darwin Harbor »





"We would like to congratulate the pilot following all emergency landing and evacuation procedures and his very professional handling of the situation," a CSG statement said.





Darwin is in Australia's Northern Territory, on the coast of the Timor Sea. The city's airport is near the water.





The plane's trajectory took it over the water, giving the pilot limited opportunities to ditch the plane on land, Blyth said. He said the ocean was a safer option for landing than the beach, where the firmness of the sand was unknown.





"Personally, I think the decision was appropriate," Blyth said.





Australian media dubbed the captain of the Darwin plane "Sully Lite," comparing him to the captain of the US Airways Airbus jet that landed safely in the Hudson.





Pilot Chesley B. "Sully" Sullenberger was hailed as a hero for landing the plane safely and ensuring that all 155 people on board survived.





Asked about the comparisons, Blyth said the connection was tenuous.





"The correlation for a water landing is as close as it gets," he said.

***

(CNN) -- A Maryland mother faces assault charges for allegedly ordering a group of teens to beat up a 14-year-old who was stabbed in the ensuing melee, Baltimore County police said Friday.





Kimberley Lyn Cudanin, 34, told her 16-year-old son and at least four of his friends to attack Malaki Malloy as retaliation for a recent assault against her 14-year-old son, police said in a news release.





On Saturday night, Cudanin drove some of the teens to where Malloy was, about a mile from her home, police said. Those teens and others at the scene then beat and stabbed Malloy and three friends who were with him, police said.





Malloy was released from the University of Maryland Medical Center's shock trauma center Monday, hospital spokeswoman Cindy Rivers said Friday.





Cudanin and her son Andre were arrested Monday and face first- and second-degree assault charges, police spokesman Bill Toohey said.





Four other teens face the same charges after being arrested Wednesday: Leo Eades, 17; Marvin King, 16; Malcolm Scott, 15; and James McBride, 16. All are being charged as adults, police said.





Police are looking for two other suspects, Toohey said.





Warren Brown, defense attorney for at least one of the teens, could not be immediately reached for comment Friday.





An attempted murder charge is likely against the person alleged to have stabbed Malloy, Toohey said, but police have yet to determine who that person was. Investigators do not think it was Kimberley Cudanin, he said.





In fact, investigators do not think she assaulted anyone, but under Maryland law, her role in the attack warrants the assault charges, Toohey said.





CNN's Khadijah Rentas contributed to this report.

***

ATLANTA, Georgia (CNN) --   An advisory panel is recommending a major step up in protection for health workers dealing with patients suspected or confirmed to have H1N1 influenza.



One expert says that based on current knowledge, N95 respirators offer health workers the best protection.



The Institute of Medicine said Thursday, in recommendations requested by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, that loose paper masks are inadequate because the workers could still breathe in the virus.



Instead, health workers should switch to N95 respirators that form an airtight seal around the nose and mouth.



If properly fitted and worn correctly, N95 respirators filter out at least 95 percent of particles as small as 0.3 micrometers, which is smaller than influenza viruses, the report notes.



The institute provides independent, evidence-based advice to policymakers, health professionals, private entities and the public. It is one of four groups that make up the National Academies.



The study released Thursday was requested by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.



"Scientists do not know to what extent flu viruses spread through the air or whether infection requires physical contact with contaminated fluids or surfaces," a summary of the report says.



It calls for "a boost in research to answer these questions and to design and develop better protective equipment that would enhance workers' comfort, safety and ability to do their jobs."



"Based on what we currently know about influenza, well-fitted N95 respirators offer health care workers the best protection against inhalation of viral particles," said committee chairman Kenneth Shine, executive vice chancellor for health affairs at the University of Texas in Austin. He is a former president of the institute.



"But there is a lot we still don't know about these viruses, and it would be a mistake for anyone to rely on respirators alone as some sort of magic shield."



Health care workers should use several strategies to guard against infection, such as innovative triage processes, washing hands, disinfecting, wearing gloves, getting vaccinated and using antiviral drugs, Shine said.



The institute was asked specifically to evaluate personal protective equipment designed to guard against respiratory infection, and therefore the committee focused on the efficacy of medical masks and respirators.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Several hundred Sri Lankan Tamil protesters shouted slogans at the British Parliament for a second day Tuesday, urging it to act to end the "genocide" against their people in Sri Lanka.





Police clash with Tamil protesters outside the Houses of Parliament.





"Stop the genocide!" they shouted. "Stop the war!"





They waved the red flag of Tamil Eelam, the Tamils' traditional homeland in northern and eastern Sri Lanka. The flag is emblazoned with a yellow roaring tiger.





Most of the protesters slept overnight on the streets around Parliament Square after beginning their unauthorized protest Monday afternoon. At one point, the protesters blocked the street leading to Westminster Bridge over the River Thames, police said.





That led to road closures around Parliament.





By Tuesday morning, a solid ring of police had hemmed the protesters in Parliament Square across the street from the Houses of Parliament and Big Ben. Roads were open again, but the protest and police presence caused traffic congestion in the area.





Hariram Shan, 24, is a Sri Lankan Tamil who said he has lived in Britain for six years. He said the protesters hope the British government will intervene to stop Sri Lanka's crackdown on Tamil Tiger rebels, which he said harms civilians.





"They can force economic sanctions," Shan told CNN.





Dushyanthy Sukumar, 47, said the Sri Lankan government is retaliating against innocent civilians.





"The Sri Lankan government has now cornered the rebels, the LTTE (Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam), and what they are doing is killing the people," she said.





Sukumar, who said she has lived in Britain since leaving her homeland in 1987, said she is angry at the British government for supporting Sri Lanka.





"The Sri Lankan government is doing their dirty work through this government," she said.





The Sri Lankan military said Sunday that it had captured the last rebel stronghold and killed five rebel leaders after three days of gunbattles.





It said more rebels could still be hiding in a 20-square-kilometer "safety zone," but that it would not enter the area because it is home to some 50,000 people.





The Tamil Tigers have fought since 1983 for an independent homeland for the country's ethnic Tamil minority. The civil war has left more than 70,000 people dead.

***

MOGADISHU, Somalia (CNN) -- Ethiopian troops have not yet begun to withdraw from key positions in the capital of Somalia two days after they were supposed to do so under a peace agreement designed to end years of conflict.

Ethiopian troops are yet to leave the Somlai capital despite a peace agreement.

The Ethiopians had agreed to withdraw from some bases by Friday under an agreement signed last month by the Somali transitional government and a rebel faction known as the Alliance for the Re-Liberation of Somalia.

Ethiopia invaded Somalia two years ago to expel Islamic forces who had conquered Mogadishu. Under the deal signed October 26, a cease-fire between the transitional government and the ARS went into effect November 5. The Ethiopians were to withdraw from from key positions in the capital on November 21, and leave the country entirely early in 2009.

Somali Prime Minister Nur Hassan Hussein has said that Ethiopian troops will withdraw as agreed.

Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed, a moderate leader of the rebel ARS, told the local radio station Shabelle Saturday that the Ethiopian troops would pull out on schedule.

Insurgents clashed with Somali government forces and their Ethiopian allies Friday, witnesses said, leaving at least 11 fighters dead.

The fighting started when armed insurgent fighters attacked the house of a local commissioner in Mogadishu's Wadajir district, sparking heavy fighting between the government troops guarding the house and the insurgents.

"I saw 11 men wearing red turbans on the heads dead on the ground," local resident Mohamed Haji Ali told CNN by phone from a house near where the clashes took place. Other residents provided a similar death toll.

The commissioner whose house was attacked, Ahmed Da'd, said that his soldiers killed 17 insurgents. He displayed what he said were some of the dead insurgents for the media.

It is not clear what will happen if the Ethiopian troops remain in Mogadishu despite the October 26 peace deal. Under that agreement, government and opposition members will form a 10,000-member joint police force to keep order, along with the African Union peacekeeping mission now in place and a U.N. force to be deployed later. Both sides will work toward establishing a unity government in Somalia, which has been riven by 17 years of strife since the collapse of its last fully functional government.

Ethiopia invaded Somalia in December 2006 to install the transitional government in Mogadishu after a decade and a half of near-anarchy. The invasion had the blessing of the United States, which accused the Islamic Courts Union -- which captured Mogadishu earlier that year -- of harboring fugitives from al Qaeda. The Islamists responded with a guerrilla campaign against government and Ethiopian troops.

Efforts to replace the Ethiopians with an African Union-led peacekeeping mission faltered as the violence worsened, and heavy fighting in Mogadishu and other cities drove hundreds of thousands from their homes. The lawlessness also spilled on to the seas off the Horn of Africa, where international vessels are routinely hijacked by suspected Somali pirates who demand large ransoms.

Journalist Abdinasir Mohamed Guled and CNN's Mohammed Amiin and Amir Ahmed contributed to this report.

***

MOSCOW, Russia (CNN) -- Russian energy monopoly Gazprom said Thursday it has cut off supplies of natural gas to Ukraine after a payment deadline expired.



A gas-compressor and gas-holder station in Mryn, Ukraine. Gazprom said it had cut supplies to Ukraine Thursday.



Gazprom had been threatening the move, saying months of negotiations with Ukraine had failed to resolve the issue of outstanding payments. The company says Ukraine owes about $2 billion for past natural gas deliveries.



Ukraine also disputes the new price set by Gazprom for 2009 deliveries, which was initially more than double the price from 2008.



Gazprom has reassured the rest of Europe that its natural gas supply, which runs through Ukraine, will not be affected by the dispute with Kiev. Thursday, a Gazprom spokesman said on Russian state television the company had actually increased the deliveries to the rest of the continent.



"Gazprom will continue supplying gas for its consumers in Europe at full volume," the company's chief executive, Alexey Miller, said. "We have an effective transit contract."



Without natural gas, some Ukrainians could be in for chilly days and nights. The temperature at midday Thursday in Kiev was 25 degrees Fahrenheit (-4 degrees Celsius), with a forecast high of only 32 F (0 C) and snow predicted overnight.  Watch a report on Gazprom's threats to cut off gas supplies to Ukraine »



Ukraine's state-controlled energy company, Naftogaz Ukrainy, said Thursday it is ensuring domestic natural gas needs are covered by taking gas from underground storage facilities.



"All of Ukraine's consumers are fully secured," the company said in a statement.



In Washington, the White House urged a resolution Thursday.



"The United States would like to see a restoration of normal deliveries," White House spokesman Gordon Johndroe said. "The parties should be resolving their differences through good-faith negotiations, without supply cutoffs."



The frigid weather is of particular concern, the White House said. "We urge both sides to keep in mind the humanitarian implications of any interruption of gas supply in the winter," Johndroe said.



Naftogaz Ukrainy also disputed Gazprom's claim that it owes for past deliveries, saying Thursday it has paid its debt to Gazprom in full, though it declined to give a figure.



Another part of the dispute centers on Gazprom's price hike for 2009 gas deliveries. Gazprom had wanted to more than double Ukraine's payments, but Wednesday it offered a lower price.



Ukraine, which currently pays about $100 per 1,000 cubic meters, balked at the figure offered, saying it simply can't afford to pay the new price.



It is the second time in three years Gazprom has threatened to cut off gas supplies to Ukraine. The company made good on its threat on January 1, 2006, but turned the supply back on a day later.



Russia is the world's biggest producer of natural gas and supplies Europe with more than 40 percent of its imports -- mainly via the pipelines through Ukraine.



Naftogaz said in its statement Thursday that it would ensure the uninterrupted flow of Russian gas to Europe through Ukraine, but only under existing arrangements. It indicated some gas deliveries to Europe could be halted in Ukraine if Naftogaz fails to reach a new agreement with Gazprom.



Although gas is still flowing to Europe, there are also concerns in Russia that the amount could be reduced if Ukraine siphons off some of the gas headed to the west.



Naftogaz said it will continue negotiating with Gazprom to address the issues.

***

(CNN) -- Five young men died Saturday when the car they were in drove off the end of a private airstrip near Ocala, Florida, became airborne for 200 feet and slammed into an oak tree, authorities said.



The 2008 BMW was split in two in the violent wreck. All of the victims died at the scene.



"This had to be the worst vehicle crash that I have ever seen during my career," said Randy Robinson, a spokesman for the Emergency Medical Services Alliance with 27 years on the job.



The 2008 BMW was split in two in the wreck, which happened at 3:45 a.m., said Lt. Mike Burroughs, a spokesman for the Florida Highway Patrol Troop B.



He told CNN the victims -- 18 to 20 years old and all from the area -- were declared dead at the scene.



Burroughs said it was not clear how the car got onto the private Greystone community airstrip -- the same one actor John Travolta uses for his aircraft -- but the car was driving north on Runway 36, which is 1.5 miles long.



"It is evident that the driver of the vehicle saw he was approaching the end of the runway," Burroughs said. "He attempted a braking maneuver and the vehicle slid sideways off the end of the runway."



The car flew through the air for 200 feet, he said, and struck an oak tree 15 feet off the ground, splitting the vehicle in two.



Three of the occupants were ejected -- one landing 40 feet away, Burroughs said.



The engine block of the BMW was completely dislodged and wreckage from the car was found over a 200-square-foot area, the FHP spokesman said.



It was not known if the victims were wearing seat belts and the agency was awaiting the results of toxicology tests from the medical examiner's office to find out if alcohol or drugs played a role, Burroughs said.



The airstrip's private taxiways back up to homes in the Jumbolair and Greystone gated communities. E-mail to a friend

***

Port-au-Prince, Haiti (CNN) -- France's President Nicolas Sarkozy made a landmark visit to Haiti Wednesday, announcing more than $100 million of additional aid to the former French colony where 212,000 people were killed by an earthquake five weeks ago.





Sarkozy is the first French president ever to visit the country which has in the past demanded huge reparations from France to compensate for slavery-era exploitation before Haitian independence two centuries ago





He told a news conference that an extra €100 million ($136 million) was being made available to help reconstruction efforts, bringing France's contribution to the the aid effort to €320 million.





Sarkozy was scheduled to meet with Haitian President Rene Preval and Prime Minister Jean-Max Bellerive and take a helicopter tour of earthquake-devastated zones, Sarkozy's office said.





He also planned to tour a French Civil Security hospital and meet with French teams and injured Haitians, his office said. He planned to meet members of the government involved in reconstruction and members of the United Nations mission in Haiti.





Sarkozy's trip was scheduled to last less than five hours, after which he planned to go to the French island of Martinique for an overnight stay. Thursday, Sarkozy planned to visit French Guiana on South America's northeastern coast before returning home, his office said.





Sarkozy is the first European head of state to visit Haiti since the January 12 earthquake, Agence France-Presse reported.





France has had close cultural ties with its former colony since independence, but diplomatic relations have sometimes been fraught, with Paris occasionally expressing concerns over instability in the Caribbean nation.





In 2004, France called for the resignation of then president Jean Bertrand Arstide, who was subsequently ousted in a 2004 rebellion, after his government  demanded that France pay $21 billion in reparations.

***

(CNN) -- Despite some high-profile bombings in recent days, Iraq's security forces are ready to take over for U.S. forces this week to stabilize the nation's major cities, the U.S. commander in Iraq told CNN on Sunday.



Except for soldiers in advisory roles, all U.S. combat troops will leave Iraqi cities and towns by June 30.



Army Gen. Ray Odierno said he's seen a "constant improvement" in both the security situation and governance in Iraq to prepare for the June 30 deadline for U.S. troops to withdraw from major cities.



"They've been working for this for a long time," Odierno said on CNN's "State of the Union."



In a separate interview on "Fox News Sunday," Odierno said all U.S. troops already were out of Iraq's major cities before Tuesday's deadline.



"We have already moved out of the cities," Odierno said. "We've been slowly doing it over the last eight months. And the final units have moved out of the cities over the last several weeks."  Watch CNN's Michael Ware on the U.S. withdrawal »



The shift is part of the security agreement that former President George W. Bush's administration signed with Iraq.



In the CNN interview, Odierno blamed the recent violence in Iraq on "extremist elements using the timeframe and date to gain attention to themselves and divert attention from the success of Iraqi security forces."



The 131,000 U.S. troops in Iraq still will "maintain full coordination with Iraqi forces inside the cities" and continue to have intelligence capacity, Odierno said. With approval from the Iraqis, they also will carry out operations in major cities as necessary, he said.



Odierno said his goal is to help provide security that allows Iraq to hold planned national elections leading to the eventual removal of all U.S. troops by the end of 2011.



He said his biggest worry is a breakdown in stability such as a "consistent increase in violence" or a situation that Iraqi forces can't handle.



"I don't see that" happening, Odierno said. "I think we're on the right path."



Odierno also said Iran continues to "interfere" in Iraq, including training insurgents and paying surrogates. But he said his mission is limited to providing security within Iraq, no matter the provocation from Iran or elsewhere.



"I'm not authorized to do anything outside the borders of Iraq," he said.



Iran's government has repeatedly denied fomenting violence inside Iraq.

***

Syracuse, New York (CNN) -- A second man who has publicly accused a former Syracuse University coach of molesting him told CNN's AC360 on Tuesday that he was speaking out so that no other children would be hurt.





Mike Lang accused former men's assistant basketball coach Bernie Fine, 65, of touching him inappropriately at least dozens of times when he was a boy.





"I just hope that no other kids get abused, and that's the main reason why I came out and said what I had to say. ... I don't want this to happen to anybody else," Lang said.





Fine's house used to be like a home to him, and the coach was a father figure, a "great guy," he said.





Syracuse fired Fine on Sunday, less than a month after the university placed him on administrative leave after Lang and his stepbrother, Bobby Davis, came forward to publicly accuse him of molesting them over several years.





See a timeline of the Syracuse sexual abuse scandal





A third man, Zachary Tomaselli, now 23, has also said he was abused by Fine -- while in a hotel room in Pittsburgh, where he'd gone to watch a Syracuse game.





Police in Syracuse and Pittsburgh are investigating the allegations and looking for other potential victims, authorities have said.





Police say they'll change reporting procedures





When the allegations first surfaced, Fine -- married with a son and two daughters -- called them "patently false." He has not commented since.





The investigation at Syracuse comes in the wake of a sex abuse scandal at Penn State University that received nationwide attention. Former Penn State assistant football coach Jerry Sandusky is accused of sexually abusing boys over a span of 14 years.





When asked what his reaction was when he saw the Penn State story break, Lang said his "stomach just turned."





"All I can think of is what me and my little brother went through, and it's happening all over again," he said.





Regarding Jim Boeheim, head men's basketball coach at Syracuse, Lang said, "I honestly believe he didn't know anything about this."





While some have called for Boeheim to be fired, he said, "I just don't want that to happen. He's a Syracuse man in and out and ... I don't believe that he had any knowledge this was going on."





Lang, now 45, said he used to tell Fine to stop touching him, but that "you couldn't tell him no."





"It was hard to say anything, because you think you're with a god -- just hard to come out and say anything to anybody about it," Lang said.





Watch Anderson Cooper 360° weeknights 10pm ET. For the latest from AC360° click here.

***

LONDON, England -- A mother is seeking to have the womb of her severely disabled daughter removed to prevent the 15-year-old from feeling the pain and discomfort of menstruation.



Doctors in Britain are now taking legal advice to see if they are permitted to carry out the hysterectomy on Katie Thorpe, who suffers from cerebral palsy.



But a charity campaigning for the disabled said on Monday the move could infringe human rights and would set a "disturbing precedent."



Andy Rickell, executive director of disability charity Scope, told the Press Association: "It is very difficult to see how this kind of invasive surgery, which is not medically necessary and which will be very painful and traumatic, can be in Katie's best interests.



"This case raises fundamental ethical issues about the way our society treats disabled people and the respect we have for disabled people's human and reproductive rights.  Watch why the surgery is so controversial »



"If this enforced sterilization is approved, it will have disturbing implications for young disabled girls across Britain."



Katie's mother Alison Thorpe, who lives in Billericay, southern England, said the operation was in her daughter's best interests.



"First of all, this is not about me. If it was about me, I would have given up caring for Katie a long, long while ago," she told GMTV.



"It is about quality of life and for Katie to not have the associated problems of menstruation adds to her quality of life. It means she can continue with the quality of life we can give her now.



"Katie wouldn't understand menstruation at all. She has no comprehension about what will be happening to her body. All she would feel is the discomfort, the stomach cramps and the headaches, the mood swings, the tears, and wonder what is going on."



Thorpe said an operation would be best for Katie, despite the initial pain it would cause.



She added: "The short-term pain and discomfort we can manage with painkillers. We will be able to manage that pain much better than menstruation once a month, when Katie cannot tell us 'I'm in pain.'"  E-mail to a friend

***

BEIJING, China (CNN) -- Graphic footage of death and destruction has been shown on China's state-run news networks in the days following the massive earthquake that hit southwest Sichuan province earlier this week.



Such telling video has rarely been shown by domestic media so extensively and so quickly after a national disaster.



CCTV, China's state-run television network, as well as some local TV stations, have interrupted their regular programming to provide 24-hour coverage of the disaster.



Field reporters give live reports of search-and rescue operations. News about China's deadly earthquake is being updated around the clock -- tallying death tolls, the horrendous damage and the government's swift response.



Footage shows Premier Wen Jiabao surrounded by grieving villagers, his arms tightly holding two young girls.



"Your sorrow is our sorrow," he assures them. "As long as people are still alive, we can start all over again."



Premier Wen traveled to the disaster areas within hours of the massive earthquake. Chinese television covered his movements while leading rescue operations and comforting people in distress. Wearing a hard hat, he was shown standing on rubble and consoling trapped survivors through a loud speaker. The message is compelling: This disaster is terrible but the government is doing everything it can.



Such swift reaction and extensive news coverage has not been seen in previous disasters. When the Great Tangshan earthquake struck 32 years ago, the Chinese media kept the information secret for a long time, even though over 240,000 people were killed. In the early stages of the 2003 SARS outbreak, domestic media downplayed reports on the deadly epidemic, even as it spiraled out of control and spread globally.



More recently, severe snowstorms hit southern China during Spring Festival, the nation's most important holiday. Local media initially downplayed the crisis, following the government's cue; Premier Wen Jiabao was later forced to apologize for the government's slow response.



With the Beijing Olympics just three months away, China is in the spotlight.



Wenran Jiang, acting director of the Chinese Institute at the University of Alberta, believes the nation has drawn lessons from its past experiences with disaster. "China made mistakes before. They seemed to have learned their lessons from the earlier episodes and this one -- they probably want to manage it as well as they can."  Watch latest report on rescue efforts »



Why China's new approach? Jiang notes that "the media follow-up is quite transparent," in part because it "is politically less sensitive covering such a natural disaster." Besides, Chinese officials see tangible benefits in allowing media transparency. By showing the leaders helping people and coordinating search and rescue efforts, he explains, "the result is that the whole [of] China is being mobilized. The disaster has now become a rallying point of the country."



Experts in the region note the stark contrast between China's open response in the aftermath of the earthquake and Myanmar's defensive, clumsy response in the aftermath of a deadly cyclone earlier this month. Unlike its southern neighbor, China appears open to accepting international help and providing accurate information.



Chinese officials say they welcome offers of sympathy and international assistance. Aid groups have been on standby, ready to help as soon as the Chinese government gives the green light. Officials say that will come "when the time is ripe."



Today's more open, quick and aggressive reporting is a stark departure from China's poor performance in recent years.

***

Washington (CNN) -- President Obama announced Thursday that the federal government will spend $8 billion developing a nationwide high-speed train system -- an investment the White House says is needed to help spur long-term economic growth.





The investment, to be made through a series of state grants, will be funded through the government's $862 billion economic stimulus package.





Overall, projects and planning involving the rail corridors will take place in 31 states, according to a White House statement.





The program "will help accelerate job growth in an economy that is already beginning to grow," Obama said at a town hall at the University of Tampa in Florida.





"There is no reason why other countries can build high-speed rail lines and we can't," Obama said.





More than 30 rail manufacturers have agreed to establish or expand U.S. operations if they are hired to work on the high-speed rail network, the administration said.





The president first mentioned the program in his State of the Union speech Wednesday night. The administration initially released an outline for a national high-speed rail network last April.





Each of the corridors identified by the administration last year are between 100 and 600 miles long.





The program is "a long-term venture in which states will need to plan projects, purchase and lay track, build and assemble equipment, and construct or upgrade train stations, tunnels and bridges," the statement said.





In addition to the $8 billion mentioned by Obama, the plan also includes $1 billion a year for five years in the federal budget "as a down payment to jump-start the program," the White House said.





Train corridors in the program include:





-- San Diego-Los Angeles-San Luis Obispo in California





-- Oakland-Sacramento in California





-- Portland-Eugene in Oregon





-- Seattle-Portland in Washington and Oregon





-- Chicago-St. Louis in Illinois and Missouri





-- St. Louis-Kansas City in Missouri





-- Minneapolis/St. Paul-Madison in Minnesota and Wisconsin





-- Madison-Milwaukee in Wisconsin





-- Milwaukee-Chicago in Wisconsin and Illinois





-- Cleveland-Columbus-Cincinnati in Ohio





-- Detroit/Pontiac-Chicago in Michigan, Indiana and Illinois





-- Tampa-Orlando in Florida





-- Raleigh-Charlotte in North Carolina





-- Washington-Richmond in the District of Columbia and Virginia





-- Raleigh-Richmond in North Carolina and Virginia





-- New York City-Albany-Buffalo in New York





-- New York City-Montreal in New York and Quebec, Canada.





-- Boston-New York-Washington in Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Delaware, Maryland, and the District of Columbia





-- Brunswick-Portland in Maine





-- Philadelphia-Harrisburg-Pittsburgh in Pennsylvania





-- Springfield-East Northfield in Massachusetts





-- New Haven-Springfield in Connecticut and Massachusetts

***

(CNN) -- Michael Vick turned himself in to authorities on Monday to get a head start on serving his sentence for running a dogfighting ring, the U.S. Marshals Service said.



Michael Vick leaves court in Richmond, Virginia, in August after pleading guilty to dogfighting charges.



The Atlanta Falcons quarterback is scheduled to be sentenced on December 10 on a federal conspiracy charge of bankrolling the dogfighting operation.



Vick, 27, voluntarily turned himself in around noon, said Kevin Trevillan of the Marshals Service, and is being held at Northern Neck Regional Jail in Warsaw, Virginia, until the sentencing hearing.



The quarterback, who has been suspended indefinitely by NFL Commissioner Roger Goodell, faces 12 to 18 months in prison on the charge.



Vick pleaded guilty in August after three associates admitted their own roles in the operation and agreed to cooperate with prosecutors.



"From the beginning, Mr. Vick has accepted responsibility for his actions and his self-surrender further demonstrates that acceptance,"  Vick's attorney, Billy Martin, said in a statement.



"Michael wants to again apologize to everyone who has been hurt in this matter and he thanks all of the people who have offered him and his family prayers and support during this time," Martin's statement said.



CNN Senior Legal Analyst Jeffrey Toobin speculated that Vick started his sentence early "to get it out of the way." Watch Toobin explain why Vick would surrender early »



On September 25, a Virginia grand jury indicted Vick and the three co-defendants -- Purnell Peace, 35, of Virginia Beach, Virginia; Quanis Phillips, 28, of Atlanta, Georgia; and Tony Taylor, 34, of Hampton, Virginia -- on state charges of running a dogfighting ring at Vick's home outside Newport News.



The Surry County grand jury brought two charges against the four men: one count of unlawfully torturing and killing dogs and one of promoting dogfights. Each is a felony charge that could result in a five-year prison term.



In addition, Taylor faces three additional counts of unlawful torture and killing of dogs.



A hearing in that case is set for November 27, but Vick does not have to be in court at that time.



In September, Vick was put under tight restrictions by the federal court after he tested positive for marijuana use.



Vick tested positive for the drug on September 13, a court document from the Eastern District of Virginia shows.



As a result, U.S. District Judge Henry E. Hudson ordered Vick to "submit to any method of testing required by the pretrial services officer or the supervising officer for determining whether the defendant is using a prohibited substance."



Those methods could include random drug testing, a remote alcohol testing system "and/or any form of prohibited substance screening or testing," the order said.



Vick was also ordered to stay home between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m., "or as directed by the pretrial services officer or supervising officer," the order said. He was to be electronically monitored during that time.



Vick must participate in substance abuse therapy and mental health counseling "if deemed advisable by the pretrial services officer or supervising officer" at his own expense, the order said. E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- Josef Fritzl, the Austrian man accused of keeping his daughter in a cellar for decades and fathering her seven children, will go on trial March 16 on six charges including murder and incest.

Josef Fritzl admitted fathering seven children by his daughter during her 24-year captivity.

The Austrian Press Agency reported Thursday the trial was expected to last about five days and be held behind closed doors. Further details about the case would be announced Friday, it said.

Fritzl, 73, was charged in November with incest and the repeated rape of his daughter, Elisabeth, for 24 years.

But he was also charged with the murder of one of the children he fathered with her, an infant who died soon after birth. State Prosecutor Gerhard Sedlacek said Michael Fritzl died from lack of medical care.

In all, Fritzl faces six charges at trial: murder, involvement in slave trade (slavery), rape, incest, assault, and deprivation of liberty, Sedlacek's office said. If convicted, he could face life in prison.

The case first came to light in April 2008 when Elisabeth's then-19-year-old daughter, Kerstin, became seriously ill with convulsions. Elisabeth persuaded her father to allow Kerstin to be taken to a hospital for treatment.

Hospital staff became suspicious of the case and alerted police, who discovered the family members in the cellar.

Fritzl confessed to police that he raped his daughter, kept her and their children in captivity, and burned the body of the dead infant in an oven in the house. Elisabeth told police the infant was one of twins who died a few days after birth.

When Elisabeth gained her freedom, she told police her father began sexually abusing her at age 11. On August 8, 1984, her father enticed her into the basement, where he drugged her, put her in handcuffs and locked her in a room, she told police.

Fritzl explained Elisabeth's disappearance in 1984 by saying the 18-year-old girl had run away from home. He backed up the story with letters he forced Elisabeth to write.

Elisabeth Fritzl and all but three of her children lived in the specially designed cellar beneath her father's home in Amstetten, Austria, west of Vienna. The other three children lived upstairs with Fritzl and his wife; Fritzl had left them on his own doorstep, pretending his "missing" daughter Elisabeth had dropped them off.

Under Austrian law, if Fritzl is convicted on several offenses, he will be given the sentence linked to the worst crime. In addition to murder, he will face the following charges:

***

(CNN)  -- Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper said Thursday that Canada's governor general has allowed him to suspend Parliament, postponing a no-confidence vote from his opponents that he was likely to lose.

Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper says Parliament will resume on January 26.

Harper called on his opponents to work with his government on measures to aid the nation's economy when Parliament returns on January 26.

"The first order of business will be the presentation of a federal budget," Harper told reporters outside the governor general's residence in Ottawa, Canada.

"Those who were elected here to serve the interest of Canada as a whole should work together -- at least to some degree -- on planning an economic plan for Canada."

Had Governor General Michaelle Jean -- who represents Britain's Queen Elizabeth II as head of state -- denied Harper's request, Monday's vote would have likely brought down Harper's government, less than two months after his Conservative Party strengthened its minority position in federal elections.

The Liberal Party and the leftist New Democratic Party announced plans earlier this week to form a governing coalition with the support of the Bloc Quebecois, which supports independence for French-speaking Quebec.

Liberal Party Leader Stephane Dion, the man who would fill Harper's role under the planned coalition, said the coalition would look to replace Harper unless he makes "monumental change."

"For the first time in the history of Canada, the prime minister of Canada is running away from the parliament of Canada," said Dion, accusing the premier of placing "partisan politics ahead of the interest of all Canadians."

New Democratic Party leader Jack Layton said Harper had used a "maneuver to escape accountability."

"He refuses to face the people of Canada through their elected representatives," he said. "The prime minister is choosing to protect his own job rather than focusing on the jobs of Canadians who are being thrown out of work today."

The news comes one day after Harper appealed directly to Canadians for support, vowing in a nationally televised address on the economy to halt his opponents, whom he accused of imposing their own agenda on the Canadian people.

"Unfortunately, even before the government has brought forward its budget, and only seven weeks after a general election, the opposition wants to overturn the results of that election," said the prime minister, whose Conservative Party strengthened its minority position in federal elections on October 14. iReport.com: Outrage brewing in Canada

Harper rejected the idea of a "power-sharing coalition with a separatist party," referring to the Bloc Quebecois, and insisted the country must stand together.

"At a time of global economic instability, Canada's government must stand unequivocally for keeping the country together. At a time like this, a coalition with the separatists cannot help Canada," he said Wednesday.

"The opposition is attempting to impose this deal without your say, without your consent, and without your vote. This is no time for backroom deals with the separatists; it is the time for Canada's government to focus on the economy and specifically on measures for the upcoming budget. This is a pivotal moment in our history," he said.

Harper, 49, has served as prime minister since February 2006.

***

(CNN) -- Sevilla have sacked coach Manolo Jimenez after their disappointing home draw to bottom-club Xerez on Tuesday extended the club's winless run to seven games.





Despite lying fifth in the Spanish Primera Liga table, Sevilla were knocked out of the lucrative European Champions League by Russian side CSKA Moscow last week.





Jimenez had also secured a Copa del Rey final against Atletico Madrid but it wasn't enough to save the 46-year-old's job.





The club's sporting director Ramon Rodriguez admitted the decision had been difficult but said he had "done what I had to."





He told the club's official Web site: "It was an unavoidable situation and we had to find a solution, and the pain that it brings.





"Tuesday was the end of the story but the decision comes from the image and dynamics of the team. Without doubt we are grateful to Manolo. He is an excellent professional, he has made all this possible and impossible. However it is obvious that he could not get a response out of the team.





"Fortunately we believe that there is time. The growth and the ambition of the club is shown in the change of the manager. We are fighting for important things."





Xerez's injury-time equaliser on Tuesday meant Sevilla's last league success was against Real Mallorca back in February.





Ironically, it is Mallorca who occupy the much-coveted fourth spot in the table that guarantees Champions League football next season.





Jimenez took charge in October 2007 when former coach Juande Ramos left to take over at English Premier League team Tottenham.





In that season he led Sevilla to a fifth-place finish, while in 2009 they came third in the league behind Real Madrid and Barcelona.





Rodriguez said a new manager would be in place for Sunday's game with Villarreal. "The matter will be resolved as soon as possible and he [the new manager] will be sitting on the bench for Sundays match," he added.

***

(CNN) -- David Beckham revealed that he has missed playing football "at the highest level" after being presented as an AC Milan player ahead of his three-month loan deal from the Los Angeles Galaxy.

David Beckham parades his new AC Milan kit after completing his three-month loan to the Italian club.

Beckham, 33, has negotiated a move to the Serie A giants in a bid to remain match fit and stay in the thoughts of England manager Fabio Capello.

His move to LA Galaxy from Real Madrid last year was perceived at the time as a step backwards to a league that has still to establish itself on the world stage, and the former England captain admitted that a move to Milan represented a move back into the mainstream.

"Moving to America was a big step for me because there was a lot of people who were criticizing the move, but I still believe it was a move where I wanted to challenge myself and I was able to challenge myself in different ways," Beckham told a packed press conference in Milan.

"But I have always said that I would always miss playing at the highest level. I'm not saying that in America they won't get to the highest level -- it will take time and it will happen. But with five months off during the season I personally can't do that.

"I needed to be able to be playing top-flight football to keep myself fit, to keep myself in contention for other things that are going on."

Beckham, who began the press conference by addressing the assembled media with a few words in Italian, will be in the stands to watch his new team take on Udinese on Sunday.

He will then join them at a training camp in Dubai and could make his debut when the Serie A season resumes with a trip to Roma on January 11.

The former Manchester United and Real Madrid midfielder added: "I'm really happy to be here, it is a great honor. I hope to add to the team, I hope to give everything that I've always given in my career.

"To be able to have the chance to play for another one of the biggest clubs in the world, I've played for the biggest club in England, the biggest club in Spain and now I'm going to be playing for the biggest club in Italy, is amazing.

"I've been very lucky in my career to have done that, and I'm just going to enjoy it because I think to be given this opportunity is incredible." added Beckham.

***

(CNN) -- Seven members of the environmental group Greenpeace were arrested Monday after protesting at a private ship that the group says is scheduled to depart for Alaska this summer as part of a drilling mission.





The group said it was sending a message to Interior Secretary Ken Salazar to ban new drilling in the Arctic or any U.S. waters. The ship was docked at Port Fourchon, Louisiana, near the site of the massive BP oil spill that for more than a month has been gushing thousands of barrels of oil daily into the Gulf of Mexico.





Photos from the scene show two protesters repelling off the side of Harvey Explorer, a 240-foot supply vessel, with one holding a sign reading "Salazar: Ban Arctic drilling." The activists also smeared messages -- "Arctic next?" -- on the boat in raw crude from the BP spill in the Gulf.





The seven arrested, between ages 24 and 32, face unauthorized entry charges of a critical infrastructure and an inhabited dwelling, according to the Lafourche Parish County Sheriff's Department. They could face additional charges pending an investigation into the incident, authorities said.





The protest comes as the Obama administration has decided to establish a presidential commission to investigate the disaster and look into federal oversight of offshore oil drilling, safety aboard rigs and environmental protection. Permits to drill offshore were suspended last month pending an Interior Department safety review after the explosion of the Deepwater Horizon drill rig.





Still, the government is under pressure to issue new permits for offshore drilling as early as next week. The safety review is due this Friday, and the Obama administration will use it to help decide when and how drilling should resume.





The Harvey Explorer is a vessel contracted by Shell for offshore operations off the Alaskan coast that had been scheduled for July.





"The safety and security of this contracted vessel and its crew are a top priority," Shell said in a statement Monday. "While we welcome discussions regarding Shell operations, we are disappointed in the approach taken by Greenpeace today."





Greenpeace and other environmental groups argue there should be no new drilling until the investigation into the disaster is complete, which will take months.





"As long as we continue to rely on dirty and dangerous fossil fuels and offshore drilling, we can't prevent future disasters from destroying our oceans and the industries and wildlife that depend upon them," said John Hocevar, oceans campaign director for Greenpeace.





"Pulling the plug on plans to drill in the Arctic would be a first step towards a comprehensive ban on all new drilling in the United States," he said.

***

(CNN) -- A German top-division football match was called off on Saturday after the appointed referee apparently tried to commit suicide before the kickoff.





Cologne's game against Mainz was postponed when match official Babak Rafati failed to show up, the home team's website reported.





German Football Assocation president Theo Zwanziger called an emergency press conference at Cologne's RheinEnergieStadion to explain the situation.





"At 1345 I was informed that something terrible had happened," Zwanziger said.





Rafati, a German with Iranian ancestry, did not appear at midday for his scheduled appointment with his three assistants, who then went to his hotel room and opened it with the help of staff.





The 41-year-old was found inside in a "motionless" state, Zwanziger said. Police confirmed that no-one else was involved, and it is assumed that he tried to commit suicide.





"According to the information that I have, his state is stable," Zwanziger said. "He is no longer in critical condition and he is currently being treated in the intensive care unit."





Zwanziger said Rafati's assistants were receiving counseling after the incident, which came two years after the suicide of former Germany international goalkeeper Robert Enke.





Rafati had refereed in the Bundesliga since 2005, and was on the panel of FIFA's international officials from 2008 before being dropped this year, the AFP agency reported.





"The pressure in professional sports is unbelievably high. We just don't manage to bring the right balance into it. No-one should be in such a hopeless situation," said Zwanziger, who promised to provide support for Rafati's family and colleagues.





Saturday's other Bundesliga matches were played as scheduled.





Bayern Munich's lead was reduced to two points after a 1-0 home defeat by defending champions Borussia Dortmund.





Teenage midfielder Mario Gotze score the only goal in the 65th minute to put Dortmund second on 26 points, above Borussia Monchengladbach on goal difference.





Gladbach crushed fifth-placed Werder Bremen 5-0 as Marco Reus scored a hat-trick, while Schalke moved up to fourth with a 4-0 win at home to Nuremberg thanks to a double from Klaas-Jan Huntelaar and another goal from veteran Spanish strike partner Raul.





Wolfsburg moved clear of the relegation zone with a 4-1 win over Hanover, while third-bottom Freiburg snatched a 2-2 draw against visiting Hertha Berlin as Stefan Reisinger scored his second goal five minutes into time added on.

***

(CNN) -- Legendary American boxer Muhammad Ali has visited the birth place of his ancestors in Ireland, prompting thousands of well-wishers to line the streets of the town.



Muhammad Ali on a nine-day visit to Europe that included a stopover to his ancestoral home in Ireland.



The scenes were reminiscent of a presidential visit as the 67-year-old former three-times world heavyweight champion traveled to Ennis, County Clare to see the hometown of his forebear.



The visit was commemorated by the town council with the unveiling of a plaque at the home of his great grandfather and by making Ali the first honorary "freeman" of the town.



Abe Grady -- the grandfather of Ali's mother Odessa Lee Grady -- lived in the town of Ennis,  before emigrating to the United States in 1860 where he married an African-American emancipated slave. Watch as Muhammad Ali visits Ireland »



Ali -- who was crowned Sportsman of the Century by Sports Illustrated in 1999 -- had his Irish heritage uncovered by genealogists in 2002.



"Now that we know Muhammad is an Ennis man, we will be back," Ali's wife Lonnie told Britain's Daily Telegraph newspaper.



The small County Clare- town of 23 thousand put on an open-air concert, closed schools early and had special screenings of the Ali v George Foreman documentary "When We Were Kings" to welcome the "Louisville Lip."



Ali -- who has been a Parkinson's Disease sufferer since 1984 -- did not speak to those who had gathered but shadow-boxed to spectators and cameras before meeting his distant relatives.



"It was incredible. We've had so much rain and yet today it was beautiful. The rain held off wherever Muhammad Ali went." Frankie Neylon, the town's mayor said.



Ali fought in Ireland only once during his career, beating Al Blue Lewis in a non-title bout at Dublin's Croke Park in 1972.



The visit to Ireland was part of a nine-day tour of Europe that Ali had undertaken to raise money to fight Parkinson's Disease and for the Ali Center.

***

CABO SAN LUCAS, Mexico (CNN) -- A "dangerous" Hurricane Jimena bore down Tuesday on the Mexican peninsula of Baja California, with the resort town of Cabo San Lucas lying in its path. Meanwhile, a new tropical storm was forming in the Atlantic Ocean.



A NOAA satellite image shows Hurricane Jimena off the coast of Baja California, Mexico, on Tuesday morning.



Jimena's maximum wind speed dropped from 145 mph to 135 mph, but it still remained a Category 4 storm, according to the U.S. National Weather Service's 11 a.m. PT (2 p.m. ET) update.



"Some fluctuations in strength are likely today and gradual weakening is forecast on Wednesday," the weather service said. "However, Jimena is expected to remain a major hurricane until landfall."



Also on Tuesday, Tropical Storm Erika formed in the Atlantic, 390 miles east of the Leeward Islands, the National Hurricane Center said.



Jimena's storm center is forecast to come ashore on Thursday morning, but the weather service warned that "because it will be moving parallel to the coastline, any slight change in direction could have a huge impact in the location and timing of landfall."



Mexico's government extended a hurricane warning for most of the southern half of Baja California -- from Punta Abreojos on the peninsula's west coast to Mulege on its east coast, according to the National Weather Service.



A hurricane warning means hurricane conditions are expected within the warning area in the next 24 hours and people should quickly prepare "to protect life and property."



"A dangerous storm surge along with battering waves will produce significant coastal flooding along the Baja California Peninsula," NWS said in its 11 a.m. PT report



On its current track, Jimena's center will approach the peninsula's southern portion later on Tuesday and central Baja California peninsula by Thursday, the weather service said at 11 a.m. PT.



In addition to damaging winds, the storm could bring as much as 15 inches of rain, forecasters said.



Jimena -- the 10th named storm of the Pacific season -- was centered about 110 miles (175 km) south-southwest of Cabo San Lucas, according to the weather service. It was traveling north-northwest near 12 mph (19 kph).



People in his town of Los Cabos, at the very tip of the peninsula, were preparing for the storm and were getting a precursor as winds and rains began to pick up, said resident Cuauhtemoc Morgan on Monday.



Morgan, who sent videos to to CNN's iReport, said residents had protected every home in his neighborhood, fortifying windows with masking tape. Lines at supermarkets were long with worried residents preparing for the storms, Morgan said.



Authorities were setting up shelters in schools and trying to devise a plan to protect the homeless, he added.

***

(CNN)  -- It's a trip that would make Demi Moore and Ashton Kutcher blush. On Friday, the Carnival cruise ship Elation, sponsored by the world's largest nonprofit singles travel group, will make history by hosting the world's first International Cougar Cruise, and we don't mean the animal.





Defined by the Urban Dictionary, a cougar is "an older woman who frequents clubs in order to score with a much younger man." It can be anyone from "an overly surgically altered wind tunnel victim, to an absolute sad and bloated old horn-meister."





"A cougar is generally known as a woman over 40 who likes to date younger men, but theoretically any woman who dates younger men is a cougar," said Rich Gosse, who came up with the cougar cruise idea.





The ship, which sets sail from San Diego, California, to Ensenada, Mexico, for three nights, is booked for 300 guests and even has a waiting list. The ship has three swimming pools, a seven-deck-high atrium, bar and grill, a Moroccan-inspired Casablanca Casino and a lounge that features stage shows, according to Ann Thomas, owner of the Singles Travel Company and organizer of the Cougar Cruise.





After making port in Ensenada, the cruise offers extracurricular activities like horseback riding, ATVing and other outdoor excursions.





"There's at least four or five options a day for people to get together on the cruise. We're doing lots of activities; dancing, dining, Jacuzzi parties, karaoke for two hours. And starting at $125 a ticket, it's a great price," Thomas said.





"I've had to hire two more people part-time just to pick up the phones," she said. "I've never seen a response quite like this."





Thomas admits that she was hesitant to sign on to the idea but is glad she did.





"We have people flying in from Italy and Denmark. My associates have been booking from France, Canada. It's fascinating," Thomas said.





Gosse, who has been hosting singles events for more than 30 years, said he got the idea after hosting a cougar convention in Palo Alto, California.





"We had to turn away hundreds of people," Gosse said. "Then we did one in Beverly Hills and had a massive crowd down there, so I thought, maybe we should do a cougar cruise. I didn't think anyone would want to go. Needless to say, the phone is ringing off the hook."





These cougars may as well be an endangered species compared with those hunting them on this cruise.





"The basic problem is, we have is too many cubs," Gosse said. "We usually have too many women and not enough guys, but there's been a paradigm shift in recent years, so now the cubs are more excited about it than the cougars."





A "cub" is someone in their 20s or early 30s who likes to date older women, according to Gosse.





For years, he says, it's been socially acceptable for older men to date younger women. But in recent years, a phenomenon sparked by celebrities like Kutcher, baseball player Alex Rodriguez (who is said to have dated pop star Madonna) and others has led a new generation of younger men on the prowl for more experienced partners.





There is even an ABC sitcom called "Cougar Town" that glamorizes the sexual escapades of a 40-something divorcee on a search for self-discovery by dating younger men.





"Tim Robbins [and] Susan Sarandon was the first high-profile cougar-cub relationship," Gosse said of the actors, who have been together since the late 1980s. "Now we're seeing a paradigm shift where these younger guys are actively looking for older women."





"If you look at the demographics, the only logical way for people to get their needs met is for younger men to date older women," he said.





According to the U.S. Census Bureau,

***

(CNN) -- Israeli President Shimon Peres said he had an amicable phone conversation with Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, a day after Erdogan stormed offstage during an angry exchange with Peres at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland.

Turkish PM Recep Tayyip Erdogan leaves the stage Thursday, as Israeli President Shimon Peres sits, left.

Peres said he and Erdogan did not take the spat personally.

"I called him up and said, yes, it's nothing against you, nothing against Turkey. We consider you as a friend," Peres said. He said Erdogan reciprocated.

Although there was no mention of an apology, Peres said there was a polite exchange between the two leaders.

"I didn't take it personally. I didn't go for a personal fight. I answered unfounded accusations. It was my duty. And they didn't change my mind," he said.  Watch Shimon Peres on the Gaza conflict Â»

Turkey, a predominantly Muslim nation, has long been the Jewish state's closest military and economic partner in the region, and Turkey recently mediated indirect peace talks between Israel and Syria.

But many Turks have been incensed with Israel over its three-week military operation that ended there earlier this month.

And in Davos, Erdogan was angered after Peres said that Israel is committed to peace and blamed Hamas for the fighting in Gaza, where Israel staged a three-week military operation that ended earlier this month.

When Erdogan began responding, a moderator cut him off, saying the debate had run over its allotted time. Erdogan patted the moderator on the arm until he was granted one more minute to respond.  Watch commentary on Erdogan's angry exchange Â»

"I know the reason behind raising your voice is because of the guilty psychology," he said to Peres. "My voice will not be that loud. You must know that. When it comes to killing -- you know killing very well. I know how you hit, kill children on the beaches."

He then left the stage, complaining that Peres was receiving preferential treatment.

"From now on, Davos is finished for me," Erdogan said. "I will not come back. You won't let people talk. You gave him 25 minutes, but you gave me 12 minutes. This is not right."

Erdogan had described the military campaign against Hamas fighters in Gaza as "barbaric" and accused Israel of using excessive force.

He said: "The Palestinian Territories are like an open-air prison, isolated from the world. I have always been a leader who said anti-Semitism is a crime against humanity. But so is anti-Islamism."

Peres had said Hamas was responsible for the "tragedy," accusing the Islamist militants of creating a "dangerous dictatorship."

"Israel left Gaza completely -- no occupation," Peres said. "I want to understand why they throw rockets at us."

On Friday, after his outburst, Erdogan returned home to a hero's welcome. Thousands of people lined up at Ataturk Airport in Istanbul, cheering and waving signs. A large banner read, "You Will Never Walk Alone," and smaller signs bore phrases including "Davos Conqueror." People also were seen waving Turkish and Palestinian flags and throwing flowers on the road leading to Erdogan's home.

Despite the glowing response at the airport, there has been some criticism in the Turkish media of Erdogan's exchange with the Israeli president.

CNN Turk's Deniz Bayramoglu said the issue was still "hot" with Erdogan's secularist political opponents speaking out against the prime minister.

"They also say that Israel's behavior in Gaza is unacceptable but they are very critical of Prime Minister Erdogan's behavior," Bayramoglu said.

"Some are saying they are really proud of Prime Minister Erdogan and some are saying it is a diplomatic scandal."

Erdogan explained whom he was directing his anger at during a news conference at the airport. "My words were only to the Israeli government, not the Israeli

***

(CNN) -- The space shuttle Atlantis glided to a picture-perfect landing Friday morning under bright, sunny skies at Kennedy Space Center in Florida.





The seven-person crew returned after an 11-day mission to deliver key spare parts to prolong the life of the international space station.





The original six-member crew, with flight engineer Nicole Stott -- who launched in August -- returned amid sunny, clear Florida weather.





"Couldn't have picked a clearer day," Cndr. Charles Hobaugh said as the shuttle approached the runway.





Mission Control told Hobaugh that the landing was a "picture-perfect end" to the mission. "Everybody, welcome back to Earth, especially you, Nicole," Mission Control said.





Stott had spent 87 days on the international space station, according to NASA.





About an hour after the shuttle landed, the crew transport vehicle moved alongside the orbiter access hatch on Atlantis' port side, NASA said on its Web site. With the crew hatch opened, the astronauts left the orbiter to enter the vehicle.





It contains beds and comfortable seats so the astronauts can receive a brief medical checkup before they step onto the tarmac, NASA said.





The crew's mission included three space walks and installation of two platforms to the station's backbone. The platforms will hold spare parts that will sustain station operations after the shuttles are discontinued.





NASA said the parts the crew delivered will add years to the station's life after the space shuttle fleet is retired next year.





Some of the parts are for systems that keep the station from overheating or tumbling through space, NASA said.





During the mission, the crew celebrated Thanksgiving while they prepared for landing. They dined on smoked turkey, green beans, mushrooms, cornbread dressing and candied yams, according to NASA.





Russia will take over supplying the international space station.





On this mission, Atlantis also marked a 6 pound, 13 ounce development.





Astronaut Randy Bresnik welcomed a daughter from space, the second time a baby has been born to a U.S. astronaut on a mission.





Mike Fincke's daughter was born in June 2004 while he was aboard the international space station, NASA said.

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN) -- The newly named lawyer for Michael Jackson's children makes her first court appearance Monday as a judge decides if he'll approve a contract between Jackson's estate and concert promoter AEG Live.



Michael Jackson's estate will be the subject of a court hearing today.



Jackson's mother, Katherine Jackson, who has custody of the three children, objected to provisions of the deal that would give AEG Live a share of rights to video of her son's final rehearsals.



Los Angeles County Superior Court Judge Mitchell Beckloff appointed estate law expert Margaret Lodise last week to represent the children after he decided their interests might sometimes conflict with their grandmother's.



Despite warnings by estate lawyers that a delay could cost millions of dollars, Beckloff delayed his decision on the AEG Live contract one week to give the children's new lawyer time to weigh in on the deal.



The contract would provide for an exhibition of Jackson memorabilia that would travel to at least three cities, according to Kathy Jorrie, a lawyer for concert promoter AEG Live.



"The longer we wait, the more time passes, frankly, the less interest there will be on the part of the public to come see it," Jorrie said.



The judge has already approved a contract to allow Columbia Pictures to use video that AEG Live shot of Jackson's last rehearsals for a documentary due out this fall. Columbia is a division of Sony Pictures.



Sony Pictures said it would deliver the movie -- "This Is It" -- to theaters starting October 30 "with the full support of the estate of Michael Jackson."



Court papers filed last week revealed that Columbia Pictures would pay a minimum of $60 million for the rights to make the Jackson movie.



Katherine Jackson's lawyers, while endorsing the movie deal, have objected to terms given to AEG, saying they are too generous to the company.



Jackson's lawyers objected to the estate's agreement to let AEG recover all its expenses from that money, then take 10 percent of the remainder. It also gives the company a perpetual share of the profits from the video rights.



AEG Live's lawyer said the company had made many concessions to the estate and could not make more.



The judge previously has said he might approve the contracts even over Katherine Jackson's objection.



Jermaine Jackson, Michael Jackson's older brother, told CNN's Larry King recently that he likes the deals, which he said could bring in nearly $100 million into the estate.



Katherine Jackson and Michael Jackson's three children are the main beneficiaries of the estate, which is controlled by Jackson's former lawyer, John Branca, and longtime Jackson friend and music executive John McClain.



Branca and McClain were named in Jackson's will as executors. Katherine Jackson is considering a challenge of their control of the estate.

***

(CNN) -- Spongy red balls wait in a queue, separating two teams wired to smack their opponent. Within seconds, the players dip and dive like dolphins until one player stands alone, relishing in victory.



An adult plays in a dodge ball league organized by the

City of Sparks Parks and Recreation in Nevada.



It's the classic game of dodge ball, but these aren't fifth-graders during PE class in Sparks, Nevada.



The childhood sport of dodge ball made a comeback four years ago in this bedroom community among adults in their 20s and 30s -- and even a few players who reached retirement.



Now, hundreds of working professionals, doctors, lawyers and teachers congregate at the local recreation center for a dose of dodge ball on Sunday nights.



"I think a lot of it goes back to trying to stay young," said Tony Pehle, recreation supervisor in Sparks, who started the dodge ball program after being inspired by the 2004 Ben Stiller movie "Dodgeball: A True Underdog Story."



"They might be adults, but they still like to play and have fun."



Has Peter Pan syndrome come to stay? From playing dodge ball to jumping double Dutch and competing in rock-paper-scissors, adult men and women, from urban nests to rural towns, are reveling in games and activities once thought to be child's play.



The 2009 World Yo-Yo Contest in Orlando, Florida, this weekend (August 13)  is all grown up, attracting more than 150 adult competitors, who can showcase dizzying tricks with the flick of a finger. Later in the month, hundreds of adults outfitted in pirate and animal costumes will race their homebuilt vehicles for Oregon's annual Portland Adult Soapbox Derby, a crafty activity that began for youths in the 1930s.



"Once a year, I get to build something for the kid in me," says Jason Hogue, a 41-year-old carpenter, who has participated in the race for eight years. Last year, he constructed a car shaped like a hammerhead shark. "We get to use our creativity and get excited with our friends."



Whether they're done to seek refuge from the daily grind or to provide nostalgia for youthful days -- or they're a product of what some experts say is a generation that can't grow up -- these juvenile pastimes are getting more popular. For example, adult viewership of the Nickelodeon show "SpongeBob SquarePants" swelled by 51 percent from 1999 to 2009, officials say.



The World Adult Kickball Association, one of the largest kickball organizations, has spread its tentacles to 33 states as well a soldier division in Iraq. WAKA Kickball began as a casual game between a few young single friends in their 20s in Washington, D.C. Now, the games appeal to tens of thousands of adults, many of them yuppies wanting a quick escape from the stresses of their first 401(k), mortgage and job.



"I played soccer growing up, and I like competition," says avid kickball player Marlon LeWinter, 28, of New York City. LeWinter, a public relations executive, usually plays the position of center with a bunch of producers, writers and analysts in their late 20s. They named their team Chipwich Nation after they scarfed down the cookies-and-ice cream treat at a bar after a game one night.



"Sometimes when it's [the score] two to one in a kickball came, I get the jitters," he says.



The economic bind also creates a favorable environment for adults to latch onto simple children's games and sports. With players who are trapped in a world of layoffs and job freezes, these adult leagues, contests and tournaments are the equivalent of sandbox time for children. They can make new friends and go for a beer after the game. These activities are also budget-friendly, costing less than $100 to join for several months of play -- much less than a golf club membership.



Since the recession, Duncan Toys, one of the biggest yo-yo manufacturers in the United States, has seen

***

Editor's Note: Sarah Bliss is a writer for the Tufts Daily, the leading news source for Tufts University. This article was brought to CNN.com by UWIRE, the leading provider of student-generated content. UWIRE aims to identify and promote the brightest young content creators and deliver their work to a larger audience via professional media partners such as CNN.com. Visit UWIRE.com to learn more.



SUNY at Canton in New York has provided a designated "pet wing," home to a variety of animals.



(UWIRE) -- As university residence halls seek to transition into more homey environments -- with additions like full kitchens and single-stall bathrooms -- pet ownership is still forbidden for the majority of dorm residents.



But several universities, including MIT, have now added some pets to the "acceptable" list of dorm possessions.



According to a recent article published by The Boston Globe, students at MIT who reside in four of the school's 11 undergraduate dormitories can bring cats with them to school, thanks to a policy implemented several years ago in an effort to curb students from housing forbidden animals.



Other schools have jumped on the four-footed bandwagon: Stephen's College, a women's college in Columbia, Missouri, allows for many household pets, including dogs, provided that they are vaccinated and under forty pounds.



And the SUNY at Canton in New York has provided a designated "pet wing," home to a variety of small caged animals and cats since 1996.



While animal companionship is largely viewed as a welcome addition to family homes, there are many roadblocks that have deterred Tufts from altering its pet policy.



"We don't have a policy that allows for dogs or cats or ferrets or monkeys -- you name it -- and ... the main reason is so many people have allergic reactions to animal dander," Dean of Student Affairs Bruce Reitman said. "It's one thing in a family, where everyone agrees that this is what they want and no one has an allergic reaction to the animal. But in a residence hall, where there is no such communication or agreement, it's hard and people are affected."



While Tufts students are currently not permitted to have more than a small fish tank in the dorm setting -- in addition to service animals -- this has not always been the case. During a failed experiment that ended around a decade ago, faculty members, residence directors and graduate teaching assistants were allowed to own pets in an attempt to encourage residence.



"We were trying to entice [people]to come live in the halls, and ... they wouldn't come unless you allowed the pets," Reitman said. "In order to pragmatically get [them] to come in, we said 'Okay, let's do this.' Then people said, 'No, this isn't fair, I can't live here.' Not many students complained, but enough did."



According to Dr. Margaret Higham, medical director of Health Services, the prevalence of allergies and asthma on campus would make a more lenient pet policy problematic. In addition, dorm cleanliness would be noticeably impaired by the allowance of pets, she said.



"Pets need to be taken care of ... Litter boxes need to be cleaned daily," Higham said. "The dorm rooms were not built with the need to ventilate for that type of situation. And what about fleas? Once they are introduced, they would spread rapidly through all of the furniture. I do not see students being able to care for animals adequately in the dorm setting."



Even without canines currently roaming the quad, there has been a modest history of animal neglect that calls into question a student's ability to provide for an animal properly.



"I think some fraternities in recent years did have animals," Reitman said. "There were concerns or complaints when spring break came along, because there is this animal, not cared for ...the animal activists came in here and said, 'That's no way to treat an animal,'" Reitman said. "A residence facility -- be it a sorority,

***

(CNN) -- Ena Zizi was participating in a prayer group at the national cathedral in Port-au-Prince, Haiti, when the structure came down on her during the 7.0-magnitude earthquake that hit the island on January 12.





In New York, meanwhile, her son, Maxim Janvier, had no way of knowing what befell her other than she was missing.





Miraculously, the 70-year-old Zizi survived seven days trapped under the rubble before she was rescued by international search crews this week. A person can, give or take, expect to survive 72 hours trapped without water or food. Zizi managed to hold on for twice as long, something that experts say speaks to the body's resilience in times of danger. It is possible for a healthy person to survive more than 10 days in some cases, experts say.





"I wasn't surprised. I knew she would live through that. She is a tough woman," Janvier said, recalling when he heard the news, via a CNN tip, that his mother had been found. Earlier, he had used CNN's Web site to enter his mother's name, age and approximate location in hope of someone identifying her.





Zizi has since been moved to a medical facility aboard the USS Bataan, and now her son is seeking help moving her to a hospital in Florida for further treatment.





"I haven't given up hope," Janvier told CNN. "It's God's sign to me that I will have another chance to see my mom."





A CNN crew captured video of Tuesday's rescue.





After hours of careful extraction by rescue crews from Germany, South Africa and Mexico, Zizi was carried from the rubble on a wooden board as she grasped the edges, her face covered in dust.





"Thank God! Thank God!" she exclaimed as she was pulled out, the video shows.





"Thanks to teamwork we were able to take this woman that prayed and prayed, and I believe that her faith that is so big was the thing that saved her," one of the Mexican rescuers said.  iReport: Search list of the missing and the found





Janvier said he has no doubt that his mother's faith played a role in her survival.





"Definitely, no question. Everyone was praying," he said.





By her side as Zizi was freed, her friends from the church cheered and prayed, Janvier said.





The next step in Zizi's recovery, however, remains unclear.               Full coverage  l   Twitter updates





The life-long Port-au-Prince resident was undergoing surgery aboard the USS Bataan, Janvier said. She was reported to have suffered a fractured femur in the quake.

***

(CNN)  -- A Malaysian model, who was set to become the first woman to be caned in the southeast Asian country for drinking beer in public, had her sentence postponed Monday until the end of the Islamic holy month of Ramadan.





Kartika Sari Dewi Shukarno's punishment is unique in that she has opted to go through with it.





Authorities had picked up Kartika Sari Dewi Shukarno, 32, from her father's house Monday morning and were taking her to a prison in the eastern state of Pahang when the van turned around and brought her back.





"They sent her back to the house. They said the top official asked them not to bring her to Kuala Lumpur," said Kartika's father, Shukarno Abdul Muttalib.





Authorities in Pahang said the delay would run until the month of fasting ends. Monday was the third day of Ramadan.





An Islamic, or sharia, court in Pahang had fined Kartika -- a Muslim -- $1,400 (5,000 Malaysian ringgit) and sentenced her to six strokes with a rattan cane for drinking at a hotel bar two years ago.





Kartika, a 32-year-old part-time model and mother of two, was visiting Malaysia from Singapore at the time.





She pleaded guilty, paid the fine, and wanted her caning to be carried out in public.  Watch more on Kartika's release »





She said she lost her job as a nurse in Singapore and took up part-time modeling to support her husband in raising their two children. Her son has cerebral palsy; her daughter a heart condition.





"I want to move on. This case has been hanging over me for a long time," she told CNN last week.





On Monday morning, Kartika hugged her children, bade a tearful goodbye to the throngs of people gathered at her father's house, and boarded the van.





She was to be taken to a prison on the outskirts of Kuala Lumpur. The caning would have been carried out within seven days of that, making her the first woman to be caned in Malaysia under sharia law.





Kartika's punishment is unique in that she has opted to go through with it. Two other Malaysians sentenced to the same fate have filed appeals, the Syariah (Sharia) Lawyers' Association of Malaysia said.





The case drew widespread attention and condemnation, in and outside Malaysia.





The moderate Muslim country has a dual-track justice system, in which Islamic courts operate alongside civil courts.





Muslims -- who make up about 60 percent of the 28 million who populate the country -- are forbidden from consuming alcohol. Other religious groups are exempt.





Though caning is used as a supplementary punishment in Malaysia for at least 40 crimes, such as rape or immigration violations, it is not meted out by Malaysia's civil court for alcohol consumption.





But the country's civil system also cannot overrule a sharia court sentence.





In this respect, Kartika would have been the first woman to be caned for violating the country's religious laws.





"Regardless of whether or not such penalties fall under Syariah law or civil law, we believe that these should be repealed, as they go against the fundamental human right to be free from torture and violence," said Haslinah Yaacob, vice president for the All Women's Action Society.





CNN's Anna Coren in Sungi Siput, Malaysia, contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- A Marine who survived being burned over more than 95 percent of his body in Iraq and established a charity to help burned children has died, the military has announced.



Sgt. Merlin German was 22.



He was severely wounded February 21, 2005, en route to Camp Ramadi when his Humvee hit a roadside bomb.



He was not expected to survive, but he was transported to Germany and then to Brooke Army Medical Center in Texas, which has the U.S. military's top burns unit.



He spent nine months in intensive care and underwent more than 100 operations.



German moved out of the hospital into his own home after 17 months of treatment.



He founded Merlin's Miracles, a charity that aims "to assist burned children and their families to take vacations, trips, outings or anything the families needed to make life a little easier," according to its Web site.



German died April 11 at Brooke Army Medical Center of complications after surgery.



"He beat all odds and then on top of that continued to serve as an inspiration and motivator for others," said Dr. Evan Renz, a critical-care surgeon who treated German.



"It is very difficult to describe the sense of loss. He endeared himself to all he came in contact with. It's really impossible to describe, except to say: Imagine the loss of dear family or friend."



Renz remembers being impressed with German from the start.



"This young man was clearly showing us signs he was going to fight through this from the very first minute," he said.



"There was consensus he was going to be a someone who would probably break some of the previous expectations about survivability. If someone was going to survive, he was going to be that individual." E-mail to a friend



CNN's Barbara Starr and Larry Shaugnessy contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- The crew members of a North Korean freighter regained control of their ship from pirates who hijacked the vessel off Somalia, but not without a deadly fight, the U.S. Navy reported Tuesday.

The USS James E. Williams ordered pirates to give up their weapons, the Navy says.

When the battle aboard the Dai Hong Dan was over, two pirates were dead and five were captured, the Navy said.

Three wounded crew members from the cargo ship were being treated aboard the guided-missile destroyer USS James E. Williams.

The captured pirates were being held aboard the North Korean vessel, the Navy said.

The bandits had seized the ship's bridge, while the crew kept control of the steering gear and engines, the Navy said.

The Koreans moved against the attackers after the Williams -- responding to reports of the hijacking -- ordered the pirates to give up their weapons, according to the Navy.

When the crew members stormed the bridge, the deadly battle began. After the crew regained control, Navy sailors boarded the Dai Hong Dan to help with the injured.

North Korea and the United States have no diplomatic relations.  Watch why the U.S. helped the North Koreans »

The incident took place about 70 miles northeast of the Somali capital, Mogadishu, the Navy said.

It is the second incident of piracy reported in recent days. A second U.S. Navy destroyer was searching waters off Somalia for pirates who hijacked a Japanese-owned ship, military officials said.

Over the weekend, gunmen aboard two skiffs hijacked the Panamanian-flagged Golden Nori off the Socotra archipelago near the Horn of Africa, said Andrew Mwangura, a spokesman for the Kenyan-based Seafarers' Assistance Program.

The guided-missile destroyer USS Arleigh Burke has been pursuing the pirates after entering Somali waters with the permission of the troubled transitional government in Mogadishu, U.S. officials said Monday. In recent years, warships have stayed outside the 12-mile limit when chasing pirates.

Two military officials familiar with the details confirmed the ongoing operation.

The Navy's pursuit of the pirates began Sunday night when the Golden Nori radioed for help. The Burke's sister ship, the USS Porter, opened fire and sank the pirate skiffs tied to the Golden Nori's stern before the Burke took over shadowing the hijacked vessel.

When the shots were fired, it was not known the ship was filled with highly flammable benzene. U.S. military officials indicate there is a great deal of concern about the cargo because it is so sensitive.

Benzene, which U.S. authorities have declared a known human carcinogen, is used as a solvent and to make plastics and synthetic fabrics.

Four other ships in the region remain in pirate hands, the Navy said.

U.S. and NATO warships have been patrolling off the Horn of Africa for years in an effort to crack down on piracy off Somalia, where a U.N.-backed transitional government is struggling to restore order after 15 years of near-anarchy.  See how piracy is worse than 2006 »

On Monday, the head of the transitional government resigned as his administration -- backed by Ethiopian troops -- battled insurgents from the Islamic movement that seized control of Mogadishu in 2006.

Hospital officials reported 30 dead in three days of clashes on the city's south side.

In June, the ship USS Carter Hall fired warning shots in an attempt to stop a hijacked Danish cargo ship off Somalia, but the American vessel turned away when the pirated ship entered Somali waters.

In May, a U.S. Navy advisory warned merchant ships to stay at least 200 miles off the Somali coast. But the U.S. Maritime Administration said pirates sometimes issue false distress calls to lure ships closer to shore.  See the warning area »

The pirates often are armed with automatic rifles and shoulder-fired rockets, according to a recent warning from the agency.

"To date, vessels that increase speed and take evasive maneuvers avoid boarding, while those that slow down are boarded, taken to the Somali coastline and released after successful ransom payment, often after protracted negotiations of as much as 11 weeks," the warning advised.

The

***

(CNN) -- The Tennessee man accused of selling the gun used to kill former NFL quarterback Steve McNair is in custody facing a federal charge of being a convicted felon in possession of a firearm, authorities said Friday.



Police say Adrian Gilliam admitted he sold Sahel Kazemi the gun she used to kill NFL quarterback Steve McNair.



"This is another example of what can happen with a gun when a felon is selling it on the street with little to no interest other than just selling it for 100 bucks," said Nashville, Tennessee, Police Chief Ronal Serpas.



Authorities said federal agents traced the gun used in the Fourth of July murder-suicide to Household Pawn in Nashville, which sold it in January 2002.



"Further investigation revealed the 9 mm pistol was later sold for approximately $100 to Adrian Gilliam approximately one to one and a half years ago," Nashville police said in a news release.



Gilliam, 33, of LaVergne, Tennessee, told detectives that on July 2 he sold the gun for about the same price to Sahel Kazemi outside a shopping mall.



Police said Kazemi, McNair's 20-year-old girlfriend, used the gun two days later to fatally shoot McNair -- a former Tennessee Titans quarterback and married father of four -- and herself in McNair's condominium in downtown Nashville.



Gilliam had been convicted of second-degree murder and attempted armed robbery in Florida in 1993, according to the new release, and those felony convictions meant that he could not legally be in possession of a firearm.



Along with Serpas, the announcement of the arrest was made by Edward M. Yarbrough, the U.S. attorney for the Middle District of Tennessee; James M. Cavanaugh, the Special Agent in Charge of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms & Explosives' Nashville Division; and Mark Gwyn, director of the Tennessee Bureau of Investigation.



CNN's Shelby Lin Erdman contributed to this report

***

(CNN)  -- A Russian heavy missile cruiser stopped three pirate ships off the coast of Somalia, and detained 10 pirates, according to a statement released Friday by Russian Navy headquarters in Moscow.





Russian missile cruiser "Peter the Great" moored in Cape Town, South Africa, last month.





The cruiser, Peter the Great, halted two small high-speed motor boats and a mid-size, support vessel on Thursday, the Russians said.





"Ten pirates have been detained. All of them are citizens of Somalia," the press release obtained by CNN stated.





"Officials from the Northern Fleet's military prosecutor's office are currently questioning the detainees aboard the Peter the Great. Their future will be decided in coordination with the Russian Foreign and Justice ministries."





The Russians said a Russian helicopter Ka-27, which took off from the cruiser, had located two small boats, which were moving toward an Iranian fishing vessel at high speed last Thursday.





When those in the boats spotted the helicopter overhead, the boats began slowing down, then veered off toward their support vessel, which was adrift nearby.





The helicopter crew could see pirates in the two motor boats throwing weapons into the sea, and kept chasing the boats until the Russian cruiser arrived in the area.





"The three boats were (captured and) delivered to the Peter the Great, and ten Somalian pirates were taken aboard.





"The detainees possessed weapons, including a G-3 rifle, an Ak-47, two AKMS machine-guns, two grenade-launchers and two anti-infantry grenades, and also had a GPS receiver, a ladder, 500 grams of drugs, a large amount of money, a bag of sugar and a bag of rice. The detained pirates were high on drugs," the press release said.





Meanwhile, Somali pirates have released a Panamanian-flagged, Japanese-owned vessel that was hijacked in the Gulf of Aden in November, according to a non-governmental group that monitors piracy.





The ship, named the MT Chemstar Venus, was released late Thursday, according to Ecoterra International.  See an interactive map of 2009 pirate attacks off the Horn of Africa »





The 18 Filipino and five South Korean crew members were reportedly unharmed.





The International Maritime Board, a group that also monitors piracy, told CNN that the company had not confirmed the release of the ship, but said shipping companies sometimes wait a few days before going public to ensure the safety of the crew.





The ship was hijacked on November 15. It was unclear whether the pirates were paid a ransom to release the ship.





This incident comes a week after Somali pirates released a Ukrainian ship carrying tanks, ammunition and crew after receiving a ransom of $3.2 million.





-- CNN's David McKenzie contributed to this report.

***

MADRID, Spain (CNN) -- Barack Obama sometimes gets ribbed for his outsized ideas, like the massive stage built in Denver, Colorado, to accept the Democratic presidential nomination. But an artist in Barcelona, Spain, may be about to outdo the candidate himself.



Large-format sketches have long been a focus of artist Jorge Rodriguez-Gerada's work.



The artist plans to create a gigantic face of Obama sculpted from gravel and sand, which will cover nearly 2.5 acres (1 hectare) of Barcelona beachfront before the U.S. elections.



"The size of the piece is intrinsic to its value," the artist, Jorge Rodriguez-Gerada, said Saturday.



He hopes it will be big enough to be seen on Google Earth.



"Obama's personality -- his youth, personal history and message of a new politics -- has fused with the historical moment to create someone larger than life," says the artist's dossier about the work, titled "Expectation."



The huge size also alludes "to the global impact of this election," the dossier adds. iReport.com: What do you want to ask Sen. Obama?



Rodriguez-Gerada, 42, is a Cuban-born American who grew up in North Plainfield, New Jersey, near New York, and now lives in Barcelona.



The artist, who has long focused on large-format sketches and other designs, said he had been planning to put an anonymous face on Barcelona's Mediterranean beachfront but shelved the idea. Then, six weeks ago, he decided it should be Obama's face.



"Everybody's doing work about Obama," he said. "I was talking to my wife about the importance of this election internationally. It all came together."



The idea, that is. The execution of the project is still a work in progress, but with a lot of help pouring in.



The artist has created what he calls a "vectored image" from different photos of Obama, showing the candidate's face looking left over his shoulder.



He will use 500 tons of material -- mainly gravel but also sand and possibly some soil in black, brown and white tones -- to create the image on a flat piece of land slightly raised and overlooking the Mediterranean, near downtown Barcelona.



The artist and a Barcelona newspaper say the city has temporarily ceded use of the land for the project.



The portrait of Obama's face will be 445 feet long by 264 feet wide (139.28 by 82.67 meters) and the artist hopes to have it done by late next week or no later than November 3, the day before the U.S. elections.



The materials have been donated, along with bulldozers and their drivers. The crews will initially spread the materials along white lines, and other markers that will be laid out according to the sketch.



Then, the artist's technical team will direct volunteers with garden rakes to put the final touches on the materials, making sure the various colors are spread properly on the ground in order to depict Obama's eyes, hair, cheeks and collar, according to the plans.



Rodriguez-Gerada said he'll need to raise about $18,700 (15,000 euros) for other costs, such as rakes and gloves for volunteers, documentation, even portable toilets for the crew.



He said it's his "biggest work ever, in scale and complexity."



He's a self-described political independent until recently, when he joined Democrats Abroad in Spain. But he added that the art project is his alone, without help from any political organization or campaign, and he won't be paid for it.



Rodriguez-Gerada said this project also aims to address the issue of "trying to find heroes with empathy for the problems of the world. We really need empathy from Barack Obama. There's a need to do positive things for the future."



Obama's giant face would be environmentally friendly, with all natural colors, so the materials could be recycled, the artist said.



Rodriguez-Gerada's not sure how long the face would remain in place

***

KABUL, Afghanistan (CNN)  -- Babies lie side by side in warming beds or sprawled on blankets atop crude wooden tables.



Many families at Indira Gandhi Children's Hospital in Kabul, Afghanistan, seem resigned to the situation.



Children with wounds and broken bones are carried in by their parents to wait on stiff plastic chairs.



Outside, coughing youngsters squat on the pavement with their anxious families, waiting for care.



And everywhere, parents clutch plastic bags containing bring-your-own medicines and supplies.



For though they are all awaiting treatment at Afghanistan's only specialist pediatric hospital, the hospital cannot even afford bandages for its patients.



The Indira Gandhi Children's Hospital in central Kabul has to run on an operating budget of less than $1,200 a month, said Dr. Noorulhaq Yousufzai, the hospital director.



The few supplies that he can buy have to be hoarded for emergencies, and he has to count on parents to buy what's needed to care for their children.



"In some cases, there is shortage of the surgical materials, and sometimes we don't have antiseptic to use," Yousufzai said.



The United Nations says that more than $15 billion in aid has been sent to Afghanistan since the U.S.-led coalition overthrew the Taliban in late 2001. But still, the hospital cannot afford to help the hundreds of children who stream in every day, desperate for care and cures.



The government does pay for salaries and sometimes for fuel, but there is often a shortage of even basic supplies like syringes.



Doctors say they have to double up premature babies in incubators. And some of those incubators are compromised. On a recent day, a plastic surgical mask taped onto one machine was the only shield from infection.  Watch scenes from inside the hospital »



The parents waiting anxiously beside their sick children seem resigned to the situation in the hospital. One mother, who declined to give her name, said she spent the family's entire weekly income of $8 on an injection that did not help her baby.



"This is something that the hospital should be giving us, because we can't afford it," she said.



The U.S. Agency for International Development says infant mortality has dropped by 22 percent since the overthrow of the Taliban but acknowledges that the health status for Afghans is among the worst in the world.



One in every five Afghan children will die before their 5th birthday, often of a preventable disease, according to the Save the Children aid agency.



The toll on the children and parents is clear to any visitor, and the strain hits the hospital staff, too.



"When you see a patient is very, very, sick and you cannot help, and they have to provide something for their children and they are not able to provide, it's also a stress for us," Yousufzai said.



At the end of 2001, there were hopes that the hospital would be upgraded, but it is still waiting. It needs some acute care of its own, or it will continue to struggle to help the children who arrive at its door pleading for care.

***

(CNN) -- Mexican President Felipe Calderon announced the resignations Tuesday of three high-level government officials, most notably Communications and Transport Secretary Luis Tellez Kuenzler.

The government of Mexican President Felipe Calderon, seen here in January, is facing elections in July.

Abraham Gonzalez, a key official for the powerful ministry that oversees Mexico's government, also resigned. So did Sergio Vela Martinez, president of the National Council for Culture and the Arts.

No official reasons were given for any of the resignations, which analysts said did not appear to be related. But at least two of the resignations did not come as a surprise.

Tellez, who stepped down from a Cabinet-level post, had been involved for weeks in a controversy over taped comments revealed last month by CNN journalist Carmen Aristegui.

In the taped conversation, Tellez said former Mexican President Carlos Salinas de Gortari had stolen government money. Salinas has not been formally accused of any crime.

Tellez received an anonymous threat in late February from an apparent political enemy telling him to resign or more damaging audiotapes would be released to the media. He refused and turned the matter over to authorities.

Ana Maria Salazar Slack, a political analyst who is host of a daily radio show in Mexico City, called it "an almost soap opera-ish scandal" that left Calderon little choice but to force Tellez to resign.

"Although Calderon wanted to keep him in office, it made it very difficult to keep him there," she said.

Calderon moved Tellez to a post as a presidential aide dealing with economic matters.

Other observers also were not surprised by the move.

"That was waiting to happen," said Andrew Selee, director of the Mexico Institute at the Washington-based Woodrow Wilson Center. "But evidently the president values his counsel and has kept him in a high-profile position in the presidency from which he'll continue to have influence."

Robert Pastor, the Latin America national security adviser for President Jimmy Carter in the 1970s, praised Tellez but said political considerations prevailed.

"He's a very competent fellow," Pastor said. "One of the most competent people I've known in Mexico. But this tape in particular was very embarrassing."

In a televised news conference after Calderon announced the changes, Tellez expressed his "gratitude for this opportunity that few Mexicans obtain."

Replacing Tellez will be Juan Molinar Horcasitas, the head of the Mexican Institute for Social Security.

Molinar belongs to the same party as Calderon, the National Action Party [PAN], while Tellez belongs to the opposition Institutional Revolutionary Party [PRI]. That played a role, Slack said.

"The president is sending a signal to his party that he's going to support people from his own party," Slack said. "Beyond the political scandals of the tapes, there's a decision for the president to appoint people very close to the party."

Gonzalez's departure was not a surprise either, since he is running for a congressional seat in July and Mexican law requires him to resign.

Analysts spoke highly of Gonzalez's replacement, Geronimo Gutierrez Fernandez. He had been the top person in the foreign ministry for Latin and North America.

"Gutierrez moving in is outstanding," the Mexico Institute's Selee said, calling him "one of the smartest people ... I've met" and "an impressive guy."

Consuelo Saizar Guerrero takes over as head of the National Council for Culture and the Arts, replacing Vela, whose reasons for resigning were not disclosed. Saizar previously served as head of the Economic Culture Fund, the government's book-publishing enterprise.

The arts and culture post will play a significant role in 2010, when Mexico celebrates 100 years of its social revolution and 200 years of its declaration of independence, radio analyst Slack said.

As for the timing of resignations from three key posts, Slack linked it to Mexico's election calendar.

"In order to understand these changes," she said, "you have to understand there are midterm elections in July.

***

(CNN) -- Key West's historic Duval Street reopened Monday morning after a fire swept through a building housing three well-known businesses and temporarily shut down other popular spots on the island city's main street.



A fire broke out late Sunday night on Duval Street in Key West.



The fire, which started at about 10:30 p.m. Sunday and was contained by 1 a.m. Monday, wiped out a crepe shop, an art gallery and a sign shop. Two firefighters suffered minor injuries, city spokeswoman Alyson Crean said.



The fire department was working Monday to determine the cause of the blaze, Crean said.



Singer Jimmy Buffet's Margaritaville restaurant and store was one of the businesses initially shut down, halting late-night festivities at the popular watering hole in mid-pour.



"I was hoping to go back in, finish off my shift and clean up, but they wouldn't let us back in," said waitress Patricija Hambrook. "It became bigger than we thought.



"We couldn't close out checks, and the drinks we made were never served."



Margaritaville's restaurant reopened Monday afternoon, and its adjacent retail store reopened a few hours later, the fire department said.



In addition to protecting Margaritaville, firefighters kept flames away from the historic San Carlos theater, although the facility's administrator said that a large broken out window and about 2 inches of water on the floor of the lobby would keep it closed for a few days.



Alex Pascual said he anticipated the theater would reopen by Thursday, in time for a concert scheduled for that evening.



The San Carlos was founded in 1871 and was the site of Cuban patriot Jose Marti's 1892 speech launching his drive for Cuban independence.



Fire officials initially shut down Duval Street to vehicular traffic but allowed pedestrians to stroll the sidewalks. Traffic restrictions prompted some business owners to be concerned about their livelihoods, at least for the short term.



Robert Porter, assistant manager of Crazy Shirts, was concerned early Monday "because there aren't any cars driving through."



But Banana Republic general manager Darren Paugh said the foot traffic and onlookers curious to see the aftermath of the fire "should increase business for the day." Plus, he said, three cruise ships were in port Monday morning.



And Crean indicated life for tourists won't stop in Key West because of the fire.



"We have a lot of spring breakers on vacation and bikers coming from Bike Week in Daytona," Crean said.



All the concern proved unfounded when officials reopened Duval Street at about 10 a.m. Monday morning.



For the owners of the three businesses that took the brunt of the fire, however, it will be some time before it's business as usual.



"It's a big loss for us. And we worked so hard, it's not fair," said La Creperie Cafe owner Yolande Findlay in a story published on the Keynoter newspaper's Web site Monday. Findlay, according to the paper's Web site, opened the popular crepe shop with her partner, Sylvie Lenouail, six years ago. Both are from Brittany, France.



The American Royal Art gallery, which specialized in entertainment art, and the sign shop Montage were destroyed in the fire.

***

Kabul, Afghanistan (CNN) -- An Afghan employee of the U.S. Embassy in Afghanistan who opened fire at a CIA annex there worked as part of a local guard force, a U.S. official said Monday.





Embassy spokesman Gavin Sundwall said the lone gunman killed a U.S. citizen and wounded another in the shootings Sunday. The wounded American was evacuated to a military hospital with injuries that were not life-threatening.





Security personnel used a flash-bang round to stun the shooter and then killed him, according to another U.S. official who earlier provided details of the incident.





The gunman shot indiscriminately, and he is not believed to have targeted the victims, the second U.S. official said. One or two civilians suffered minor wounds as people went running for cover, the official added.





The American killed was a CIA employee, according to a third U.S. official. The official said the gunman fired toward the building but never entered it.





All the sources spoke on condition of not being identified.





The FBI is investigating the attack, along with other U.S. agencies and local authorities, a U.S. official said.





Another official said the FBI is the lead agency in the investigation. CIA and diplomatic security officials also are involved.





The first U.S. official said the shooter "is believed to have worked as part of the local guard force" and added that no motive has been established.





Investigators are looking into whether the shooter was a disgruntled employee or whether he was inspired by militants.





All Afghan employees go through a background security check and must pass through a metal detector each time they enter the Embassy, the second official said.





"We have no information as to whether the individual was authorized to carry a weapon or if he seized a weapon," the official said.





Afghan troops guard the outer perimeter of the Embassy, while embassy contractors and members of the U.S. military guard the inside.





The CIA building is several hundred yards from the Embassy compound and has its own entrance and security, according to another U.S. official.





Embassy personnel usually travel in armored cars for meetings in the CIA facility.





"It's not possible to stop everything from happening. You can only limit it, make it highly unlikely," said the official, who also spoke on condition of anonymity. "The job of soldiers and diplomats and spies is to be amongst the people, getting work done. You have to have some level of trust to get anything done."





"There is a calculated risk" for U.S. personnel working in countries like Afghanistan, the official said.





The annex area is known as a place where Embassy personnel both live and work, some in intelligence operations. A CIA spokeswoman declined to comment on the attack.





Afghanistan has been the site of several high-profile attacks of late, including strikes at the NATO headquarters and the U.S. Embassy in Kabul and the assassination of former Afghan President Burhanuddin Rabbani. Rabbani had been leading efforts for reconciliation talks.





The latest shooting is not believed to be related to any other recent attacks in Kabul, U.S. officials said.





In December 2009, a Jordanian informant detonated a suicide bomb at a CIA base in Khost, Afghanistan, killing seven CIA employees and two others.





A CIA review of the incident found that some people within the CIA and the Jordanian intelligence service were skeptical about the attacker's reliability, but those concerns had not been passed on to officers on the base.





CNN's Barbara Starr, Nick Paton Walsh, Carol Cratty and Pam Benson contributed to this report.

***

WASHINGTON  (CNN) -- Sen. Barack Obama raised more than $40 million from more than 442,000 donors in March, his presidential campaign announced Thursday.



Sen. Barack Obama greets campaign volunteers during a stop in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, Wednesday.



More than 218,000 of the donors were giving for the first time, the campaign said.



The figures are estimates, a campaign spokesman said. "We're still calculating."



Sources in Sen. Hillary Clinton's campaign said the New York senator raised $20 million in March.



Impressive as the $40 million figure is, it is well below the $55 million Obama raised in February. Clinton, Obama's rival for the Democratic nomination, raised about $35 million in February.



Political analysts say this kind of fundraising power catches the attention of voters.



"They add to the so-called 'bandwagon effect' -- the sense that Obama is building, that he's going to be the nominee," said Stu Rothenberg of the Rothenberg Political Report.



With its March totals, the Obama campaign has raised approximately $234 million, which surpasses the Democratic record of $215 million that 2004 nominee Sen. John Kerry raised in that presidential primary season.



Obama is $25 million shy of President Bush's presidential primary fundraising record of $259 million, set in his uncontested campaign in 2004.



Obama raised $194 million through the end of February. Official fundraising tallies for March are due to the Federal Election Commission by April 20.



Clinton raised $156 million through the end of February.



The Clinton campaign said Thursday morning it would not release March figures until required to file its FEC report, two days before the critical Pennsylvania primary April 22.



But later, campaign sources provided the figures, which show March to be Clinton's second-highest fund-raising month for the campaign.



A Clinton spokesman downplayed the importance of Obama's fundraising total.



"We knew that he was going to out-raise us. He has out-raised us for the last several months," Howard Wolfson said after Obama's figures were released. "We will have the resources that we need to compete and be successful in the upcoming primary states."



Wolfson also said he expected Clinton's tax returns to be released soon.



Clinton pledged March 25 she would release her returns within a week.



Sen. John McCain, the expected Republican nominee, raised $11 million in February. He has not announced his March total. E-mail to a friend



CNN's Rebecca Sinderbrand and Rob Yoon contributed to this report.

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- For years, Russian arms dealer Viktor Bout made millions of dollars delivering weapons and ammunition to warlords and militants, officials say.



On Thursday, Bout and his associate, Andrew Smulian, were arrested in Thailand after a series of events that officials said could have come straight out of a spy novel.



The men's capture involved law enforcement agencies from at least five countries, including two undercover agents from the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration posing as Colombian rebels.



Bout and Smulian are accused of conspiracy to provide surface-to-air missiles and other weapons to Colombian rebels, said Michael Garcia, U.S. attorney for the Southern District of New York.



In a complaint filed by a DEA agent, they are said to have conspired to sell millions of dollars worth of weapons to the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC.



The U.S. Department of State designated the group as a foreign terrorist organization in 2003.



"This marks the end of the reign of one of the world's most-wanted arms traffickers," Garcia said of Bout.



"Someone will undoubtedly write a book about this case someday, and I can tell you that it will read like the very best work of Tom Clancy, only in this case, it won't be fiction," said Michael Braun, assistant administrator and chief of operations for the DEA.



Secret meetings



The operation began in January, when Smulian began meeting with two men who claimed to represent FARC but who were actually confidential sources working for the DEA.



The men expressed interest in buying millions of dollars worth of weapons.



At meetings in the Netherlands Antilles, Denmark and Romania, Smulian discussed the details and logistics of the arms deal with the two agents. At one meeting, the agents were given a digital memory stick containing an article about Bout and documents containing photos and specifications for 100 surface-to-air missiles and armor-piercing rocket launchers.



Smulian explained that a delivery system was in place that would allow the weapons to be air-dropped into Colombia, and he told the men that it would cost $5 million to transport the weapons.



During one meeting, Smulian introduced the DEA sources to Bout over the phone.



After that conversation, Smulian told one of the sources that the weapons were ready in Bulgaria. Smulian and Bout set up a face-to-face meeting with them to finalize the deal, and that is what happened Thursday.



The arrests were made Thursday afternoon.



The charges against Bout and Smulian cover the period from November through February, according to a written statement from the U.S. attorney's office and the DEA.



The United States plans to pursue the extradition of Bout from Thailand, the statement said. There was no mention of Smulian's fate.



Bout and Smulian are charged with conspiracy to provide material support or resources to a designated foreign terrorist organization. If convicted, each could get a maximum sentence of 15 years in prison, the statement said.



'I'm not a diamond guy'



Intelligence agencies around the world have tracked Bout for years. Although some of his work has been legitimate, most has not.



He has made deliveries to Africa, Asia and the Mideast using obsolete or surplus Soviet-era cargo planes.



Bout, a former Soviet air force officer who speaks multiple languages, has what is reputed to be the largest private fleet of Soviet-era cargo aircraft in the world, according to U.S. officials.



He acquired the planes shortly after the breakup of the Soviet Union, the U.S. Department of the Treasury said in 2005.



At that time, the U.S. Treasury announced that it was freezing the assets of Bout and his associates, who are all tied to former Liberian President Charles Taylor.



Taylor is being tried on war crimes charges by the Special Court for Sierra Leone.



Intelligence officials said Bout shipped large quantities of small arms to civil wars across Africa and Asia, often taking diamonds in payment from West African fighters.



A 2006 article in Foreign Policy magazine said that although Bout served many third-world leaders

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- President Obama on Wednesday signed a measure awarding the 300 surviving Women Airforce Service Pilots from World War II the Congressional Gold Medal.



Jane Tedeschi when she was in the Women Airforce Service Pilots program. The WASPs were formed in 1942.



The bill passed by both chambers of Congress bestows one of the nation's highest civilian honors on the group known as WASPs more than 60 years after they were the first women to fly U.S. military aircraft.



"The Women Airforce Service Pilots courageously answered their country's call in a time of need while blazing a trail for the brave women who have given and continue to give so much in service to this nation since," Obama said in a statement. "Every American should be grateful for their service, and I am honored to sign this bill to finally give them some of the hard-earned recognition they deserve."



The Women Airforce Service Pilots was formed in 1942 to create a corps of female pilots able to fill all types of flying jobs at home, freeing male military pilots to travel to the war front.



The 1,100 members had to pay their own way to Texas for months of rigorous training.



Once assigned to military bases, they did everything from participating in ground-to-air anti-aircraft practice; to towing targets for air-to-air gunnery practice with live ammunition; to flying drones; to conducting night exercises; to testing repaired aircraft before they were used in cadet training; to serving as instructors and transporting cargo and male pilots to embarkation points.



Overall, they flew more than 60 million miles in every type of aircraft -- from the PT-17 and AT-6 trainers, to fast attack planes like the A-24 and A-25 and heavy bombers such as B-17 and B-29s.



Paid $250 a month, the women were not officially part of the military -- receiving no benefits, no honors.



Jane Tedeschi, who graduated in May 1944, was sent to a Selma, Alabama, base that did engineering work.



"We did whatever they asked us," she recalled in a CNN interview. "You knew enough about flying you could adapt. ... Sometimes it was a little tougher."



While the work was technically noncombat, it could be dangerous. Thirty-eight of the women pilots were killed.



As the war was winding down in December 1944, the program was closed with no recognition from the government and not much help for the women who served.



They went off to restart their prewar lives, but without getting any of the help received by male veterans.



Several of the women, however, have said they were not bitter since the only reason they had signed up was to do their part for the country.



They noted they were just like the thousands of other women who also learned new skills and went to work in the factories to replace male workers sent off to war.



"We were proud of what we did, and the war was over. It was time to get on," Tedeschi said.  Watch Tedeschi recall WWII »



But many Americans were not aware of their efforts. The WASP records were sealed for more than 30 years. In 1977, Congress voted to make the WASPs eligible for veterans benefits.

***

Miami, Florida (CNN) -- A 15-year-old boy who was burned over 65 percent of his body in October, allegedly by a group of teenagers he knew, has been readmitted to a Miami hospital after he had trouble breathing, a hospital spokeswoman said Monday.





Michael Brewer "had complications with his breathing and is now back in the ICU," said Lorraine Nelson, spokeswoman for Jackson Memorial Hospital. Brewer was admitted to Jackson Memorial's Holtz Children's Hospital on Sunday night and is in serious condition, she said.





It was not known whether Brewer's condition was related to his severe burns. He was released from Jackson Memorial's burn unit December 22, more than two months after the October 12 incident.





"He had been doing very well. He had been going to physical therapy and doing well, but things happen," Nelson told CNN.





At the time he was discharged from the burn unit, Dr. Louis Pizano, associate director of the burn center, told reporters, "From what happened in the beginning, we would have predicted probably six months, at least, in the hospital. And it is miraculous."





Brewer had three skin graft surgeries during his stay in the burn unit and was on a ventilator for almost the entire first month.





Three teenagers have been charged as adults with attempted murder in connection with the incident. Detectives said eyewitnesses told them that 16-year-old Jesus Mendez used a lighter to set fire to Brewer after Denver Jarvis, 15, allegedly poured alcohol over him, and that Matthew Bent, also 15, allegedly encouraged the attack. Detectives said Mendez admitted that he set Brewer on fire and that he made a "bad decision," according to an arrest transcript.





The three face a maximum sentence of up to 30 years in prison if convicted. Two other boys who were allegedly involved, a 13-year-old and 15-year-old, have not been charged in the attack.





A court-appointed psychologist who examined two of the five boys allegedly involved in the attack told CNN they are competent to proceed and assist their attorney.





Detectives believe that Brewer owed Bent $40 for a video game. When Brewer did not pay, police said, Bent stole Brewer's father's bicycle, then was arrested when Brewer reported him to the police.





The next day, police believe, the group sought out Brewer. Witnesses reported the group called him "a snitch" as they set him on fire.





Witnesses have said Brewer jumped into a pool to put out the flames.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN)  -- A missile shield test was a "smashing success," Pentagon officials said Friday, despite the failure of the test to put to rest concerns that the interceptor might not be able to differentiate between real missiles and decoys.

Eight of the United States' 13 missile defense tests have been deemed a success.

The ground-based interceptor missile, launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, destroyed a long-range ballistic missile launched from Kodiak, Alaska, the Defense Department's Missile Defense Agency said.

But one key aspect of the test -- to see whether the system could tell the difference between a missile and a decoy aimed at confounding its "seek" systems -- failed because the decoy did not deploy.

Officials told CNN on Thursday that Friday's test would be the most realistic of 13 missile shield system tests conducted to date. Eight of the 13 tests have now been deemed a success by the Pentagon.  Watch a Pentagon spokesman explain the Friday's problem Â»

This was the first test in which a crew at an alternate fire control center in Alaska remotely launched the interceptor missile from California.

The "initial indications," according to the Defense Department, are that all components of Friday's test performed as designed.

Critics have long complained that the tests are not realistic because they don't involve balloons or other simple decoys that, they argue, could easily fool the interceptor.  Watch a report on the defense system Â»

In Friday's test, however, the target was a mock warhead and was supposed to be accompanied by "countermeasures similar to what Iran or North Korea could deploy," according to a missile defense agency official. The intention was for the interceptor's kill vehicle to distinguish the target from the decoys.

But the decoy that was supposed to deploy to test the system did not. The Pentagon blamed a 40-year-old target system.

"Countermeasures are very difficult to deploy. We have had trouble deploying them in the past," said Lt. Gen. Patrick J. O'Reilly, director for the Missile Defense Agency. But O'Reilly said that the interceptor did differentiate between the actual missile target and the upper stage of the missile it had detached from.

The test, which had been delayed several times, comes at a crucial time for the $100 billion system, as President-elect Barack Obama is about to take office.

Early in his campaign, Obama pledged to "cut investments in unproven missile defense systems." But he later said he would support missile defense systems if they work.

"The biggest threat to the United States is a terrorist getting their hands on nuclear weapons," Obama said in the September 26 presidential debate.

"And we are spending billions of dollars on missile defense. And I actually believe that we need missile defense, because of Iran and North Korea and the potential for them to obtain or to launch nuclear weapons."

Friday's test also showed the Pentagon that multiple sensor systems were able to network together and hone in on a single object, O'Reilly said.

"All those sensors working together, at any one time the system knew which sensor was reporting what and tracking it and gave the war fighter one presentation of a target," O'Reilly said soon after the test was finished. "That was one tremendous accomplishment for us."

Last month, the outgoing head of the Missile Defense Agency said that not only are U.S. missile defenses workable, they are up and running.

"Our testing has shown not only can we hit a bullet with a bullet, we can hit a spot on the bullet with a bullet. The technology has caught up," Lt. Gen. Trey Obering said.

CNN's Jamie McIntyre and Adam Levine contributed to this report

***

WASHINGTON (CNN)  -- U.S. Rep. Patrick J. Kennedy has checked into an unnamed medical facility for help with his recovery from substance abuse, the Rhode Island Democrat said in a statement Friday.



"I have decided to temporarily step away from my normal routine," Rep. Patrick J. Kennedy says in a statement.



In May 2006, Kennedy, the son of Sen. Edward Kennedy, was admitted to the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, a day after slamming his car into a security barricade on Capitol Hill.



At the time, Kennedy said he had been suffering from addictions and depression since he was a young man.



"I have always said that recovery is a life-long process and that I will do whatever it takes to preserve my health," Kennedy, 41, wrote in Friday's release.



"In consultation with my doctors, I have decided to temporarily step away from my normal routine to ensure that I am being as vigilant as possible in my recovery. I hope that in some small way my decision to be proactive and public in my efforts to remain healthy can help remove the stigma that has served as a barrier for many Americans reluctant to get the help they need."



A Democratic aide declined to say what facility is providing treatment or how long Kennedy might be there.



Kennedy left for treatment earlier this week, said a close associate who didn't want to be identified.



Since the 2006 incident, the associate said, Kennedy often goes to the Mayo Clinic for one- or two-day stints without anyone knowing.



This time, Kennedy and his aides realized the stay would be longer and more aggressive and decided to put out a statement.



There was no "culminating event" this time, the associate said, and he did not think it was related to Edward Kennedy's ongoing battle with brain cancer.



"He's human," the source said of Patrick Kennedy. "He has good days and bad days. This is a part of his effort to make sure there are more good days than bad days."



CNN's Dana Bash contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- New Yorkers feasted on the stories when the news broke in 2006: Brooke Astor, a socialite and megaphilanthropist with Alzheimer's, had allegedly been swindled of millions and mistreated by her own son.



Brooke Astor and grandson Philip Marshall outside her New York country estate, Holly Hill, in 2001 or 2002.



Anthony "Tony" Marshall, her only child, was indicted on criminal charges including grand larceny, possession of stolen property, forgery and conspiracy.



Jury selection for the criminal trial was scheduled to begin Monday. But co-defendant Francis Morrissey's attorney filed an 11th-hour motion to sever his client's trial from Marshall's.



The motion was denied late Friday, and a new trial date has been set for March 2. Morrissey, Marshall's former lawyer, faces charges including forgery and scheming to defraud.



A lawyer representing Marshall, Fred Hafetz, would say only that there would be "no plea" and that he hopes his client will "be vindicated."  Watch author Meryl Gordon discuss the case »



The trial is likely to resuscitate the tabloid feeding frenzy, which has fostered headlines such as "Bad heir day," "Mrs. Astor's disaster" and "DA's kick in the Astor."



It's not the way those closest to Astor want to remember her. And the disclosures expected to spill forth from the witness stand aren't the type that Astor, who died in August 2007 at 105, would want shared in public.



"She would have been mortified," said Vartan Gregorian, a longtime friend and president of the Carnegie Corporation of New York. "She was very private."



Through her late husband's Vincent Astor Foundation, Astor was credited with giving New York, where the Astors made their fortune, about $200 million. And although she felt it was expected of her to be proper and elegant, Gregorian said, her wealth didn't define her.



Talk of money, real estate and other people's misfortunes were off-limits at her dinner parties, he said. "She was not ostentatious. ... She was very funny, very witty and very caring."



When a would-be robber accosted her, she foiled the holdup attempt with this response: " 'Excuse me. My name is Mrs. Astor. I don't think we've been properly introduced,' " Gregorian remembered with a laugh.



For 23 years, Linda Gillies directed the Astor Foundation and witnessed her hands-on approach to doing good -- not just for her "crown jewels," which included the Metropolitan Museum of Art and the New York Public Library, but also for lower-profile programs.



Astor was often quoted as saying, "Money is like manure; it's not worth a thing unless it's spread around." But for her, again, it wasn't just about the money.



Betty Cooper Wallerstein, a community organizer who benefited from Astor's help in saving 2,500 low-income apartments on Manhattan's Upper East Side, described Astor as being equally comfortable mingling with tenants as she was in high society.



She remembered attending Astor's 90th birthday party and being struck by the diversity of the crowd waiting to get inside. Around her were elected officials, the social elite, big names such as Henry Kissinger as well as Astor's staff members and activists such as herself.



"She was as lovely to me as she was to the dignitaries who were there," Wallerstein said. "It was such a beautiful and democratic line."



Many close friends and staff members would not speak to CNN, as they will be testifying in the trial or will be involved in a later suit to contest Astor's will, which her son is said to have changed. But those who did speak were quick to share memories they'll always hold dear.



The tears came quickly when Carmine Fasciani, 73, remembered Astor.



The one-time police detective sergeant, whom Astor always called Sergeant, said he handled security and later served as the full-time head of staff at

***

Washington (CNN) -- Idaho on Wednesday became the first state to pass a law saying no thanks to part of President Obama's health care proposal.





The Idaho Health Care Freedom Act says in part, "every person within the state of Idaho is and shall be free to choose or decline to choose any mode of securing health care services without penalty or threat of penalty."





Gov. C.L. "Butch" Otter, a Republican, said Wednesday he signed it because he believes any health care laws should ensure people are "treated as an individual, rather than as an amorphous mass whose only purpose in this world is to obey federal mandates."





Several other states may follow suit.





The governor of Virginia is expected to sign a bill passed in his state last week, and according to American Legislative Exchange Council, similar proposals have made it through one chamber of the legislatures in Missouri, Oklahoma and Tennessee. While such bills have recently failed in six states, 22 additional states have seen proposals introduced.





These state laws would directly conflict with the national health care bill that Democrats are trying to pass, which includes a requirement that all individuals get health coverage or face a tax penalty.





Several legal analysts said if Congress enacts a national health care law, it would supersede any state laws written to block them.





"I think most of the states that are passing these laws understand that they can't trump federal law with state law," said Professor Jonathan Siegel at George Washington University Law School. "But what they get out of it is symbolic effect. They're sending a message to the federal politicians that they don't like the health care mandate."





Such state laws might not be the only legal challenge to Democratic health care legislation.





Florida Attorney General Bill McCollum, a Republican, on Tuesday sent a letter to the other 49 state attorneys general, asking them to join him "in preparing a legal challenge to the constitutionality of whatever individual mandate provision emerges, immediately upon the legislation becoming law."





States have previously challenged federal laws and regulations in areas aside from health care.





Five states have passed a Firearms Freedom Act, according to firearmsfreedomact.com, including Montana, Wyoming, South Dakota, Tennessee and Utah. The law declares that any guns that are manufactured and kept in-state are not subject to federal gun laws passed by Congress under interstate commerce authority, because the guns never crossed state lines.





A number of states have also passed laws trying to wrest more control from Washington over issues such as how public lands are used or how a state's National Guard forces are deployed overseas, according to the 10th Amendment Center, which advocates for states' rights.





While such laws may face an uphill path in court, supporters describe them as a sign of public opinion, which can still have impact.





They point to last year's announcement of federal policy on medicinal marijuana, after 14 states passed laws to allow its use. While federal drug law makes no exception to allow medicinal use of marijuana, Attorney General Eric Holder said in October that prosecuting the use of medicinal marijuana users wouldn't be a priority.





He said the Justice Department would instead "effectively focus our resources on serious drug traffickers, while taking into account state and local laws."





CNN's Brian Todd and Eric Weisbrod contributed to this report.

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- To understand how close Kanye West and his mother, Donda, were, one only needs to listen to his music.



Donda and Kanye West, here during her book tour, were very close.



He regularly made reference to her in his lyrics, discussing everything from her insistence that he receive a college degree to her unshakeable support of him when he ultimately decided to pursue a rap career.



Donda West, who died at 58 over the weekend, appeared to be as tough as she was loving.



On "Can't Tell Me Nothing," a track from his latest album, "Graduation," he rhymes about his mother's attempt to discourage him from spending money on jewelry and "Louis V." On "Touch the Sky," from his 2005 album, "Late Registration," he recalls how his mother drove him from Chicago, Illinois, to New York in a U-Haul van. (Read the obituary of Donda West.)



She was also the inspiration for the song "Hey Mama," from the same album. "I want to scream so loud for you/ because I'm so proud of you," he rhymes. "I know I act a fool/ but I promise you I'm going back to school/ I appreciate what you allowed for me and I just want you to be proud of me."  Watch how Kanye West is mourning his mother »



Donda West was indeed proud. She regularly attended her son's concerts and often could be found dancing and rapping his more radio-friendly lyrics.  Watch Donda West talk about "Raising Kanye" »



At the MTV Video Music Awards in September, she and a gaggle of girlfriends were perched in the VIP section at a party for Rolling Stone magazine. As Kanye West whipped the crowd into a frenzy with hits such as "Gold Digger" and "Through the Wire," his mom waved her hands in the air side to side and bobbed to the beats.



When asked if her son would sell more records than 50 Cent (both rappers released their albums on September 11), she answered coyly.



"Good music will win out," she said with a smile and a wink. (Her son's label is named Good Music.)  Gallery: Donda and Kanye »



"Graduation" would go on to trounce 50 Cent's "Curtis," debuting at No. 1 on the Billboard charts and selling more than 950,000 copies in its first week of release.



Long before her son became an international superstar, Donda West was an English professor at Chicago State University. She stepped down as chairwoman of the university's English department in 2004 to manage her son's burgeoning career full time.



The two collaborated on a book, "Raising Kanye: Life Lessons From the Mother of a Hip Hop Star," which was released in May. And most recently, she became the CEO of Super Good, the parent company of Kanye West Enterprises. She also was the chairwoman of the Kanye West Foundation, which, interestingly enough, is focused on keeping students from dropping out of school. E-mail to a friend

***

MADRID, Spain (CNN) -- An underemployed Spanish matador is breaking tradition and carrying advertising on his capes in the bullring -- promoting a soft drink aimed at gays.



Matador Joselito Ortega in an exhibition fight on Sept. 23 in the southern Spanish city of Malaga.



While fighting bulls, matador Joselito Ortega will use capes embroidered with the words "Gay Up," the name of the energy drink.



The move has many in the macho-steeped world of bullfighting seeing red.



But Ortega, 29, told CNN, "I'm glad to be the first person (in bullfighting) whom the gay community will take as an icon."



"People think the bullfighter is very tough, very rude and they only like women," Ortega added. "But we are in 2009. Everything must change."



Industry experts said it would be the first time advertising will appear on bullfighter's capes -- the large one used when the bull rushes into the ring, and a smaller one used later as the matador moves in for the kill.



In the 1980s, matador Luis Reina had a contract showing the brand name of Japanese electronics giant Akai on parts of his shiny "suit of lights," while fighting.



"But that lasted just one or two fights," recalls Curro Vazquez, a former bullfighter who now manages one of Spain's top-tier matadors, Cayetano Rivero Ordonez.



Rivero Ordonez has declined offers to carry publicity on his bullfighter's suit and capes while in the ring, Vazquez said, out of respect for "the ritual of bullfighting."



"The cape is a sacred thing," said Vazquez, adding that it's fine for premier bullfighters -- who are treated like rock stars -- to have lucrative endorsement deals for products, but only outside of the ring.



This is the first endorsement deal of any kind for Ortega. He became a full matador in 2006, facing the biggest bulls, but said he's fought only six or seven fights since then.



Yet a bullfighter in demand can have dozens of fights in just a single season.



"Ortega is a new bullfighter and he might see this as a way to get known," Vazquez said.



If so, it appears to be working. Ortega and his drinks company have been flooded with media queries since they made the announcement this week.



Pedro Suarez, the CEO at Grupo Banus Pi, the firm that makes Gay Up and took over management of Ortega's career just two weeks ago, said they plan to organize an exhibition fight for Ortega soon, and sell the TV rights exclusively.



Gay Up is a non-alcoholic energy drink made in Spain, drawn from a formula originally from Colombia. Suarez said the company tried to sponsor a Spanish football (soccer) team but was turned down because of the Gay Up brand.



Then they found Ortega, who says he's not gay. He's been gored six or seven times in his career, which started 13 years ago as a junior bullfighter.



"All sports teams have advertising on their uniforms," Ortega said, insisting he'd continue to fight bulls the same way, even with ads on his capes.



Bull breeder Juan Pedro Domecq Morenes welcomed the change, saying it might help revive Spain's billion-dollar bullfighting industry, which he said in recent years has seen a 45 percent decline in the number of fights, especially in smaller village bullrings.



"Only God is sacred," said Domecq, who also publishes a bullfighting Web site. "The rest of the traditions have to advance, modernize."

***

(CNN) -- They share a deep sorrow: an idealistic American who tried to protect the Kurds of Iraq, a Canadian general who refused to follow orders in Rwanda, a French priest who fought for the soul of Cambodia.





CNN's Christiane Amanpour traveled to the killing fields of Europe, Africa and Asia for "Scream Bloody Murder."





Each one tried to focus the world's attention on the world's most heinous crime: genocide. Each time, they were shunned, ignored or told it was someone else's problem.





To understand why, CNN's Christiane Amanpour traveled to the killing fields of Europe, Africa and Asia for a two-hour documentary, "Scream Bloody Murder."





Having reported on mass atrocities around the world, this time Amanpour traced the personal accounts of those who tried to stop the slaughter.





The yearlong CNN investigation found that instead of using a U.N. treaty outlawing genocide as a springboard to action, political leaders have invoked reason after reason to make intervention seem unnecessary, pointless and even counter-productive.  Map: See the locations featured in the documentary »





December marks the 60th anniversary of the U.N.'s Genocide Convention, when -- in the aftermath of the Holocaust -- the nations of the world pledged to prevent and punish future attempts to eliminate ethnic, religious and national groups. Read the 1948 Genocide Convention (pdf)





"The Genocide Convention should have stopped genocide, but it didn't," said Holocaust survivor and Nobel laureate Elie Wiesel. Intervention is a daunting challenge, he believes, because of a tendency to minimize accounts from refugees and victims. "It's better not to believe, because if you believe, you don't sleep nights. And how can you eat? How can you drink a glass of wine when you know?"  See images from locations in the documentary »





1970s: Cambodia





Father François Ponchaud was a Catholic missionary in Cambodia when the Khmer Rouge guerillas -- communist revolutionaries -- seized power in 1975. They expelled all foreigners from the country.





But working from France, Ponchaud gathered refugee accounts and monitored radio broadcasts to document the slave labor, torture and executions the Khmer Rouge were using to kill one-fourth of Cambodia's population.





He published his findings in a major French newspaper and wrote a book, "Year Zero." But even so, Ponchaud tells Amanpour, "No one believed us."  Watch a behind-the-scenes look at the making of 'Scream Bloody Murder' »





1980s: Iraq





CNN found that intervention is often weighed against political and economic costs.





Declassified U.S. government documents show that while Saddam Hussein was gassing Iraqi Kurds, the U.S. opposed punishing Iraq with a trade embargo because it was cultivating Iraq as an ally against Iran and as a market for U.S. farm exports.





According to Peter Galbraith, then an idealistic Senate staffer determined to stop Hussein from committing genocide, the Reagan administration "got carried away with their own propaganda. They began to believe that Saddam Hussein could be a reliable partner." Read once-secret U.S. documents





1990s: Bosnia





Even extensive news coverage may not lead to intervention.





During the violent breakup of Yugoslavia in the 1990s, the media reported on the Bosnian Serbs' ethnic cleansing of Muslims: the siege of Sarajevo, the concentration camps, the use of rape as a weapon of war.





It was like watching "a color remake of the black-and-white scenes we'd seen in World War II," said U.S. diplomat Richard Holbrooke, whose Jewish grandfather fled Germany when Adolf Hitler came to power.





Holbrooke was an early advocate for a U.S.-led military operation against the Bosnian Serbs.





"I took a stand that I believed was correct," he told Amanpour. "I didn't think it was so controversial."





But it would take three years -- and the massacre of 8,000 Muslim men and boys in the town of Srebrenica -- for Holbrooke to make his case within the Clinton administration.





1994: Rwanda





In Rwanda, where Hutu soldiers and militias massacred their Tutsi countrymen, the Clinton administration

***

(CNN) -- China has developed a vaccine for swine flu and is set to become the first country in the world to begin mass inoculations, but there are concerns over possible side effects, the World Health Organization (WHO) has said.



A swine flu vaccine has been approved in China and inoculations could begin in the next few weeks.



WHO spokesman Gregory Hartl told CNN, "We have to be ready for the fact that there might be adverse effects."  "No matter what vaccine you're looking at, sometimes there are extremely rare side effects. We don't even know what those are yet, but they will show up in one in every two or 10 million vaccinated."  Inoculations could begin in the next few weeks, according to the South China Morning Post, before celebrations begin on October 1 to mark the 60th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic.



The vaccine, PANFLU.1, was developed by Sinovac Biotech Ltd and is suitable for people aged three to 60.



Sinovac says the single-shot vaccine has been approved by China's National Institute for the Control of Pharmaceutical and Biological Products and has obtained the Certificate for the Release of Biological Products. It says more than five million doses will be ready by the end of September.



The South China Morning Post reports Health Minister Chen Zhu as saying that some 200,000 people taking part in the anniversary celebrations will be the first to receive the vaccine.



Others considered to be high priority are students aged five to 19, those with medical conditions, especially chronic respiratory and coronary diseases, and pregnant women. The inoculation program will also target medical staff and key workers, including police officers, soldiers and quarantine officials.



Chen said on Tuesday that there have so far been 5592 recorded cases of H1N1 in China's 31 inland provinces, but no one has yet died from the illness.



"Due to the rising number of cases, especially since late August, we have indeed started seeing some serious cases," he said.



The Post reported that there are plans to vaccinate 65 million people before the end of the year and that Chen admitted the amount of available vaccine was not nearly enough to inoculate the country's population of 1.3 billion people.



The Chinese State Food and Drug Administration (SFDA) last week approved two factories to produce the vaccine -- Sinovac, based in Beijing, and Hualan Biological Engineering, based in Henan -- according to the Post. But it reports the SFDA has announced that "more qualified enterprises which could produce swine flu vaccines" would be licensed by the end of September.



Hartl said that in Europe, several drug firms are set to submit clinical trial data in the next few weeks, with GlaxoSmithKline likely to be among the first.



Weidong Yin, CEO of Sinovac, said last week, "With the support of the Ministry of Health, State SFDA, and Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Sinovac was able to successfully and rapidly complete the clinical trials and registration process for the H1N1 vaccine."

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Kenneth Bacon, a former reporter and Pentagon spokesman who later served as a top advocate of displaced people all over the world, died Saturday, according to Refugees International. He was 64.



Kenneth Bacon was "one of the great voices in humanitarian advocacy," says Joel Charny of Refugees International.



Bacon had served as the president of Washington-based Refugees International since 2001, the group said in a statement Saturday. The former Wall Street Journal reporter died Saturday morning from an aggressive melanoma that spread to his brain, the statement said.



Secretary of State Hillary Clinton called Bacon, who was Pentagon spokesman during the Clinton administration, a "great humanitarian leader."



"Most Americans remember Ken as the unflappable civilian voice of the Department of Defense, where he served with distinction as spokesperson for many years," Clinton said in a statement. "But for millions of the world's most vulnerable people -- refugees and other victims of conflict -- Ken was an invaluable source of hope, inspiration and support.



Refugees International credited Bacon for doubling the group's size under his leadership and helping it get increased protection and assistance for displaced people in Sudan's Darfur region, Iraq, Pakistan and other troubled areas. In the last months of his life, Bacon shifted his focus toward the issue of climate displacement, the group said.



"Ken would walk the corridors of power one day and then meet with refugees in the most remote areas of Darfur the next. His unique mixture of expertise in the media, military affairs, and U.S. government policy, added to his compassion for vulnerable refugees, made him one of the great voices in humanitarian advocacy," said Joel Charny, acting president of Refugees International. "Ken always saw the best in people. His ability to connect with nearly everyone he met made it possible for him to convince officials at the highest levels of government and the United Nations to make the necessary changes to save lives and protect people from harm."



In 1994, Bacon became the Defense Department's assistant secretary of public affairs and Pentagon spokesman. He was known for his no-nonsense manner and his signature bow ties.



"I first got to know Ken Bacon several years ago when he was the chief Pentagon spokesman. Ken did the job the way its supposed to be done: holding press conferences, answering questions, providing facts, information and context," said CNN Pentagon Correspondent Barbara Starr. "I know he was often bemused to watch the new era of spin and message, since he so passionately believed that facts stand on their own merit.



"Later, Ken became an extraordinary advocate for refugees and displaced persons around the world," she added. "I could ring him up to ask a question about any remote area of the world where people were suffering and he could explain with breadth and depth what was going on."



Before working at the Defense Department, Bacon for more than 25 years served as a reporter and editor at the Wall Street Journal, where his assignments included the covering the Pentagon, the newspaper reported.



"He came to the Journal in 1965 and scored a rare (for an intern) page-one story about an automated car-repair system that one overheated mechanic described as 'the greatest thing since girls,' " the newspaper said in a story posted on its Web site.



He is survived by his wife, Darcy, two daughters, two grandchildren, his brother and his father.



Refugees International said a memorial service would be held in September.

***

(CNN) -- Oklahoma health officials said Friday they are searching for the source of a rare form of E. coli that has killed one person and sickened 116 others in the northeastern part of the state.



The subtype of bacteria -- called E. coli 0111 -- is "not normally found in this form of outbreak," said Leslea Bennett-Webb, director of communication for the Oklahoma State Department of Health.



More than 50 people have been hospitalized and nine people -- six of them children -- have been placed on dialysis, she said.



She said the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta, Georgia, helped state officials determine the subtype, but said the cause of the outbreak remains unknown.



"The focus has been narrowed to the Country Cottage Restaurant located in Locust Grove," she said, noting that most of the people who became ill ate there between August 15 and August 23.



Tests carried out on water from a well on restaurant property indicate the presence of bacteria, but "we have not been able to confirm what kind of bacteria," said Skylar McElhaney, a spokeswoman for the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality.



The Oklahoma Department of Health will analyze them and compare them with samples taken from victims, she said. "We can't say for sure that it is tied to the water in any way, but we also cannot rule it out," she said.



Symptoms of infection with the bacteria can include severe diarrhea, bloody diarrhea, vomiting and severe abdominal cramping, said Larry Weatherford of the Oklahoma State Department of Health.



Management at the restaurant, which has closed during the investigation, was working closely with health officials, he added.



Meanwhile, the outbreak appears to be abating. "While we believe we are seeing a downward curve in the number of people who have become ill, we still have many challenges with some patients who remain hospitalized," said State Epidemiologist Dr. Kristy Bradley. "We continue to ask the public to be extra diligent in their hand washing and food preparation to minimize the possibility of additional persons becoming ill."



The CDC estimates there may be about 70,000 E. coli infections each year in the United States.

***

LONDON, England -- A severe rabies epidemic has claimed the lives of at least 83 children within three months in Angola's capital, Luanda, the World Health Organization (WHO) has said.



Luanda, which has a large population of stray dogs, also has some of the world's worst slums.



Describing the situation as "very worrying,"  WHO rabies expert Francois Meslin told CNN: "This is a huge number and could be the tip of the iceberg."



A doctor working at the country's biggest referral hospital Hospital Pediatrico David Bernardino said staff were unable to save any of the children as rabies vaccines had run out.



Some of the children were also brought into the hospital too late to be saved, Luis Bernardino, head of the hospital told UN humanitarian organization IRIN.



He warned that the number of deaths could be much higher.



"The children were brought to our hospital and are the only ones we know of, so the number could be higher," Bernardino told IRIN.



"It is a sad moment for us," he added. "I think it was probably that no one was prepared for such a high case load."



The number of cases has now started declining, however, said Bernardino.



According to Meslin, this could be because the current infected pack of dogs has died.



Meslin told CNN that the Angolan government needed to embark on a dog rabies control program urgently to prevent further outbreaks.



Angola's capital, where most of the population live in slums, has a large number of stray dogs who are said to have caused the epidemic.



"We have had some sporadic cases in other provincial capitals in the country; we think the virus was brought into Luanda and then spread through the dogs -- Angolans love dogs," Bernardino said.



"When the first 10 deaths were reported in December 2008 we alerted the authorities, but we do not have veterinary services in the city, no kennels [to keep and observe the animals] and vaccinate them," he added.



Another problem contributing to the crisis is that vaccines are too expensive for the average family.



"One dose of vaccine costs about $10 and five of those have to be administered, which makes the total cost of treatment $50 which is more than a month's salary for families in most developing countries," Meslin added.



In 2008 the WHO wrote that rabies, a disease transmitted from animals with infected saliva to humans, is present on nearly every continent of the world but more that 95 per cent of human deaths occur in Asia and Africa.



It can be prevented by vaccination, either prior to exposure or as part of post-exposure treatment. But once symptoms of the disease develop, rabies is fatal.



According to the WHO, rabies can affect the lungs, stomach and central nervous systems. In the critical stage, a victim slips into a coma and death, usually due to breathing failure.



More than 55,000 people die of rabies each year, the WHO wrote, with 30 to 60 per cent of the victims of dog bites being children under the age of 15.

***

AUSTIN, Texas (CNN) -- Sen. Hillary Clinton, needing a win in Texas to derail Sen. Barack Obama in the race for the Democratic presidential nomination, sought Thursday to contrast her opponent's rhetorical skills with what she called her superior ability to govern.



Sens. Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton face off in a high-stakes debate.



"I do think that words are important and words matter," Clinton said at a debate at the University of Texas. "But actions speak louder than words."



Obama responded by laying out issues he's worked on in the Senate and others he'd support as president -- then called it ridiculous to suggest his supporters are "being duped."



"The implication is that the people who have been voting for me or involved in my campaign are somehow delusional," he said.



Obama said his supporters perceive the reality of what's going on in Washington very clearly, and they want to see it change.



"What they see is that if we don't bring the country together, stop the endless bickering, actually focus on solutions and reduce the special interests that have dominated Washington, then we will not get anything done."  Watch Obama talk about his plan to change Washington »



Much of the 90-minute debate featured the two candidates staking out similar positions on issues like Iraq, the economy and immigration.  Watch the candidates weigh in on the economy »



"It was a very odd debate -- the questioners had to beg them to differ with each other," said CNN senior political analyst Bill Schneider.  See what CNN's political team thought of the showdown »



The debate was the first the two have participated in since they met in Los Angeles January 31.



Five days later, the two effectively split the victories on Super Tuesday. But since then, Obama has rolled to 11 straight wins, a streak that leaves Clinton needing wins in delegate-rich Texas and Ohio on March 4.



Vermont and Rhode Island also hold primaries that day. Texas is the biggest prize, with 193 Democratic delegates.



Going into those primaries, Obama leads Clinton by 140 pledged delegates.



Responding to a question from the panel, Clinton's sharpest attack on Obama came when she went after him for borrowing lines from a speech by Massachusetts Gov. Deval Patrick, his campaign co-chairman, in his own campaign speeches. The Clinton campaign has called that plagiarism.



"If your campaign is going to be about words, they should be your own words," she said. "Lifting whole passages isn't change you can believe in; it's change you can Xerox."  Watch the spat over plagiarism »



Some in the audience booed Clinton for the line.



"This is where we start getting into silly season in politics," Obama replied, saying Patrick is a friend who suggested he use the lines. "People start getting tired of it."



A CNN/Opinion Research Corp. poll out Monday suggests the Democratic race in Texas is a statistical dead heat.  Watch uncommitted Texas students discuss debate »



In the survey, taken before Obama's Tuesday victories in Wisconsin and Hawaii, 50 percent of likely Democratic primary voters support Clinton as their choice for the party's nominee, with 48 percent backing Obama. The poll's margin of error is 4.5 percentage points.



Two other recent polls also show the race statistically even.



With so much at stake, analysts said Clinton needed a very strong performance in the debate, the only time the two candidates will share a stage in Texas before the state's primary.



"Texas is the endgame. Hillary Clinton has to stop Obama in Texas. This means she has to do something to shake the race up. She has to raise doubts about Obama and get Democrats to rethink whether they really want to rally behind him," Schneider said.



In a state where Hispanic voters are expected to make up a large share of the March 4 electorate, the pair fielded questions on immigration reform and dealing with Cuba's government in the wake of President Fidel Castro's

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- Juliana Redding was 21, an aspiring actress and model who, like so many others before her, had moved from Arizona to southern California in pursuit of the Hollywood dream. She wound up the victim in a real life murder mystery -- one few people are willing to talk about in any detail.



Juliana Redding, an aspiring model and actress, was found murdered in her Santa Monica apartment.



By the age of 18, Redding had earned her first film credit, appearing in a 2005 independent film called "Kathy T Gives Good Hoover," about college students and the graffiti culture.



In 2006, she moved into a one-bedroom apartment in Santa Monica, California, with her pet Yorkshire terrier.



She was also taking college courses while working part-time in a trendy Venice Beach bar.



Friends grew worried in March when they couldn't reach Redding for a few days. They called her mother in Redding's hometown of Tucson, Arizona. Her mother called the Santa Monica police.  Watch why this case is so baffling »



Police found Redding dead inside her apartment. "The manner of death is homicide," said Sgt. Rinaldi Thruston of the Santa Monica Police Department.



Although there are unconfirmed reports that the cause of death was blunt force trauma, the Los Angeles County Coroner's Office denies that. "Those media reports are not accurate. The cause of death was not blunt force trauma. The file has been sealed by police, so we cannot disclose the actual cause of death."



Police also would not disclose whether a weapon was used or whether Redding's apartment had been broken into, which would give clues as to whether she knew her assailant and opened the door for him or her.



Thruston also refused to say whether Redding had been sexually assaulted.



"We have made no arrests in this case nor do we have any suspects or persons of interest at this time," Thruston said.



He said police have collected evidence from the crime scene that could link a potential suspect to the crime. Police are hoping they will continue to get tips and leads from the public.



According to friends, Redding had been dating another actor for two years and they had broken up about six months before her slaying, but remained friends.



It is unclear whether she had a new boyfriend, but police have been interviewing all of Redding's known friends and neighbors.



"We believe the police are doing what they can to solve this case, but we really prefer no media attention," her mother said.



Early in the investigation, there were reports of blood found on the sidewalk or wall outside Redding's apartment.



Police will not comment on the forensic results of that blood or any specific evidence at the crime scene. They also will not reveal whether any of Redding's neighbors heard screams or other sounds of a struggle.



At this point, there are more questions than answers.



If anyone has any information leading to the arrest of the person or persons responsible for Juliana Redding's death, please call the Santa Monica Police Department tip line at (310) 458-8449.

***

Tokyo, Japan (CNN) -- Toyota has added the brake systems of the latest Lexus hybrid vehicles to a growing list of problems with various models, the company said Friday.



The company said it was checking the brakes on the Lexus vehicle model HS250h -- as well as a Japanese model called the Sai -- because they use the same system as that used on the 2010 Toyota Prius.



Toyota has announced no recall of these vehicles, however, and said it has not received any complaints about the brakes from consumers.



But the U.S. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration announced Thursday it is opening a formal investigation into problems with the Prius, Toyota's fourth-best selling model in the United States and the best-selling model in Japan.



The company has acknowledged a software glitch that is causing problems with its braking. It said it is looking further at the best way to repair the problem.



On Thursday, Ford announced that it was changing the software in the braking system for its Fusion and Mercury Milan hybrids to correct an occasion glitch in the old software. Ford said no injuries had been reported involving the problem.



The Fusion/Milan's issue seemed less serious than that of the Prius, said David Champion, the head of auto testing at Consumer Reports.



The NHTSA investigation involves only 2010 model year Prius hybrids, which went on sale in the middle of last year. There are only 37,000 of those vehicles on the road, according to the agency.



The Prius, which is built in Japan, is not one of the eight models affected by two recent recalls -- covering several million vehicles -- to fix problems with sticking gas pedals. All of those models were built at North American plants.



NHTSA said its Office of Defects investigation has received 124 reports from consumers about problems with the Prius brakes, including four reports that involved crashes and two that resulted in injuries. No fatalities have been reported. Investigators have spoken with consumers and conducted preliminary field work.



Late Wednesday, Toyota President Akio Toyoda spoke with U.S. Transportation Secretary Ray LaHood, reassuring him that Toyota takes U.S. safety concerns seriously and puts safety at the top of the company's priorities, according to NHTSA's statement.



Toyota had only limited comment on the probe.



"We have heard about NHTSA's intention to begin an investigation. Toyota will cooperate fully with NHTSA's investigation," the company said in a statement.



Even if the solution ends up being a relatively simple and inexpensive software adjustment, the Prius braking problems come at a bad time for Toyota, which has seen its prized reputation for quality and safety badly damaged by the recalls and the news attention given to them.



The company has estimated that the problem with the gas pedals will cost it about 100,000 sales this year and $2 billion in repair costs and lost revenue.



Other experts say the problem could be more long-lasting if consumers who once trusted the Toyota brand decide to shop elsewhere.



The Prius problem is a "disconnect" in the vehicle's complex anti-lock brake system that causes less than a one-second lag before the brakes start to work, Toyota said Thursday. At 60 mph, though, a vehicle will have traveled nearly another 90 feet before the brakes begin to take hold.



The company also said it changed the braking system software in January for vehicles built since then. But it has yet to determine how to fix the brakes of vehicles already on the road.



CNN's Kyung Lah and CNNMoney.com's Peter Valdes-Dapena and Chris Isidore contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Chelsea have qualified for the last 16 of the European Champions League after two Didier Drogba goals helped them to a 3-0 Group E victory over Valencia at Stamford Bridge.





The English Premier League side needed a victory to guarantee their place in the knockout stage and they got the perfect start when Drogba scored in the third minute -- Chelsea's fastest ever Champions League goal.





Midfielder Ramires doubled their advantage midway through the half after capitalizing on some hesitant Valencia defending.





Real Madrid to topple Barcelona in 'El Clasico' clash?





And Drogba sealed the victory 14 minutes from time when sliding the ball home from Juan Mata's slide-rule pass.





The result also means Chelsea top the group with 11 points after Bayer Leverkusen -- who had already qualified -- were held to a 1-1 draw by Genk in Belgium.





Jelle Vossen put the home side ahead in the first half with a superb volley, but Swiss striker Eren Derdiyok leveled for the Bundesliga side 11 minutes from time.





Leverkusen go through as group runners-up on 10 points, with third-placed Valencia going into the Europa League and Genk eliminated from Europe.





There was late drama in Group F, where Marseille came back from 2-0 down to win 3-2 at Dortmund, a result that saw them go through to the last 16 in second place behind already-qualified Arsenal.





Poland midfielder Jakub Blaszczykowski put the home side ahead from close range in the 23rd minute and Mats Hummels doubled Dortmund's advantage nine minutes later from the penalty spot, after captain Sebastian Kehl received a nasty kick in the face from defender Stephane Mbia.





But Marseille gave themselves hope on the stroke of half-time when Loic Remy headed home Morgan Amalfitano's right-wing cross.





The score stayed that way until five minutes from the end when Andre Ayew powerfully headed home Amalfitano's corner.





And a sensational comeback was completed just two minutes later when substitute Mathieu Valbuena skipped past a couple of challenges before curling home a delightful winner.





Marseille's victory was bad news for Olympiakos, who beat a depleted Arsenal side 3-1 in Piraeus.





Rafik Djebbour put the hosts ahead from a tight angle after a defensive mix-up and David Fuster made it 2-0 when goalkeeper Vito Mannone's headed clearance fell to his feet -- and he found the net from outside the area.





Yossi Benayoun pulled a goal back early in the second half with a fine strike from just inside the area but Olympiakos secured the win when Francois Modesto scored from close range after Olof Mellberg's header had come back off the post.





Despite the win, Marseille's comeback means Olympiakos (9 points) have to settle for the Europa League.





Arsenal finish top on 11 points with Marseille just a point behind and German champions Dortmund out of Europe on just four points.





Surprise packages APOEL Nicosia had already qualified from Group G, but they ended the group with a defeat as Shakhtar Donetsk claimed a 2-0 away victory.





The Ukrainian side had already been eliminated, but they inflicted a first defeat on the Cypriot side courtesy of goals from Luiz Adriano and Yevhen Seleznyov.





Porto needed to beat Russian champions Zenit St Petersburg at home to qualify alongside APOEL, but the visitors defended solidly to secure a 0-0 draw.





It meant APOEL and Zenit both qualified with nine points, with the Cypriot side top virtue of a better head-to-head record. Porto (eight points) have to settle for the Europa League.





Barcelona and AC Milan had already qualified from Group H, but they enjoyed contrasting fortunes on Tuesday.





Defending champions Barca thumped BATE Borisov 4-0 at the Nou Camp despite coach Pep Guardiola resting a host of key players ahead of 'El Clasico' against Real Madrid on Saturday.





Real Madrid to topple Barcelona in 'El Clasico' clash?





It may have been an unfamiliar line-up, but the style of football was completely familiar as Barca scored at will against the Belarussians.





Sergi Roberto opened the scoring in the 35th minute from the edge of the

***

(CNN)  -- Brazilian star Kaka has rejected a world record transfer move to Premier League Manchester City and decided to stay with AC Milan.



Kaka opted to stay with AC Milan despite the riches on offer.



The 2007 world player of the year was set to earn $750,000 per week with City, who were reported to be willing to pay a staggering $147 million to acquire his services.



The devoutly religious Kaka explained his reasons on the club's television station.



"I believe I have made the right choice.



"To have gone to Manchester City could have been a great project but in the past few days I have prayed a lot to understand what the right team would be and in the end I have decided to remain here.



"I don't want anything else, I just want to be well and be happy in the place where people love me."



Italian prime minister and Milan owner Silvio Berlusconi originally broke the news that the devoted fans of the Rossoneri wanted to hear.



Interviewed on Italian TV's Sky Italia late on Monday night, Berlusconi confirmed that Milan had offered Kaka the chance to "make himself a fortune, but said he has "higher values."



Berlusconi continued: "He is staying with us, there are things which are more important than money: we are happy.



"When I heard he would prefer to stay, that he didn't think he would be missing a great opportunity and he prefers the values of our flag, the values of closeness and friendship, the warmth and the affection that all the fans have shown him in these days, I said 'hooray' and we hugged. Kaka is staying at Milan."



Fans of former European champions Milan had staged a series of protests since City's audacious move for Kaka became public late last week.



They intensified after Kaka played in the 1-0 home win over Fiorentina which improved Milan's Serie A title chances as arch-rivals and league leaders Inter Milan slipped up.



Have your say: Should Kaka have stayed at AC Milan or taken the money?



City, who are being backed by Sheikh Mansour's Abu-Dhabi investment group, finally admitted defeat in a statement on their club Web site www.mfc.co.uk from executive chairman Gary Cook:



"Whilst Manchester City Football Club has an obvious interest in world-class players of the quality of Kaka, we owe it to our fans that such a transfer must work on every level; commercially, financially, in terms of results on the field and within Manchester City's broader community."



Cook and a City delegation returned to Manchester without ever managing to meet 26-year-old Kaka face to face, dealing instead with Milan officials and his father Bosco Leite.



Manager Mark Hughes, who completed the signing of striker Craig Bellamy from West Ham on Monday, will also be hoping to finalize a deal to acquire midfielder Nigel De Jong from Hamburg as he strengthens his squad in the January transfer window.



City, who are struggling in 11th in the Premier League and out of the FA Cup, signed Kaka's Brazilian international teammate Robinho from Real Madrid shortly after their new Abu Dhabi owners took over last summer.



Robinho has proved an immediate success with 12 goals, but City are aware of the need to attract more world class players to their ranks, hence the ulitmately fruitless attempt to sign Kaka.



In a separate development, Robinho moved quickly to deny reports that he had stormed out of City's training camp in Tenerife because they had failed to sign his friend Kaka.



"I had made Manchester City aware that I needed to return to Brazil because of a family matter," he told BBC Sport. "I will return to the club and hope to sort this out as soon as possible."



He added: "I feel it is important to underline that I did not return to Brazil because of the Kaka deal.



"He is one of my good friends and it would have been great to see him at Manchester City -- but it had nothing to do with his decision to stay

***

(CNN) -- The 19-year-old woman whose hospitalization exposed a shocking Austrian incest case is recovering well and wants to see the ocean and a pop concert, her doctors and a family lawyer said Wednesday.



Dr. Albert Reiter, who treated Kerstin, is confident Kerstin will make a full recovery in time.



She and other children who were held captive for years are slowly adapting to modern life, they said.



Kerstin Fritzl, whom doctors placed in an artificial coma after she was admitted to a hospital in April for multiple organ failure, is now well enough to speak, stand and walk with assistance, her doctors said.



Doctors said that "little novelties" such as seeing a cloud go by are now big events for the former captives.



Kerstin has said she wants to see the ocean and go to a concert by British singer Robbie Williams, said Dr. Berhold Kepplinger, director of the clinic where the family is living.



He described how excited Kerstin was to hear Robbie Williams songs in her hospital room and said she was moving around to the music so much that doctors had to quiet her down.



It was then, Kepplinger said, that doctors became confident Kerstin can become fully healthy and develop normally. Her immune system has improved, and she is continuing to have physiotherapy, including strengthening exercises, he said.  Watch doctors describe what happened when the teen opened her eyes »



The two parts of her family -- those who were locked in a basement, like Kerstin, and those who lived above ground, apparently unaware of the abuse of their mother and siblings -- are getting to know each other again, the doctors and the family's lawyer said.



"We are so glad that things have turned out so positively so far," said lawyer Christoph Herbst, who appeared at a news conference at a hotel near Amstetten, west of Vienna, where Kerstin and her family are recovering.



Kerstin is the oldest daughter of an incestuous relationship between Elisabeth, 43, and Elisabeth's father, Josef Fritzl, 73, according to police. He is awaiting trial.



Police say he confessed to holding Elisabeth captive since 1984 and raping her repeatedly, fathering seven children with her. Six of the children survived.



Kerstin fell unconscious in April, and Elisabeth convinced her father that she needed urgent medical attention. Kerstin was admitted to a hospital in Amstetten, where staff grew suspicious and called police, who opened an investigation and uncovered the abuse.



Kerstin was suffering from kidney, lung, and liver failure when she arrived at the hospital, said Dr. Albert Reiter, director of the hospital. Doctors were able to turn her health around, but they kept her in a coma with artificial respiration for weeks, he said.



Doctors started reducing Kerstin's medication May 12, allowing her to emerge from the coma, he said. Three days later, she opened her eyes and smiled at her carers, he said, and doctors were soon able to take the breathing tube from her throat.



Her mother was at Kerstin's bedside regularly, and doctors credited that with helping Kerstin's health improve.



On Sunday, Kerstin finally met with other family members and was able to say hello to them, he said. Kerstin and the rest of the family were also able to move into an apartment at a regional clinic nearby.



"It was a special moment where, walking, we were able to support her and cross the threshold into a new house and into a new life," Reiter said.



Kerstin and two of her brothers, ages 18 and 5, had spent their entire lives trapped in the cellar with their mother, never seeing daylight. A television was their only contact with the outside world.



The other three children Josef Fritzl fathered with Elisabeth were taken as infants to live above ground with Fritzl and his wife, who says she had no idea her daughter was being held captive.



In recent weeks, the wife and the three children have had several meetings with Kerstin and the others formerly held in the basement. The doctors said that all are receiving therapy and are

***

(CNN) -- Artillery shells slammed into a hospital Sunday in the northern Sri Lankan district of Mullaittivu, where civilians -- including a growing number of children -- are being treated as government forces and Tamil rebels continue to clash.

A Sri Lankan soldier walks through Mullaittivu, the former military headquarters of the Tamil rebels.

More than 200 civilians and at least 30 children have been injured in the last three days of fighting, a relief worker told CNN Sunday.

"That is the absolute minimum (number of injured)," the aid worker, who did not want to be identified for fear of jeopardizing the work of relief organizations, said.

Government officials are accusing aid organizations and foreign media of sensationalizing civilian casualties.

"It looks as if it's convenient for certain agencies to exaggerate the numbers so that this can be converted to a humanitarian crisis in the public eye, " Secretary of Foreign Affairs Dr. Palitha Kohona told CNN.

On Sunday, Sri Lankan Defense Secretary Gotabaya Rajapaksa promised to "continue with the military offensive until we liberate the remaining area under LTTE (the rebel group) control," according to Sri Lanka's state-run news agency.  Watch a report on civilians caught in fighting »

A "handful" of United Nations staff are working around the clock to save a growing number of children caught in the crossfire, a U.N. spokesman said Saturday.

Children as young as 4 months old were being treated in local hospitals for shrapnel injuries and other "wounds of war," spokesman James Elder told CNN.

"There is just intense fighting in a small area where children and other civilians are," Elder said. "The space (where conflict is taking place) is shrinking and the fighting is augmenting."

Thursday, U.N. aid workers rescued 50 critically injured children and 105 adults, he said.

"We are trying to get as many people out of there as we can," Elder said.

Humanitarian groups say as many as 250,000 unprotected civilians are trapped in the area.

Sri Lankan President Mahinda Rajapaksa has promised to allow safe passage to trapped civilians and urged the Tamil Tigers to promise the same.

"We have declared a safe zone for civilians, the coordinates of which were announced by the security forces," Rajapaksa said on his government's Web site. "It is unfortunate that the (Tamil Tiger group) is exploiting this declared safe zone for civilians by placing their heavy artillery within the safe zone and using it as a launching pad to attack security forces and indiscriminately kill civilians."

The fighting has created a "nightmarish" situation for civilians in the conflict zone, Elder said.

An emerging shortage of humanitarian supplies and diminished access to clean water, sanitation, and food are compounding a crisis, he said.

Sunday, Sri Lankan soldiers seized a key rebel stronghold in a surprise attack deep in Tamil held territory.

Troops crossed a lagoon and entered the town of Mullaittivu before encountering heavy resistance from Tamil fighters, according to the government-run news agency.

The The Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) -- commonly known as the Tamil Tigers -- have fought for an independent homeland for the country's ethnic Tamil minority since 1983. The civil war has left more than 70,000 people dead.

***

(CNN) -- A massive dust storm swept through parts of Australia on Wednesday, bathing the city of Sydney in a reddish haze.



The Sydney Harbour Bridge is seen on Wednesday in Sydney, Australia.



Susan Paget marveled at the eerie red view from the balcony of her apartment in Manly, a suburb of Sydney, and said she took the day off work to avoid the dust storm mess.



"It just feels dirty and rusty," Paget told CNN. "It was totally bizarre to wake up around 5:30 a.m. and see such a red bizarre sky."



A video Paget submitted to CNN's iReport showed thick haze, which made it difficult to see her neighbors' homes. Watch Paget's updated iReport



Health officials in Sydney warned residents to stay in indoors if possible, especially if they had asthma or heart and lung conditions.



"Avoid spending too much time outdoors due to the high particle levels and hazardous air quality," the New South Wales Department of Heath Web site said.  See images of the dust storm »



The Ambulance Service of New South Wales said the dust storm had kept it busy with emergency calls.



"We have already seen an increase in calls to people suffering from asthma and other respiratory problems," the agency said in a statement.  Watch a news report on the haze »



iReporter Mark Clarke told CNN he woke up earlier than usual with a stuffy nose and cough at his home in Stanmore, a suburb of Sydney. iReporter: "It was like Mars"



He pulled the curtains back and saw a "strange red orangish glow coming from outside."



"It feels and smells like a vacuum cleaner exploded," he said. Watch Clarke's iReport



The country's bureau of meterology attributed the red haze to strong north-westerly winds which blew the dust overnight to Sydney and regions west of the capital.



During the day, the dust blanket moved north onto the Queensland capital of Brisbane.



The bureau of meterology's senior forecaster Tony Auden told the Australian Broadcasting Corporation that the haze was likely to continue moving north.



"It should make its way up into the Sunshine Coast and into those Capricornia and central coast areas soon," he said. "For the south-east expect it to probably linger for the rest of today and hopefully settle out of the air overnight."

***

In Fad-Free Nutrition, exclusively on CNN.com, the editors of Cooking Light help you digest the latest diet and food news and trends.



The recent recall of industrial peanut butter and products that contain it sparked nationwide concern about the safety of eating many popular snack products. That's understandable, considering the average American consumes 3.3 pounds of peanut butter each year, according to USDA data.



Pistachios, pecans, hazelnuts, almonds, and others can be made into tasty spreads and put in recipes.



While consuming with caution is always prudent, it's important not to give up on nuts and peanuts (which are actually legumes) entirely. They offer numerous health benefits and can even help dieters stay on track.



Consuming just one ounce of nuts -- of any variety -- up to five times a week in place of other calories consumed is likely to help reduce the risk of heart disease. Although nuts are high in calories, they contain heart-healthy mono- and polyunsaturated fats, and they're jam-packed with nutrients such as vitamin E, folate, niacin, copper, magnesium, and potassium. Plus, they have some protein and fiber to help keep you feeling satisfied. Learn more about the health benefits of nuts (plus recipes that use them) at CookingLight.com.



Tips on smart snacking



If you are worried about buying peanut butter based on the recent salmonella scare, try these tasty and nutritious alternative ways to snack safely:



1. Make your own spread. Although major national brands of jarred peanut butter have not been recalled, it's a fun and nutritious option to make your own. At certain grocery stores, such as some locations of Whole Foods Market, you can grind peanuts to make fresh peanut butter. In less than one minute, you have a fresh, peanutty spread without preservatives or added sugar. You can also make fresh peanut butter at home; all you need are plain roasted peanuts and a food processor. Put ¾ cup plain roasted peanuts in a food processor; process two minutes or until smooth. See our staff's tips on making homemade nut butters on our blog, Test Kitchen Secrets.



2. Get creative. Use fresh peanut butter to upgrade homemade versions of snacks that may have been recalled. For example, spread a teaspoon of peanut butter on a whole-grain cracker instead of purchasing ready-made peanut butter crackers. You might surprise yourself by creating a better-for-you treat, such as our lightened peanut buttery Swag Bars.



3. Branch out beyond peanut butter. Almond, cashew, macadamia, walnut, and hazelnut butters are unaffected by the recall. They all offer a strong nutrition profile. For example, 2 tablespoons of almond butter (one serving) provide the following:



• Almost half your daily needs of the antioxidant vitamin E with 6.5 milligrams



• About one-third of a day's worth of magnesium (97 milligrams), a mineral that supports muscle function and bone tissue



• 243 milligrams of potassium (about five percent of one day's allotment), which helps keep your blood pressure levels steady



Visit CookingLight.com to learn more about other nutritious nut butters made from cashews, almonds, macadamia nuts, hazelnuts, pecans, pistachios, and walnuts -- including how to make them, and healthful recipes that put them to delicious use.



For more tips on making healthy taste great, try Cooking Light - CLICK HERE

***

(CNN) -- The Jacksonville, Florida, man accused of hacking celebrities' online accounts for nude photos and other private information said Friday, "I am very sorry for all of this."





A federal judge ordered Christopher Chaney, 35, to appear in a California courtroom on November 1 to answer charges, a spokeswoman for the U.S. attorney's office said.





"What I'm most sorry about is that I had to drag my mom into all of this, and my family and my neighbors and they just want to live their lives," Chaney told reporters. He did not respond to questions.





Chaney is accused of hacking into the accounts of more than 50 celebrities, including movie stars Scarlett Johansson and Mila Kunis and singer Christina Aguilera.





A grand jury indicted Chaney on nine counts of computer hacking for gain, eight counts of aggravated identify theft, and nine counts of illegal wiretapping. If convicted of all 26 counts, Chaney would face a maximum of 121 years in federal prison, U.S. Attorney Andre Birotte Jr. said.





The aggravated identity theft charge alone carries a mandatory two-year prison sentence, he added.





The suspect's attorney, Christopher Chestnut, said his client "remains very remorseful" and understands the importance of privacy.





Still, Chestnut indicated the potential sentence appeared harsh.





"People who murder kids don't get 120 years in prison," he said.





Earlier this week, Chaney told a reporter that he had became "addicted" to the intrusion and "didn't know how to stop."





"I know what I did was probably one of the worst invasions of privacy someone could experience," Chaney told CNN affiliate WAWS/WTEV in Jacksonville, Florida, on Wednesday.





"And these people don't have privacy to begin with. And I was in that little sliver of privacy they do have."





The FBI's Los Angeles office said he was arrested as part of "Operation Hackerazzi," which looked into computer intrusions targeting individuals associated with the entertainment industry.





"Unfortunately, Mr. Chaney was able to access nude photos of some of the celebrities and some of them were uploaded on the Internet," Birotte said Wednesday.





A recently circulated nude photo of Johansson is part of the investigation, he said.





Chaney allegedly "also took financial information, movie scripts and conversations that the celebrities believed to be private," Birotte told reporters.





In the interview with WAWS/WTEV, Chaney said the hacking "started as curiosity and it turned into just being, you know, addicted to seeing the behind-the-scenes of what's going on with these people you see on the big screen every day."





"It just happened and snowballed," he said, adding that he wishes it had never begun.





Chaney said he felt "almost relieved months ago" when authorities seized his computer because "I didn't know how to stop doing it myself. I wasn't attempting to break into e-mails and get stuff to sell or purposely put it on the Internet. It just -- I don't know."





Authorities allege that Chaney distributed the photos he obtained illegally and offered them to celebrity blog sites. Some of the files, including private photographs, were posted online "as a result of Chaney's alleged activities," authorities said in a statement.





"I've had like six months to think about it," Chaney said, "it eats at me. ... When you're doing it you're not thinking about what's going on with who you're doing it to."





According to the FBI's Los Angeles field office, investigators believe that Chaney used publicly available sources to mine for data about his targets. Once Chaney gained access and control of an e-mail account, "he would obtain private information, such as e-mails and file attachments, according to the indictment," the FBI said in a statement.





Authorities allege that once Chaney hacked into a celebrity's e-mail account, he would use the contact lists to find other celebrities'

***

(CNN)  -- Federal investigators are concerned a potential danger persists because of the simultaneous use of intersecting runways at Newark Liberty International Airport, one of the nation's busiest and a gateway to the New York metro area.





The alert comes after repeated instances in which planes above the Newark airport flew too close to each other in violation of safety standards. There were four such instances last year and at least four this year, according to the U.S. Department of Transportation inspector general.





In one case, on January 16, 2008, two Continental planes -- a Boeing B-737 and an Embraer 145 -- missed each other by 600 feet, according to a DOT inspector general's report.





"That was very scary. I was there for that one personally in the control tower, and it scared the heck out of everybody up there," said Ray Adams, a Newark air traffic controller.





Potential danger arises when approaching planes need to abort their landings, which happens about every 700 flights at Newark, according to a Federal Aviation Administration analysis.





In what the FAA calls "go-arounds," the diverted plane approaching Newark has to make a sharp right turn through the flight path of planes landing and taking off from an intersecting runway, allowing little margin for error.





"There was a distinct possibility that we could have had a collision with these operations," Adams said.





Adams said he raised the safety issue to the FAA but got nowhere. He persisted, taking his complaint to New Jersey's congressional delegation, which organized two meetings last year with FAA officials.





In response, Adams said, he was punished, put on paid leave for 11 months, then leave without pay for a month. The FAA said the disciplinary actions had nothing to do with Adams' safety complaints.





Adams filed a whistle-blower complaint with the U.S. Office of Special Counsel, the agency that investigates whistle-blower complaints. Adams' complaint led DOT Inspector General Calvin Scovel to investigate. Scovel found merit in Adams' concerns, concluding in a report two months ago that "questions about the safety of the runway 22L-11 approach configuration at Newark persist."





In response, the FAA promised to use a computer program that helps air traffic controllers stagger aircraft to ensure proper spacing.





On November 5, the DOT wrote to the Office of Special Counsel confirming the computer system had been put to use at Newark on October 26. The next day the Office of Special Counsel learned the technology was no longer in use at Newark.





"I am outraged," said Rep. Donald Payne, D-New Jersey. "When you put into jeopardy the human lives at risk, it can't get any more serious than that."





FAA spokesperson Laura Brown said, "There was no intent to deceive anyone about what we were doing." She added, "FAA safety officers wanted to make absolutely sure employees were fully trained on the equipment." The FAA said it intends to have the computer system fully operational at Newark by mid-December.





Last week the Office of Special Counsel raised the matter with President Obama, writing that "we found a substantial likelihood that FAA officials were engaging in conduct that constitutes gross mismanagement and a substantial and specific danger to public safety."





Meanwhile, after a year out of the control tower, Adams returned to his regular job Wednesday at Newark air traffic control.

***

(CNN) -- Lebanon stunned traditional regional powerhouses South Korea 2-1 in Beirut on Tuesday to boost their hopes of qualifying for the last stage of Asia's 2014 World Cup qualifying.





Lebanon lost 6-0 to the Koreans in in September's away fixture in the first game under new coach Theo Bucker, but the German has overseen a big improvement since then.





Central defender Ali Al Saadi put the Middle East side ahead after just five minutes, but the visitors leveled on 20 from the spot as Koo Ja-Cheol slotted home.





But the Wolfsburg midfielder blotted his copybook by tripping Mahmoud el Ali, and Abbas Atwi converted the winning penalty just after half an hour.





Lebanon now trail 2002 World Cup semifinalists South Korea only on goal difference, with Kuwait two points further back ahead of the final round of Group B matches after beating United Arab Emirates 2-1.





Australia booked passage to the second round of qualifying with an unconvincing 1-0 win in Thailand.





Blackburn's Brett Emerton set up Brett Holman for his second-half headed winner as the Socceroos went through as Group D winners.





Saudi Arabia and Oman fought to a 0-0 draw and will battle it out with Thailand to decide the second qualifying place in the final round.





Iran also progressed with a game to spare, beating Indonesia 4-1 before a goalless draw in Doha between Qatar and Bahrain confirmed their qualification.





Bahrain must win against Indonesia in the concluding matches on February 29, while the Qataris need a point against Iran to go through.





Iraq ended China's hopes of qualifying from Group A by beating leaders Jordan 3-1 to claim the second spot.





China had earlier won 4-0 against Singapore with a late Zheng Zheng double.





Japan had already gone through from Group C, but the Blue Samurai's 20-match unbeaten run ended with a 1-0 defeat to bitter rivals North Korea in Pyongyang.





Pak Nam Chol's 50th-minute header secured the victory, but in a bad-tempered game the home side had Jong Il Gwan sent off in the 77th minute.





"It was a physical match in a tough environment," Japan coach Alberto Zaccheroni told broadcaster TBS. Uzbekistan beat Tajikistan 3-0 to go three points clear at the top of the group.





The top two teams from each of five groups reach the final stage, where a round-robin is played to decide on four places for the 2014 finals in Brazil. The fifth-placed team go into an intercontinental playoff.





In the first round of Africa qualifying, Emmanuel Adebayor returned to international action as Togo beat Guinea-Bissau 1-0 to progress to the second stage after a first-leg draw.





The Tottenham striker had retired from representing his country after the January 2010 gun attack on the Togo team bus before the African Cup of Nations.





Serge Gakpe, who scored in the opening 1-1 draw, netted a second-minute winner for the Sparrowhawks.





The Democratic Republic of Congo also went through after beating Swaziland 5-1 to win 8-2 on aggregate, while Congo progressed 6-1 on aggregate despite being held 1-1 by Sao Tome e Principe.





Lesotho and Tanzania triumphed by virtue of the away-goals rule at the expense of Burundi and Chad respectively, despite both nations losing the second legs.





Kenya, Mozambique, Namibia, Rwanda and 2012 Africa Cup of Nations co-hosts Equatorial Guinea also made it to the second stage.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- A top congressional Republican on Sunday criticized President Barack Obama's expected decision to reverse the Bush administration's limits on embryonic stem-cell research, calling it a distraction from the country's economic slump.



U.S. Rep. Eric Cantor also says the policy reversal could lead to embryo harvesting, which "shouldn't be done."



"Why are we going and distracting ourselves from the economy? This is job No. 1. Let's focus on what needs to be done," Rep. Eric Cantor, the Republican whip in the House of Representatives, told CNN's "State of the Union."



Obama's move, scheduled for Monday morning, is part of a broader effort to separate science and politics and "restore scientific integrity in governmental decision-making," White House domestic policy adviser Melody Barnes said Sunday. The Bush administration's 2001 policy bars federal funding for research on embryonic stem cells beyond the cell lines that existed at the time.



Cantor, R-Virginia, has been among the leaders of GOP opposition to Obama's economic policies.



In a conference call with reporters, Barnes said funding research is also part of the administration's plan to boost the plunging U.S. economy.



"Advances with regard to science and technology help advance our overall national goals around economic growth and job creation," she said, adding, "I think anytime you make an effort to try and separate these pieces of the puzzle, you're missing the entire picture."



Because stem cells have the potential to turn into any organ or tissue cell in the body, research advocates say they could yield cures to debilitating conditions such as diabetes, Parkinson's disease and spinal injuries. But because work on embryonic stem cells involves the destruction of human embryos, many conservatives supported the limits former President George Bush imposed by executive order in 2001.



"Frankly, federal funding of embryonic stem-cell research can bring on embryo harvesting, perhaps even human cloning that occurs," Cantor said. "We don't want that. That shouldn't be done. That's wrong."



The Bush policy limited federal funding to work on 60 existing stem-cell lines, but only 21 of those have proven useful to researchers. Congress voted to roll back those limits in 2006 and 2007, but Bush vetoed the legislation both times, leading to Democratic charges that he had put politics over science.



Dr. Harold Varmus, president of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center and co-chairman of Obama's science advisory council, said Sunday that Obama will "endorse the notion that public policy must be guided by sound, scientific advice."



Obama's order will direct the National Institutes of Health to develop revised guidelines on federal funding for embryonic stem cell research within 120 days, said Varmus, who joined Barnes in the conference call with reporters.



"The president is, in effect, allowing federal funding of human embryonic stem cell research to the extent that it's permitted by law -- that is, work with stem cells themselves, not the derivation of stem cells," he said.



Supporters of the ban said researchers could still obtain private funding or explore alternatives such as adult stem cells. Opponents said the research could be carried out using embryos left over in fertility clinics, which otherwise would be discarded.



Sen. Claire McCaskill, D-Missouri, told reporters that reversing the Bush ban would "once again say to the rest of the world that we will be the beacon for cures and for hope." She credited her support for federal funding in part for her 2006 election.



"I think it's a great moment, and I'm proud of [Obama] for reversing that executive order," McCaskill said.



Sen. Richard Shelby, R-Alabama, said the Bush policy imposed ethical limits on science.



"My basic tenet here is I don't think we should create life to enhance life and to do research and so forth," Shelby said. "I know that people argue there are other ways. I think we should continue our biomedical research everywhere we can, but

***

New York (CNN) -- Protesters rallied in downtown New York City Thursday to voice their anger over what they perceive as the roles Wall Street and big banks played in America's economic crisis.





Marching from City Hall to Wall Street, the protesters chanted "good jobs for all," and held signs with messages including "Hold banks accountable," "Make Wall Street Pay," and "Reclaim America."





The AFL-CIO organized the rally, and union President Richard Trumka addressed the crowd, saying, "How long will we allow the spirit of greed to continue to drive us into economic holes?"





The National People's Action, a group that was involved in organizing the protest, said in a news release that demonstrators represented unemployed workers, foreclosure victims and community activists.





Protester Gerard Pettine said he just wants Wall Street to be held accountable for its involvement in the economic collapse.





"They need to have some integrity and some honor and do the right thing," Pettine told CNN.





Protester Elizabeth Soto, who came with her brother to the rally, was concerned about the lack of job creation.





"We are here to say Wall Street's got to help Main Street," she said. "We supported the stimulus bill, which bailed out Wall Street, but we expected the jobs to come back to Main Street."





The New York Police Department estimated that 6,000 people participated in the rally.





Earlier Thursday, as part of a larger "day of action" against Wall Street, protesters descended upon the headquarters of two New York City banks -- JP Morgan Chase and Wells Fargo -- leaving letters for the banks' chief executive officers.





The letters, according to the news release from the National People's Action, said that the banks have an opportunity "to step up to the plate and be leaders in rebuilding the American economy."





JP Morgan spokesperson Mike Fusco declined to comment on the letter, but said that there were a "couple dozen" protesters who were in the building for less than a half hour.





Fran Durst of Wells Fargo said that about 100 protesters flooded their building's lobby and tried to deliver their letter to the bank's CEO. Durst said the event didn't cause a major disruption to the bank.





Other protests were scheduled in San Francisco, California; Kansas City, Missouri; and Charlotte, North Carolina, according to the National People's Action news release.





CNN's Mary Snow, Jennifer Rizzo, Cassie Spodak, and Kristen Hamill contributed to this report.

***

KANSAS CITY, Missouri (CNN) -- President Bush drew parallels between the aftermath of the Vietnam War and the potential costs of pulling out of Iraq in a speech Wednesday.



President Bush draws parallels Wednesday between the cost of pulling out of Iraq and "the tragedy of Vietnam."



"Three decades later, there is a legitimate debate about how we got into the Vietnam War and how we left," Bush told members of the Veterans of Foreign Wars, at their convention in Kansas City, Missouri.



"Whatever your position in that debate, one unmistakable legacy of Vietnam is that the price of America's withdrawal was paid by millions of innocent citizens, whose agonies would add to our vocabulary new terms like 'boat people,' 're-education camps' and 'killing fields,' " the president said.



The White House billed the speech, as it did next week's address to the American Legion, as an effort to "provide broader context" for the debate over the upcoming Iraq progress report by Gen. David Petraeus, the top U.S. military commander, and Ryan Crocker, the U.S. ambassador in Baghdad.



Bush also sought to shore up the perception of his support for Iraqi Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki, after voicing some frustration with him on Tuesday.



"Prime Minister Maliki's a good guy -- good man with a difficult job and I support him," Bush said. "And it's not up to the politicians in Washington, D.C., to say whether he will remain in his position.  Watch Bush reiterate his support for al-Maliki »



Sen. Edward Kennedy, D-Massachusetts, said Bush had drawn the wrong lesson from history:



"America lost the war in Vietnam because our troops were trapped in a distant country we did not understand supporting a government that lacked sufficient legitimacy with its people," Kennedy said in a statement.



Sen. Joe Biden, Democratic chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, invoked his own Vietnam analogy in a statement released after the speech:



"It's the president's policies that are pushing us toward another Saigon moment -- with helicopters fleeing the roof of our embassy -- which he says he wants to avoid."



Biden said Bush continues to cling to the premise that Iraqis will rally behind a strong central government, but he believes that will not happen.



"There's no trust within the Iraqi government; no trust of the government by the Iraqi people; no capacity of that government to deliver security or services; and no prospect that it will build that trust or capacity any time soon," Biden's statement said.



But House Republican leader John Boehner of Ohio said more Democrats are "bucking their party leaders" in acknowledging progress in Iraq.



"Many rank-and-file Democrats have seen this progress firsthand and are now acknowledging the successes of a strategy they've repeatedly opposed," Boehner said in a statement. "But Democratic leaders, deeply invested in losing the war, would rather move the goalposts and claim that a precipitous withdrawal is the right approach despite the overwhelming evidence of significant progress."



Former presidential adviser David Gergen said Bush ran the risk of doing as much harm as good for his case.



"By invoking Vietnam he raised the question, 'if you learned so much from history, how did you ever get us involved in another quagmire?' " Gergen said.



Gergen said he did agree with Bush in one respect, though: "He's right, initially when we pulled back in Vietnam there were massive killings."



On Tuesday, Bush had expressed frustration with the pace of progress toward political reconciliation in Iraq, saying if the Iraqi government doesn't "respond to the demands of the people, they will replace the government."



Iraqi Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki on Wednesday shot back at criticism of his government, including pointed remarks from a U.S. senator who called his administration "nonfunctioning" and urged Iraq's parliament to turn it out of office.



Speaking at a press conference in the Syrian capital of Damascus, al-Maliki characterized such

***

(Coastal Living) -- Visitors love driving Oregon's coast, but it's a shame not to get out and hike the stunning landscape, too. Here are several trails to get you started.



Explore forested headlands, tour tide pools or stroll the beach barefoot on some of the Pacific Northwest's best coastal trails.



Ecola State Park area, near Cannon Beach



Novice explorers can trek along the Pacific on Clatsop Loop Trail, a two-mile historical interpretive route in Ecola State Park that leads travelers in the footsteps of Lewis and Clark. More seasoned hikers might want to drive the extra miles to Tillamook State Forest for the Kings Mountain Trail, known for panoramic views and wildflower meadows. But be warned: Hikers must endure a 2,546-foot elevation gain in two and a half miles to enjoy the stunning mountain scenes.



Devil's Punch Bowl, near Depoe Bay



Formed by the collapsed roof of two sea caves, this "punch bowl" features dramatic water displays that are definitely worth the hike. An easy walk down Beverly Beach and a cliff-climbing staircase leads to the nature-carved basin. Spend the day exploring extensive tide pools, then amble back over to the bowl to witness the wildly churning waves that accompany high tide. The area also promises whale watching and birding. Seaside accommodations are within walking distance at The Inn at Otter Crest.



Oregon Dunes National Recreation Area and environs, near North Bend



Wind-sculpted dunes, a sparkling blue freshwater lake, and a historic lighthouse all await visitors here. Set aside a day for roaming the path at William M. Tugman State Park, which circles Eel Lake and its many inlets, and expect a few wildlife encounters along the way. The nearby Oregon Dunes National Recreation Area contains the largest coastal sand piles in North America and offers an array of arduous hiking opportunities. Travelers looking for a more laid-back excursion, however, can make their way to Umpqua Lighthouse State Park for relaxing walks and a glimpse of the 65-foot tower known for its distinctive red-and-white flash. CoastalLiving.com: Oregon's Perpetual Appeal



Columbia River Bar and Fort Stevens State Park, near Astoria



The Columbia River Bar has always been a navigational nightmare for sailors, and a hike beside the "Graveyard of the Pacific" will show you why. Pass by the shipwrecked remains of Peter Iredale, one of 2,000 ships that have sunk in this area, on your way to the viewing platform overlooking the jetty. For another slice of history, take a walking tour of Fort Stevens, or enjoy a scenic two-mile jaunt around the fort's Coffenbury Lake.



Humbug Mountain State Park, near Port Orford



Rising 1,756 feet over the Pacific, the forested peak of Humbug Mountain provides visitors with switchback trails and magnificent coastal vistas. Family-friendly paths, such as the paved Old Highway 101 Trail, wind through old-growth Douglas fir, Oregon myrtle, and Western red cedar and yield striking seaside views.



Enter to win a monthly Room Makeover Giveaway from MyHomeIdeas.com

***

(CNN)  -- A commuter airliner that crashed Thursday in upstate New York, killing 50 people, underwent violent pitching and rolling seconds before impact, with passengers experiencing twice the normal force of gravity, a federal investigator said Sunday.



Only a few pieces of the Continental Connection Dash 8 turboprop were recognizable after the crash.



The plane's final 800-foot fall took five seconds, Steve Chealander of the National Transportation Safety Board said.



The aircraft crashed into a home in Clarence Center, New York, near Buffalo, on Thursday night, killing all 49 people aboard. A 61-year-old man in the house died also, but his wife and daughter survived.



Final motions of the aircraft were so drastic that the plane's autopilot automatically disengaged and warnings sounded, Chealander said, citing information from the plane's flight data and cockpit voice recorders. Also, a "stick-shaker" device, which noisily vibrates an airplane's controls to warn the pilot of imminent stall, kicked in, he said.



The flight crew of Continental Connection Flight 3407, operated by Colgan Air, discussed "significant" ice buildup on the aircraft's windshield and wings before the crash, and icing has become a focus as a possible cause.  Follow the plane's path »



Chealander said the plane's de-icing system was turned on 11 minutes after the flight left Newark, New Jersey, for Buffalo, and remained on for the entire flight. He said the pilots were told before departure from Newark that there was "light to moderate icing" in the Buffalo area but that no other pilots had reported problems with their landings at the Buffalo airport.



"It was really not a bad-weather day, and they chose to launch [from Newark]," Chealander said of the pilot and the first officer.



The plane was on autopilot during its approach to the Buffalo airport, Chealander said. As to questions about whether the autopilot should have been turned off, Chealander said using it even in bad weather situations "is normal."  Watch Chealander discuss autopilot options »



"You're encouraged to use the autopilot to help you with the workloads of these high intense weather situations that we fly into all the time," he said.



He said the NTSB in the past has recommended to the Federal Aviation Administration, which oversees civil aviation including commercial airlines, that in severe icing conditions, "it might be best to disconnect autopilot so that the pilot might have a better feel" for the aircraft's conditions.



However, severe icing is "not what we saw here," Chealander said, adding that the FAA has no such disengagement rule in effect.



"To say that they should not have been flying on autopilot is not correct," Chealander said.



The pilots' recorded remarks about "significant" icing did not indicate "severe" icing, he said.



The NTSB has said problems for the 74-seat Bombardier Dash 8 Q400 occurred when the pilots lowered the landing gear and tried to set the wing flaps to slow the aircraft for landing.



Offering more details, Chealander said Sunday that the plane's nose pitched up 31 degrees, then down 45 degrees. The aircraft rolled left 46 degrees then right 105 degrees, or past the 90-degree vertical point, he said.



Inside the cabin, he said, conditions went from lower than normal gravitational force to twice the normal force as the plane rocked through the sky. iReport.com: Send your photos, videos from the scene



Chealander said the NTSB's investigation of the crash site indicated that the two propellers on the turboprop aircraft were in place when the crash occurred.



"The airplane hadn't lost anything prior to impact. It came down intact," he said.



Meanwhile, local authorities working to recover remains of the victims said Sunday that a federal team of more than 40 people using some $2.8 million worth of scientific equipment would begin on Monday to help establish positive identification of the victims. But because of the intensity of the crash and a subsequent fire, "whether we can identify everybody or not remains to be seen

***

(CNN)  -- An angry Phil Mickelson hinted at legal action for being accused of "cheating" by fellow PGA Tour professional Scott McCarron.





The world number two carded a two-under 70 to be four shots behind third round leader Ryuji Imada at the Farmers Insurance Open, but for the second day in a row his post-round press conference centered on his use of a 20-year-old wedge with square grooves.





McCarron was quoted in the San Francisco Chronicle on Friday, saying that Mickelson and others who had opted to play with the Ping-Eye 2 wedge were exploiting a loophole in PGA Tour rules.





"It's cheating, and I'm appalled Phil has put it in play," he said.





New rules introduced this year only allow for irons with V-shaped grooves, but because of a lawsuit filed by manufacturers Ping an exception has been made for wedges, with square grooves, which were made before April 1, 1990.





Mickelson is using one of those wedges at Torrey Pines this week and on Friday he was grilled about his use and McCarron reported comments.





Mickelson declined then to get into what he called "name calling" but mounted a stout defense of his use of the club, saying it was within the rules.





But after his fine third round on the South Course, Mickelson appeared to up the ante.





"We all have our opinions on the matter, but a line was crossed and I just was publicly slandered," Mickelson told the official PGA Tour Web site.





"And because of that, I'll have to let other people handle that."





Asked he was mounting a lawsuit, Mickelson said, "I'm not going into specifics what that meant."





Meanwhile, the PGA Tour has issued a statement to explain why the controversial Ping-Eye 2 wedges were approved for play, appearing to criticize McCarron for his comments.





"Because the use of pre-1990 Ping Eye 2 irons is permitted for play, public comments or criticisms characterizing their use as a violation of the Rules of Golf as promulgated by the USGA are inappropriate at best," read the final paragraph of the statement.





Mickelson said that it was "cool if they put that out there."





On the course, Imada shot a two-under 70 for a 13-under 203 and had a two-shot lead over Ben Crane (69) and Michael Sim of Australia.





U.S. Open champion Lucas Glover carded a 68 and was three shots behind with Mickelson a further stroke behind on his season-debut on the PGA Tour.

***

(CNET)  -- When Facebook Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg recently announced a "Like" button that publishers could place on their Web pages, he predicted it would make the Web smarter and "more social."





What Zuckerberg didn't point out is that widespread use of the Like button allows Facebook to track people as they switch from CNN.com to Yelp.com to ESPN.com, all of which are sites that have said they will implement the feature.





Even if someone is not a Facebook user or is not logged in, Facebook's social plugins collect the address of the Web page being visited and the Internet address of the visitor as soon as the page is loaded -- clicking on the Like button is not required.





If enough sites participate, that permits Facebook to assemble a vast amount of data about Internet users' browsing habits.





"If you put a Like button on your site, you're potentially selling out your users' privacy even if they never press that button," says Nicole Ozer, an attorney with the ACLU of Northern California. "It's another example of why user control needs to be the default in Facebook."





In the last few months, scrutiny of the privacy practices of the Internet's second most popular Web site has reached an all-time high, with politicians threatening probes and privacy activists calling for formal investigations.





In response to the outcry, Zuckerberg convened a press conference last week at Facebook's Palo Alto, California, headquarters, where he pledged to make privacy "simpler."





For its part, Facebook told CNET on Tuesday that the information about who viewed what pages with a Like button is anonymized after three months and is not shared with or sold to third parties. A representative acknowledged, however, that the current privacy description of Facebook's social plugins "is not as clear as it could be, and we'll fix that."





Facebook's FAQ says: "No data is shared about you when you see a social plugin on an external website." No mention of this data-sharing appears under the "Information from other websites" section of the company's general privacy policy.





Publishers like "Like"





Almost as soon as Zuckerberg had finished describing the Like buttons at the F8 developer conference in April, they became a hit with Web publishers hoping for a traffic boost.





Wired's Webmonkey.com published a tutorial, a WordPress adaptation appeared, and Foursquare quickly incorporated the concept too.





Facebook itself confirmed that after only a week, "more than 50,000 sites across the Web have implemented" social plugins.





SearchEngineLand.com said Like buttons are "recommended" for virtually all Web sites; one blogging how-to guide reported that "small, blue Like buttons are now multiplying across the Web faster than you can say 'pandemic.'"





Marc Rotenberg, director of the Electronic Privacy Information Center, said that if his group had been aware of how the Like button was implemented, it would have raised this topic in a request for a Federal Trade Commission investigation of Facebook's privacy practices. (The statement sent to the FTC says, in part, that social plugins "violate user expectations and reveal user information without the user's consent.")





"The recent Facebook changes are too complex and too subtle for most users to meaningfully evaluate," Rotenberg said. "And it's not obvious that the recent announcement from Facebook has addressed all of these problems."





On the other hand, some of the Like button's features can work only if Facebook receives the user ID and URL of the Web page being visited. That allows a custom bit of Javascript code to customize the Like button.





Social plugins "work the same basic way all widgets across the Internet do," said Barry Schnitt, a Facebook spokesman. "The URL of the Web page the user is viewing must be sent to Facebook for Facebook to know where to render the personalized content."





Schnitt said Facebook does not correlate pages viewed with advertising, so someone who spends a lot of time reading articles about German sports cars on caranddriver.com will not receive Porsche 911

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- CNN White House correspondent Suzanne Malveaux has covered the Bush administration for six years.



CNN's Suzanne Malveaux shares a light moment with President Bush during his final press conference Monday.



As always, she was in the room Monday when Bush held his final press conference, an almost hourlong event in which the president answered questions about current issues and reflected on his eight years in office.



Here Malveaux reflects on her time covering the Bush administration and on the final White House press conference, which she described as "raw," "fascinating" and "bizarre."



Q: How do you compare this to previous briefings?



Malveaux: This was an extraordinary press conference. It took the president a little time to warm up. He called on me third. About two questions after that, he embraced this different kind of mood and revealed things about himself that he didn't before.  Watch Bush talk about his respect for the press »



We'd heard a bit about his misgivings before, but we didn't expect to hear about his disappointments -- "Sometimes the biggest disappointments will come from your so-called friends."



At times he looked directly at me, other times away, in flashes of rage. And occasionally he turned to all of us pleading with an expression for understanding, empathy.



He raised his voice when it was suggested that he was alone, insisting that he never felt the burden of the office: "I believe this -- the phrase 'burdens of the office' is overstated," he said.



But at other points he reflected on the weight of the job: "You never escape the presidency. It travels with you wherever you go."



When he was discussing Iraq, he was almost yelling, defending his administration. He was using gestures, leaning forward on the podium, his finger raised in the air. It was dramatic.



Q: What was it like in the room?



A: You saw at times a defiant President Bush as well as ultimately reflective in some ways.



We know he regretted the "Mission Accomplished" banner on the aircraft carrier. But we heard some new details about how he had some regrets that Air Force One flew over New Orleans at that critical time when the city was under water during Katrina, as opposed to landing. He said he was wary of taking away law enforcement and rescue resources on the ground.



But later in the press conference he was defiant about Hurricane Katrina, telling us: "Don't tell me the federal response was slow when there was 30,000 people pulled off roofs right after the storm passed."  Watch Bush defend the response to Katrina »



It was from there the president shifted to the president-elect. He discussed the fact that many people never thought they'd see the day when a black man would become the president, and it spoke volumes about the progress the country's made with race. At that time, he seemed misty-eyed.



Q: Were you surprised at how candid the president was?



A: This is certainly the most open he has been about some of the failures of his administration.



You know, what was interesting, he took us back to the time of September 11 in a very emotional and strident way. He said -- remember those times when they had those tough questions, why didn't you put the dots together? It was almost as if he felt like he couldn't win either way.



But at the same time, he said self-pity was pathetic and it wasn't something he was going to engage in.



It was a very interesting look at President Bush grappling with all of these different things -- the successes as well as the failures.



You get a sense here that he is looking at his legacy, that he's trying to come to terms with some of the things he did, his role in all of this.



Q: Was there any one moment that stood out to you?



A: He was most defiant when he talked about what

***

Port-au-Prince, Haiti (CNN) -- Scores of bodies were found in a mass grave outside the capital city of Port-au-Prince on Friday, a sign of Haitians' desperation three days after a 7.0-magnitude earthquake devastated the impoverished nation.





At least 100 bodies were discovered by a CNN crew in one open pit outside Port-au-Prince, with several other pits half-filled or completely covered over with earth, presumably full. The bodies were brought to the site by dump trucks, still accompanied by the remnants of what loved ones used to move them -- pieces of plywood, makeshift shrouds and in one case, an old refrigerator.





Elsewhere, bodies were being shoved into old crypts in the city's existing cemeteries.





Haiti's Minister of Civil Protection said Friday that the government estimates more than 50,000 people were killed, with the number possibly closer to 100,000. There is not yet an official count of the dead from the quake.





Despite the death and destruction, hundreds of people, mostly women, took to the streets in an area of the capital on Friday, singing and chanting as they marched down the street -- a sign of resilience amid huge mounds of rubble.





It is not the first time such a display has been observed. Singing and clapping has been heard well into the night in a large square that thousands of people have made home after the earthquake, a CNN crew reported.





Meanwhile, a crucial 72-hour window elapsed Friday afternoon -- the time to free those who still may be alive trapped under the remains of buildings. An 18-month-old baby was pulled from the rubble Friday, seemingly unharmed. Get the latest developments in Haiti





Still, those rescued weren't out of danger as hospitals lacked proper supplies to treat some of them. An 11-year-old girl rescued Thursday -- an effort CNN captured on camera throughout the day -- died later that night from her injuries after a first-aid station said it couldn't treat her severe leg wound, her family said.





Aid workers continued to trickle into the country Friday, trying to provide water and food to survivors in the capital, which still was being rocked by aftershocks Friday.





The quake toppled many of Port-au-Prince's buildings, and U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon estimated Friday that it left as many as "50 percent of buildings in the worst-hit areas damaged or destroyed."





Many of the capital's 3 million people are without access to food, water, shelter and electricity, he said, and crews are working "to save as many lives as possible."





Haitian President Rene Preval identified three priorities in the recovery effort -- get the government back up and running, clear the roads and sanitize the city of the scores of corpses scattered about its streets, he told U.N. television Friday





There were small signs of progress in food and water distribution by Friday afternoon. A few fire trucks and tankers were seen distributing water. A U.N. distribution center also was set up -- guarded by Bolivian U.N. peacekeeping troops -- where some 10,000 plates of cooked chicken and rice were handed out to a patient line of survivors. Elsewhere, a U.N. food convoy was rushed by dozens of hungry people who clamored to reach the handouts of nutritional biscuits and water-purification tablets. Impact Your World





Ban announced Friday that he will travel to Haiti on Sunday. U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton also announced Friday that she will visit the quake-battered capital on Saturday, the first major U.S. official to do so.





President Obama spoke for about a half-hour with Preval on Friday, pledging the "full support of the American people," including long-term help.





The relief effort has been challenged by the destruction and the need for more supplies, the U.N. secretary-general said, citing blocked roads and limited capacity at the capital's one-runway airport. The Federal Aviation Administration ordered a ground stop on all U.S. flights into Haiti Friday because of a lack of ramp space. Haiti aid efforts hampered in critical hours





But, Ban said, aid flights are

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- A jury Tuesday acquitted three men of charges that they helped the bombers who carried out the July 7, 2005, attacks on the London transportation system.





Sadeer Saleem was accused of helping to plan the July 7, 2005 bombings in London





The four bombers died in the blasts, but Waheed Ali, Sadeer Saleem and Mohammed Shakil were accused of helping them by conducting reconnaissance and conspiring with them.





Two of the men -- Ali and Shakil -- were convicted of a second charge of conspiracy to attend a place used for terrorist training. They will be sentenced Wednesday, London's Metropolitan Police said.





Tuesday's verdicts came at the end of the men's retrial at Kingston Crown Court in southwest London. A separate jury failed to reach a verdict in their first trial, which ended in August after three months.





The bombings in 2005 killed 52 people in blasts on three subway trains and a bus. At least 900 people were wounded.





Police arrested the three in March 2007 after piecing together what they called a "complicated jigsaw with thousands of pieces." They were charged in April 2007.





Police said they analyzed more than 4,700 phone numbers and 90,000 calls. They discovered the three men had made a trip to London in December 2004 -- seven months before the fatal bombings -- which prosecutors claimed was a reconnaissance trip to scout potential targets.





Prosecutors said that on December 16, 2004, the men traveled from the northern English city of Leeds to London, along with Hasib Hussain, one of the July 7 bombers. When they got to the capital, they met with Lindsay.





Over the next two days, prosecutors claimed, the men visited tourist sites including the London Eye ferris wheel, the London Aquarium and the Natural History Museum, as well as underground train locations. Some of the spots, prosecutors said, were near where the July 7 bombs were eventually detonated.





Police called it "the first feasibility study" for the London bombings -- and whether they were looking at tourist or transportation sites, the men were seeking out potential bomb targets, police said.





The three men, who always denied the charges, acknowledged making the trip but said it was just an innocent outing to visit Ali's sister in London. Saleem told the court that he had had "no idea whatsoever" about the plot.





Traces of DNA linked all three alleged accomplices in some way to the bombers, police had claimed. Investigators found Ali's fingerprints on evidence found at the bomb-making sites.





Khan, Lindsay, Hussain and a fourth bomber, Shehzad Tanweer, set off a series of bombs the morning of July 7, 2005. They exploded on underground trains near Liverpool Street, Russell Square and Edgware Road and on a double-decker bus at Tavistock Square.





Police have previously said they believe others with knowledge of the attacks remain at large.





The jury found that in July 2001, Ali went with Khan to Pakistan. In July 2003, Shakil went with Khan to a camp in Pakistan, where the two undertook firearms training with machine guns, rocket-propelled grenade launchers, and AK-47 assault rifles, London police said.





The jury found Ali and Shakil guilty of conspiring to attend a place used for terrorist training, knowing or believing that instruction or training would be provided for purposes connected with the commission or preparation of acts of terrorism, London police said.





"Mohammed Siddique Khan and Mohammed Shakil told other attendees that their aim was to fight in Afghanistan," said John McDowall, head of the Metropolitan Police Counter Terrorism Command. "They were proficient in the use of and handling of terrorist weapons, and were certainly not enjoying a day out in a beautiful and mountainous area of Pakistan, as was suggested in court.





"Shakil himself accepted that the camp at Malakand was a serious business, whose purpose was to train willing volunteers to fight and kill in Afghanistan on behalf of the Taliban, a cause to which both he and Ali were, and remain, sympathetic," McDowall said.

***

Los Angeles, California (CNN) -- Rain pounded water-logged Los Angeles on Thursday, and Mayor Antonio Villaraigosa said more than 300 city residents were ordered to evacuate because of the threat of mudslides.





"We continue to urge the public who live in these areas to evacuate, to heed the warnings of our police officers and firefighters, our first responders, who are there to protect your public safety," the mayor said.





Just over 500 Los Angeles County residents who were advised to flee their homes earlier had done so by Thursday morning, said Capt. Sam Padilla of the Los Angeles County Fire Department.





The latest storm is part of a series that began Monday, drenching communities up and down the coast. Some areas have received more than 12 inches of rain this week, the National Weather Service reported. Flash flood watches were in effect Thursday night for Southern California, as well as central Arizona and southern Utah.





"While the worst of the last few storms is behind us, there still is a significant threat from thundershowers that are forming off the coast," Villaraigosa said at a news conference Thursday night, warning of the potential for lightning, hail and water spouts.





Los Angeles had four swift-water rescue and two urban search-and-rescue teams on standby to deal with potential flooding, according to the mayor, who said more were available if needed. There were three swift-water rescues Wednesday, according to Padilla.





No relief from the wet weather is expected until the weekend, increasing the threat of mudslides in communities nestled below hills that were stripped of trees and vegetation during 2009 wildfires.





Villaraigosa said the brunt of the storm was supposed to hit by 6 p.m. Rainfall totals of 1 to 4 inches are expected across coastal sections of California with isolated additional rainfall amounts of 7 inches possible, forecasters said.





Are you affected by the storms? Send your images and video





The rains are the result of El Niño, a warm ocean current from the South Pacific, according to CNN meteorologist Chad Myers.





In coastal Pacifica, south of San Francisco, a huge mudslide left an apartment building teetering on the edge of a cliff overlooking the Pacific Ocean, CNN's Dan Simon reported. He said the four apartments in the building were evacuated, and quoted an engineer saying the building could topple into the water at any time. TV crews could be near the structure only briefly.





One man complained about being told to leave his Southern California home.





"You're talking about blocking us out of here for five days, evacuating until next week," he said to CNN affiliate KABC-TV in Los Angeles. "You know what, that's too many days, that's a huge inconvenience. I understand they're looking out for our safety ... but I'm not out driving around. I'm staying put."





See KABC's coverage of the storms





Villaraigosa said Thursday that U.S. geologists, sanitation workers and street maintenance workers will head into threatened regions Friday morning to determine whether it is safe for residents to return to their homes.





In the mountains of Southern California, the storms brought heavy snow, closing Interstate 15 at Cajon Pass and the Grapevine section of Interstate 5 for a time, the California Highway Patrol reported Thursday.





Heavy snowfall remains in the forecast for the higher elevations in the Sierra Nevada, southeastern Utah, southwestern Colorado and southeastern Arizona. More than 73 inches of snow has fallen in Chagoopa Plateau, California, since Sunday and more than 35 inches in parts of Arizona.





CNN's Sean Morris contributed to this report.

***

COLOMBO, Sri Lanka (CNN) -- Angered by what he perceived as the systemic discrimination of the minority Tamils by successive Sri Lankan governments, 18-year-old Velupillai Prabhakaran, armed with just a revolver, set out in 1972 to right the perceived wrongs by forming a militant group.



Sri Lanka's defense ministry says this handout photo shows troops with a captured Tamil Tiger craft.



That group eventually morphed into the Tamil Tigers, who have engaged in a brutal 25-year insurgency for an independent Tamil state that has left more than 70,000 dead.



Along the way, the group has been declared a terrorist organization in 32 countries, pioneered the use of women in suicide attacks and, according to the FBI, invented the suicide belt.



It was also behind the assassination of two world leaders -- the only terrorist organization to do so.



Over the weekend, the militants offered to "silence" their guns after an intense military offensive decimated their ranks, usurping them from their stronghold in the north and east of the country, and cornered the remaining rebels on a small stretch of land.  Watch more on the possible end to the conflict »



On Monday afternoon, the Sri Lankan government said it had killed Prabhakaran. If the rebels now follow through on their announcement, the action will potentially mark the end of the longest-running civil war in Asia.



Who are the Tamils?



The Tamils are an ethnic group that makes up about 12 percent of Sri Lanka's population of about 20 million. They mostly dominate the northern and eastern part of the country.



Tamils are mostly Hindu and speak Tamil.



That sets them apart from Sri Lanka's majority group, the Sinhalese, who make up 74 percent of the population. They are Buddhists and speak Sinhala.



The tension between the two ethnic groups date to the British colonization of the country -- an island in the Indian Ocean, south of India.



At the time, the country was known as Ceylon. Many Sri Lankans regarded the Tamils as British collaborators and resented the preferential treatment they received.



The tables turned when the country achieved independence in 1948 and the Sinhalese majority dominated government. It was the Tamils then who claimed they were being discriminated against in politics, employment and education.



By the 1970s Tamil politicians were demanding a separate Tamil state. It would be called Tamil Eelam.



In this climate Prabhakaran emerged with his militant group, formally known as the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam.



Who is Prabhakaran?



Prabhakaran operated from a secret jungle base in the northeastern part of the country, granting few media interviews and remaining an elusive figure to even many Tigers.



He was reputed to wear a cyanide capsule around his neck -- to swallow rather than risk capture. And he reportedly expected the same dedication from his troops. As a result, few Tigers have been captured alive.



To Prabhakaran's supporters he was a hero fighting for the rights of his people. The Sri Lankan government deemed him a war criminal with disregard for civilian casualties. He was wanted by Interpol on charges including terrorism and organized crime.



In 1975, three years after forming his group, Prabhakaran was accused of fatally shooting the mayor of Jaffna, his birthplace.



Prabhakaran was also accused of masterminding the killing of then-Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi in 1991 in the Tamil-dominated Indian state of Tami Nadu. Sri Lankan authorities allege that Prabhakaran was avenging Gandhi's decision to send Indian peacekeepers to Sri Lanka.



Two years later, a Tigers' suicide bomber, allegedly acting under Prabhakaran's orders, detonated explosives that killed Sri Lanka's then-president, Ranasinghe Premadasa, during a rally.  Watch aid agencies fear for Sri Lanka »



Who are the Tamil Tigers?



The Tigers reportedly number about 10,000, recruited from villagers in Tamil-dominated areas and unemployed Tamil youths who think they were passed over for jobs because of their ethnicity.



Their armed struggle began in July 1983 when the Tigers killed 13 Sinhalese soldiers. It led to, what was until then, the largest outburst of violence in the island's history. Hundreds of Tamils were

***

What the heck are triglycerides? If you don't know, you have plenty of company.



One in every three Americans has high triglyceride levels, which elevate risk of heart disease and early death.



The fatty particles found in your blood are important for heart health, but don't get nearly as much attention as, say, cholesterol.



Now a new study suggests that there's a good chance that your triglycerides are in the unhealthy zone, whether you know what they are or not. About one-third of American adults have triglyceride levels that are borderline or too high, according to a Centers for Disease Control and Prevention report published Monday in Archives of Internal Medicine.



"I see it as a major problem that we've completely ignored this problem so far," said Dr. Børge Nordestgaard of the University of Copenhagen in Denmark. Nordestgaard has conducted research linking high triglyceride levels to cardiovascular disease and early death, but was not involved in the CDC research.



"Everyone in clinical practice seemed to be so focused on LDL, LDL, LDL [bad cholesterol], people tended to forget triglycerides." he said.



Being too heavy, getting too little activity, drinking lots of alcohol and eating lots of saturated fat can all add up to higher triglyceride levels because the body stores excess calories as triglycerides. Health.com: Fats to eat, fats to avoid



Triglycerides are a third type of fatty particle found in the blood, along with LDL cholesterol and HDL (also known as good) cholesterol. People taking certain medications or those who have diabetes or a genetic condition can have high triglycerides. Health.com: What cholesterol tests reveal about your heart's health



Nordestgaard said that high triglycerides are as dangerous as high cholesterol levels as a risk marker for heart disease and early death.



"There's a really big potential for further prevention of heart disease and strokes by getting more focused on that," he said.  Health.com: How stress can trigger heart problems



The problem: Right now, the best way to attack high triglycerides is by losing weight, eating more healthily, and becoming more active-- a tall order for many of us.



In the new report, Dr. Earl Ford of the CDC, and his colleagues looked at a nationally representative group of 5,610 people 20 and older. They found that 33.1 percent had triglyceride levels above 150 milligrams per deciliter, while 17.9 percent had levels above 200 milligrams per deciliter, 1.7 percent had levels of 500 milligrams per deciliter or above, and 0.4 percent had levels higher than 1,000 milligrams per deciliter.



Triglycerides of 150 to 199 milligrams per deciliter are considered borderline high and anything above 200 milligrams per deciliter is considered too high. Men were more likely than women to have high triglycerides, while whites were at greater risk than African Americans and Mexican Americans.



Very high triglyceride levels can cause inflammation of the pancreas. Although there's increasing evidence that elevated triglycerides are associated with cardiovascular disease and early death, no one has yet shown that treating high triglyceride levels reduces cardiovascular disease, according to an editorial by Dr. Warren G. Thompson and Dr. Gerald T. Gau of the Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, in Rochester, Minnesota.



Lifestyle changes-- exercising, losing weight, swapping healthy fats for unhealthy ones, and the like-- are the treatment of choice right now for people with triglyceride levels between 150 milligrams per deciliter and 500 milligrams per deciliter . According to the National Cholesterol Education Panel, higher-risk people with triglyceride levels falling in this range may also need medication.



Beyond lifestyle changes, treatments for high triglycerides include statins, fibrates, niacin, and fish oil. But while fibrates reduce the risk of cardiovascular events like stroke and heart attack, Thompson and Gau note, they don't reduce mortality and actually increase the risk of death from non-heart-related causes; they are only recommended for people with triglycerides above 1,000 milligrams per deciliter.



"What we really need scientifically, we need companies to come up with drugs that are more efficient at particularly reducing triglycerides," said Nordestgaard. He usually recommends that people try statins first if lifestyle changes are not enough-- as do Thompson