Tehran, Iran (CNN) -- Five people arrested after street disturbances erupted in Tehran during the recent Ashura holy day could face the death penalty, an Iranian semi-official news agency reported Thursday.



The Iran Labor News Agency reported that the five will be tried for Moharebe, or waging war against God -- a charge that could be punishable by execution. ILNA attributed the information in its report to the Iranian judiciary.



The case will be tried "soon" with defense lawyers and a prosecutor-general representative present at proceedings. "Confessions of the accused and the investigations of the authorities" will be considered, ILNA said.



Abbas Jafari-Dolatabadi, prosecutor for the Public and Revolution Courts, had stressed that people who created disturbances on the Shiite Muslim holy day of Ashura "by setting fire to public property and other similar crimes" were engaging in acts "tantamount to Moharebe," ILNA said.



In-depth coverage of the protests in Iran



"The judiciary will severely confront those people based on the law," the report said.



Anti-government demonstrations began after the disputed June 12 presidential vote, which re-elected hardline President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad over main opposition candidate Mir Hossein Moussavi.



But late December marked the deadliest clashes since the initial protests broke out this summer.



At least seven people were killed and hundreds arrested, witnesses said, as they took to the streets on Ashura, which occurred on December 27. The Iranian government has denied that its security forces killed anyone and has blamed reformists for the violence. At times, video has shown protesters apparently turning on security forces.

***

(CNN) -- In the early morning hours Saturday, surviving remnants of a NASA satellite re-entered Earth's atmosphere over a remote stretch of the southern Pacific Ocean, the U.S. space agency said Tuesday.





Nick Johnson, NASA's chief scientist for orbital debris, said on the agency's website that the re-entry point was in the general vicinity of Christmas Island, south of Indonesia.





"It's unlikely that anyone actually observed the re-entry," Johnson said, adding that NASA has yet to receive any reports of a sighting from airplanes, ships or island inhabitants in the region.





A NASA statement on the website, labeled the final status report on the falling satellite, said it entered the atmosphere at 0400 GMT Saturday, midnight on the U.S. East Coast, over "a broad, remote ocean area in the Southern Hemisphere."





The exact coordinates cited by NASA were 14.1 degrees south latitude and 189.8 degrees east longitude (170.2 west longitude).





According to the statement, debris would have landed 300 to 800 miles northeast of the re-entry point.





The Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite was launched in 1991 on a space shuttle mission and ceased its scientific life in 2005, the NASA statement said.





It broke into pieces during re-entry, NASA said, with 26 chunks weighing a total of 1,200 pounds considered likely to reach the Earth's surface.





According to NASA, space debris the size of the satellite's components re-enters the atmosphere about once a year.

***

(CNN) -- Four British soldiers have been killed in one day in separate attacks in Afghanistan, the British Ministry of Defense announced Friday.



A British marine with an opium haul in Helmand province, where the four soldiers were killed.



The deaths happened in three incidents in the southern Helmand province, the ministry said.



Two soldiers were killed in a suicide bombing that happened Thursday afternoon during a patrol in Gereshk, the ministry said. One was a member of the Royal Gurkha Rifles and the other served with the Royal Military Police.



"With heavy heart we report another extremely sad situation, where lives of our courageous soldiers have been sacrificed for the greater good of the Afghan people," said Lieutenant Colonel Nick Richardson, a spokesman for Task Force Helmand. "Our deepest and heartfelt sympathies go to their families and loved ones and we offer our thoughts and prayers to them all at this most painful and distressing time."



Thursday evening, another soldier was killed by an explosion as he traveled in a Jackal 4x4 patrol vehicle, the ministry said. He served in the 2nd Battalion The Rifles.  Watch Afghanistan's president talk on U.S. troops withdrawals »



Earlier in the day, a soldier from The Black Watch, 3rd Battalion The Royal Regiment of Scotland was killed by a gunshot wound, the ministry said. He had been on patrol with the Afghan National Army in the vicinity of Woqab, close to Musa Qala.

***

(CNN) -- News stories saying authorities thwarted a plot to bomb the U.S. Embassy in Mexico are not true, the Mexican secretary of the navy said Tuesday.





At least two Mexican media outlets published a supposed internal report on the plot that had been leaked to the media. But the navy said the report is "fake."





In a statement released Tuesday afternoon, only hours after the news stories were published, the navy said it "categorically rejects the authorship of the alleged report in possession of some media outlets."





"The print seals and watermarks that appear on the document, as well as its format, do not correspond to the ones utilized by this federal government agency," the release read.





The secretary of the navy reported in June 2010 that four people had been detained for allegedly being in possession of 20 kilograms of explosives in the Roma neighborhood of Mexico City.





According to the stories published by the two Mexican media outlets, the finding was related to a plot by the Somali terrorist group Al-Shabaab to attack the U.S. Embassy in Mexico City.





Reports of a possible explosives cache came to the U.S. State Department in June 2010, according to a State Department source. A Somali citizen was arrested, but when Mexican authorities looked into the matter, they found nothing conclusive, said the source, who asked not to be identified. The suspect was then released, the source said.





The Mexican president's office and the Mexican Embassy in Washington told CNN they had no information regarding the alleged plot.





Officials with the U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives in Washington also denied any knowledge of the report.

***

MOSCOW, Russia (CNN) -- A magnitude 6.6 earthquake struck southern Kyrgyzstan late Sunday night killing an estimated 70 people and destroying more than 120 buildings, the government reported Monday.

The earthquake occurred near Kyrgyzstan's border with China.

Gulshat Kadirova, an official from the Kyrgyz Ministry of Emergency Situations, told CNN that casualty figures were preliminary and could rise as rescue efforts progress.

The weekend quake, measured by the U.S. Geological Survey Report, rattled all of Central Asia; however destruction is concentrated in the remote village of Nura on Kyrgyzstan's border with China.

"The remoteness of the villages hit by the earthquake, the absence of means of communications and the destruction of roads are hindering assistance to the injured," the Kyrgyz Health Ministry press service told Interfax.

The Health Ministry of Kyrgyzstan has set-up a crisis center in the region, however rescue efforts remain difficult, according to a ministry official.

The Kyrgyz Emergency Situations Ministry also sent humanitarian aid to the region.

"Four helicopters have just left taking food and blankets to the people affected in the area," a ministry representative told CNN by phone.

Russian President Dmitry Medvedev sent a letter of condolence to Kyrgyz President Kurmanbek Bakiyev, according to the Kremlin's Web site.

Medvedev noted Russia's readiness to offer assistance.

Bakiyev is scheduled to visit the destroyed region of Nura this week to monitor the search-and-rescue operations, Kadirova told CNN.

Temblors continued in Central Asia on Monday with two strong earthquakes striking part of Tibet within 15 minutes of each other.

***

(CNN) -- AC Milan have swooped to sign Standard Liege defender Oguchi Onyewu on a three-year contract -- making him the first American to appear in Serie A since Alexi Lalas in 1996.



Onyewu will become the first American since Alexi Lalas to appear in Italian Serie A after joining AC Milan.



Onyewu, who has also played in the English Premier League with Newcastle United, has moved to the San Siro on a free transfer after impressing with some superb displays during the United States' run to the Confederations Cup final.



The 27-year-old has played 38 times for his country, scoring five goals.Latest transfer gossip and rumors



"This transaction shows once again the excellent friendly relationship between our club and Belgian club Standard Liege, particularly their executive vice-president Luciano D'Onofrio," said a statement on Milan's official Web site.



The six-foot four-inch player was born in Washington DC to Nigerian parents but began his club career at Metz in France in 2002.



He was loaned out to La Louviere in Belgium in 2003 and his form there earnt him a move to Liege, where he won two Belgian titles.



He then joined Newcastle on loan, playing 11 league matches.



However, the  transfer is unlikely to appease the Milan supporters who are unhappy with the summer sale of Brazilian superstar Kaka to Real Madrid -- and the departure of coach Carlo Ancelotti to Chelsea.



About 300 fans protested outside the club's Milanello base on the first day of pre-season training on Monday, complaining at the lack of big name signings.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- An Air Force F-22A fighter jet crashed Wednesday near Edwards Air Force Base in California, killing the test pilot, the Air Force said.



An F-22A fighter jet similar to this one crashed Wednesday during a test mission in California.



The single-seater crashed about 10:30 a.m. (1:30 p.m. ET) for unknown reasons, Air Force officials said.



Lockheed Martin said the test pilot, David Cooley, 49, of Palmdale, California, joined the company in 2003 and was a 21-year veteran of the U.S. Air Force.



The fighter was on a test mission when it crashed about 35 miles northeast of  Edwards AFB, where it was stationed, the Air Force said in a news release.



At $150 million apiece, the F-22A is the most expensive Air Force fighter.



In 2004, an F-22 Raptor crashed on a training mission in the Nevada desert. The pilot ejected and was not hurt, though the jet was destroyed.



The plane was designed in the 1980s to provide a stealthy method to enter Soviet air space and strike Soviet bombers if the USSR attempted a nuclear strike.



Once the Cold War ended, the Air Force found a new mission for the F-22 as a long-range fighter with a sophisticated stealth design and state-of-the-art equipment that no other plane could rival.



However, the rising cost of the plane and numerous design and software problems threatened the program, which was almost eliminated by Congress.



In the end, the aircraft survived, and most of the problems were fixed -- except for the price tag, which forced the Air Force to buy fewer aircraft.

***

(CNN) -- Andre Berto claimed the vacant World Boxing Council welterweight title when he halted Miguel Rodriguez in the seventh round in Memphis.



Berto took the WBC belt vacated when Floyd Mayweather retired.



Berto (22-0, 19 KOs) picked up the WBC belt that became vacant when Floyd Mayweather retired.



Rodriguez's record dropped to 29-3 with 23 KOs.



Berto floored Rodriguez with an uppercut in the seventh round and when Rodriquez went down a second time referee Lawrance Cole intervened at 2:13.



Dane Mikkel Kessler knocked out Dimitri Sartison in the 12th round in Copenhagen, to become World Boxing Association supermiddle champion .



Kessler (40-1) dominated throughout in front of an enthusiastic home crowd at the Brondby Hall.



Sartison, who was born in Kazhakstan but grew up in Germany, suffered his first loss after a 22-0 start in his pro career.



Kessler won the WBA title in November 2004 by stopping Manny Siaca of Puerto Rico.



He also lifted the the WBC super middleweight crown two years later when he knocked out Markus Beyer of Germany in the third round.



But he surrendered both belts when Joe Calzaghe of Wales ended his unbeaten run in Cardiff last November.



Britain's Amir Khan was floored before successfully defending his Commonwealth lightweight title with a fifth round stoppage of Michael Gomez in Birmingham.



Khan, who has won all 18 of his fights since turning professional after winning a silver medal at the 2004 Athens Olympics, knocked Gomez down in the first round but found himself on the canvas in the second in a brief but rugged contest.



Khan said: "This was one of my toughest fights but I learned from my mistakes. I will watch the video and work on them and continue my journey to the world title."



Khan was on target with a powerful right uppercut in the first round and a combination of punches floored Gomez, who retaliated in the second round.



A left hook over the top of a jab put Khan down and he had to take a standing count and looked unsteady on his legs for several seconds afterwards.



Gomez landed a damaging hook to the ribs in the fourth but early in the fifth Khan put his opponent down again with a powerful body shot.



Gomez began to take a lot of punishment and referee John Keane stopped the contest.



Gomez looked disappointed but appeared to be all but out on his feet.

***

(CNN) -- A tornado swept through parts of Tupelo, Mississippi, on Thursday, damaging trees, power lines and overturning a 18-wheel truck, a law enforcement official said.



iReporter Graham Hancock saw damage Thursday at the Tupelo Furniture Market in Tupelo, Mississippi.



"Just a little earlier this morning, we began to get reports of damage starting from the west side of Tupelo," said Chief Deputy John Hall of the Lee County Sheriff's Department.



Hall said the storm moved north across the city to the Mall at Barnes Crossing. Nearby on U.S. 45, an 18-wheel truck was overturned, he said.



There were no reports of injuries, and Hall said authorities were assessing damages.  Watch as a Tupelo resident describes the storm »



Jeff Snyder, general manager for the Mall at Barnes Crossing, said the shopping center sustained "minor property damage."



Terry Anderson, executive director of Tupelo Regional Airport, said the facility had minor damage, including some broken windows.



He said the airport was closed for about 10 minutes while the taxiway and runway were cleared. No flights were delayed, he said, and the airport is "up and running."



Mark Waddle, who works at  the airport, said he saw the storm form.



"It was real small at first," said Waddle, an employee at the airport's Budget Car Rental counter. "All the clouds were twirling around."



Waddle said he watched as the tornado touched down near the airport.



"It looked like it hit some kind of transformer because the whole sky lit up blue," he said. "Then it kind of blew through the Tupelo airport. ... It was blowing so hard the trees were touching the ground."



Waddle said he was not aware of any significant damage to the airport apart from overturned trash cans and debris in tree branches.



"All of the people and all the vehicles and everything are fine up here at the airport," he said.



Bobbye Jones, who works at the Mississippi Department of Transportation in Tupelo, said the roof blew off the lab at the agency.



She said fallen tree branches also had damaged vehicles outside her office.



"Everything just got real dark," Jones said. .



A tornado watch, which denotes favorable conditions for tornadoes, is in effect until late Thursday afternoon for parts of northwestern Alabama.

***

Tokyo (CNN) -- A Japanese power company restarted a nuclear reactor this week, the first to come back online since a March earthquake and tsunami in the nation.





The March 11 disasters sparked a nuclear crisis and a backlash that postponed plans to reopen reactors shut down because of damage, inspections or unrelated technical problems.





Kyushu Electric Power Co. said it has started generating electricity from the No. 4 reactor late Tuesday at the Genkai nuclear power plant in western Japan.





The reactor was taken offline in October after technical problems.





Company officials won approval from a local governor and a mayor to bring the reactor online, Japan's Kyodo news agency reported.





Nuclear safety critics criticized the reopening, with the power company receiving more than 200 calls Tuesday from citizens who opposed the move.





Another power company said it may have suffered a setback in its efforts to handle damaged nuclear reactors.





Tokyo Electric Power Co. said Wednesday it detected the chemical element xenon in a nuclear reactor at the crippled Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant, a sign that nuclear fission may have occurred.





The power company said it began injecting boric acid into the cooling system and has not seen a temperature change that would suggest nuclear fission has occurred.





The reactor, No. 2, was one of several damaged in the wake of the historic March 11 disaster.





Recently, Japanese officials said it may take 30 years to decommission the four damaged reactors at the power plant.





A draft report, released by Japan's Atomic Energy Commission of the Cabinet Office last week, said the removal of debris -- or nuclear fuel -- should begin by the end of 2021.

***

MUGELLO, Italy -- Italian Valentino Rossi's resurgence continued on Saturday, as the five-time MotoGP champion took pole position at his home race in Mugello.



Rossi gives the thumbs up after taking his first pole position of the season at his home race in Mugello.



The 29-year-old has struggled since winning his last title in 2005 but is back at the head of the field this season on his Fiat Yamaha and has won the last two races.



A lap of one minute 48.130 seconds was enough to see him take his first pole position of the season ahead of Dani Pedrosa in second and fellow-Italian Loris Capirossi in third -- the 50th pole of his career and 40th in MotoGP.



"For sure we will try to keep this winning streak going. I was quite worried after practice because we had some problems but the team modified the bike and it is faster now," said Rossi.



"My last pole position was a long, long time ago -- I can't even remember when it was, so I am very happy. Loris is behind me and with two Italians on the front row the crowd will be very special here."



Rossi is three points ahead of Repsol Honda rider Pedrosa and his team-mate Jorge Lorenzo going into Sunday's race with reigning champion Casey Stoner a further 28 points back on his Marlboro Ducati.



Rossi's time bettered the previous record pole time by Spaniard Sete Gibernau by more than 0.8 seconds, and that marker was posted two years ago on a more powerful bike.



In fact, the top seven finishers all beat Gibernau's lap, achieved on a 990cc bike as opposed to the 800cc versions of today.

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- The family of a woman who died ignored on an emergency room floor has reached a settlement with Health and Hospital Corp., the family's lawyer and the company's top executive said Thursday.



Surveillance video shows Esmin Green on the hospital floor for more than an hour before anyone helps her.



The attorney, Sanford Rubenstein, said the settlement, reached Wednesday, is for $2 million.



Alan Aviles, the president and CEO of Health and Hospital Corp., said in a written statement that the company -- which operates Kings County Hospital, where Esmin Green, 49, died last year -- takes full responsibility for her death and offers a "full apology."



He said the settlement "is not meant to put a value on a life and the loss of a loved one. That remains priceless."



Last July, Green's relatives said they planned to file a $25 million lawsuit against the city and the hospital and called for criminal charges against hospital workers.



A hospital security video showed that the mother of six waited in an emergency room chair for nearly 24 hours before she slid to the floor, where she convulsed for more than a half hour and then became still.



An hour after she fell to the floor, the video showed, a hospital employee nudged Green with her foot and summoned help, but the 49-year-old woman was dead



The New York Civil Liberties Union alleges that hospital records were falsified to say that Green was "sitting quietly in the waiting room" at a time when, the video shows, she had been on the floor for 48 minutes and had not moved for more than 10 minutes.



An autopsy revealed that Green died from pulmonary thromboembolism -- blood clots that formed in her legs and eventually made their way into her lungs, according to Ellen Borakove, the medical examiner's spokeswoman. The clots came from deep vein thrombosis, which complicated Green's chronic paranoid schizophrenia, she said.

***

MADRID, Spain (CNN) -- A 92-year-old woman with cocaine strapped to her body flew all the way from Brazil to Spain before police arrested her, in a wheelchair, at Madrid's airport.



A Civil Guard spokeswoman says the 92-year old was apprehended at Madrid's Barajas Airport.



They found 4.3 kilos, or nearly 9.5 pounds, of cocaine packets strapped to her legs and torso, and also arrested a 44-year-old female companion, who tried to escape on another plane, a Civil Guard spokeswoman told CNN Tuesday.



The two women, both from Uruguay, were arrested Friday after arriving in Madrid on a flight from Sao Paolo, Brazil. But officials did not release details about the case until this week, after a judge had arraigned the two on drug trafficking charges. The judge ordered the younger woman to prison but sent the 92-year-old to a senior citizens' home in Madrid.



Due to her advanced age, "it's practically impossible" that she would be tried or face jail time, said the Civil Guard spokeswoman, who by custom is not identified. Police did not identify the two women.



Civil Guards became suspicious when the younger woman repeatedly told the older woman -- who had asked for an airport wheelchair in Madrid to traverse the terminal -- that if they rushed, they would make their connecting flight to Spain's Canary Islands.



The Civil Guards, who run customs controls at the airport, stopped the woman in the wheelchair.



The younger woman immediately fled, first trying to make the connecting flight, which by then had closed its doors, and then attempting to leave the airport terminal for the street.



But she was stuck in the "satellite," or second building, of Terminal 4, which is connected to the main building and the street by an underground train. Police caught up with her before she left the satellite terminal.



The two would-be smugglers probably expected a cash payment and return flight tickets to Brazil from their drug trafficking contacts, the Civil Guard spokeswoman said.

***

LONDON, England -- A Colombian sculptor has created a mystery at London's Tate Modern gallery by refusing to reveal how she seemingly managed to crack open a concrete floor.



"Shibboleth" is Colombian artist Doris Salcedo's first public commission in the United Kingdom.



The work by Doris Salcedo begins as a hairline crack then widens and deepens as it snakes across the full 167 meters (548 feet) of the former power station's Turbine Hall.



Salcedo said "Shibboleth," a statement about racism, took her more than a year to make but has revealed little else about its construction.



She apparently created it elsewhere and spent the past five weeks installing it in the Tate, on the south bank of the River Thames. She refused to say how she managed seemingly to crack open a concrete floor.



"What is important is the meaning of the piece. The making of it is not important," she said.



Asked how deep the crack goes, she replied: "It's bottomless. It's as deep as humanity." Visitors meanwhile are warned not to trip on the crack.



Tate director Nicholas Serota insisted the work was no optical illusion. "This sculpture has been made in the most painstaking, meticulous way by Doris and her team before it was slowly inserted into the Turbine Hall," he told the Press Association.



"It has taken five weeks of work here with very considerable disruption to the hall. It's not an illusion - it's there, it's real.



"From the Tate's point of view, there were only two questions: could we realize it in the way Doris envisaged? And once the piece was created, would it damage the structural integrity of the building forever?



"The answer to the first was yes, and to the second was no." He declined to elaborate further.



The installation will be removed next April by filling in the crack.



Serota said: "There is a crack, there is a line, and eventually there will be a scar and that scar will remain. It will remain as a memory of the work and also as a memorial to the issues Doris touches on."



The artist said the work of art represents the gap between white Europeans and the rest of humanity. Wire mesh is on show because it is "the most common means of control used to define borders and divisions."



Salcedo said of the work: "It represents borders, the experience of immigrants, the experience of segregation, the experience of racial hatred.



"It is the experience of a Third World person coming into the heart of Europe.



"For example, the space which illegal immigrants occupy is a negative space. And so this piece is a negative space."  E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- The United Nations is urging countries to invest in green jobs working with "sustainable forest management" to address the growing problem of unemployment worldwide.



A deforested area appears in a rain forest in Brazil's Para state  in October.



At least 10 million such jobs could be created, the U.N. Food and Agriculture Organization will say in a report to be released this week.



The report does not mention any countries but is aimed at "mainly regions with substantial rural unemployment and degraded land areas," said C.T.S. Nair, chief economist in the U.N. Forestry Department and one of the authors of the report.



While all countries could benefit from investing in these green jobs, Nair said, Asia and Africa -- and to some extent Latin America -- could benefit the most. India, China and almost all countries in Africa stand to benefit, he added.



The United Nations said it already is seeing indications that some countries -- such as the United States, India and South Korea -- are interested and taking action to invest in sustainable forest management by making it part of their economic stimulus plans.



Sustainable forestry aims to prevent depletion of forests by managing them and making sure their use does not interfere with natural benefits or the local environment.



For example, in forests where wood is being removed, the United Nations is suggesting that people be hired to monitor and manage how much wood is taken out to ensure the forest does not become depleted and can grow back fully. Managers also would make sure the wood harvest wouldn't affect biodiversity and the water supply.



The report will be discussed and analyzed next week at the U.N. Committee on Forestry meeting in Rome, Italy. The Food and Agriculture Organization has designated next week as World Forest Week.

***

Islamabad, Pakistan (CNN) -- Pakistani Defense Minister Chaudhry Ahmed Mukhtar was blocked from leaving the country Thursday after Pakistan's Supreme Court struck down an amnesty that had protected politicians from corruption charges, state media reported.



Nearly 280 government officials and ministers have been placed on an exit control list by the high court, said Wajid Hasan, Pakistan's high commissioner in Britain.



The 17-judge court invalidated the National Reconciliation Order on Wednesday, saying in its ruling that the amnesty "seems to be against the national interest" and "violates various provisions of the Constitution."



The order, passed in October 2007 under then-President Pervez Musharraf, only covered alleged wrongdoing that occurred between 1986 through 1999. The order, which expired last month, protected thousands of bureaucrats and politicians, including President Asif Ali Zardari and his wife, former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, from corruption and criminal charges.



Mukhtar, among the officials once protected by the order, was on an official trip to China when he was stopped at the Islamabad airport.



Pakistan's Supreme Court said its ruling revived all cases that had been suspended or withdrawn under the amnesty.



Zardari's government released a brief statement Thursday saying: "The government respects the judgment of the Supreme Court and is awaiting the detailed judgment. However, the government has already started consulting the legal experts for its implementation."



CNN's Nic Robertson and Arwa Damon contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Mikey Welsh, most famously known as the bassist for the rock band Weezer, died unexpectedly Saturday, according to the band. He was 40.





The cause of death was not immediately known.





Darryl Baety, a Chicago police spokesman, said that officers responded at 1:45 p.m. Saturday to a call from the Raffaello Hotel regarding a guest who had been scheduled to check out, but had not.





After first knocking on the door, hotel personnel entered and found someone who was "unresponsive and not breathing," according to Baety.





Police are conducting a death investigation related to the case, pending autopsy results, Baety said.





According to Welsh's official website, he was a painter before he made the the shift to music at age 19. A decade later, he had achieved fame as the bassist for the band Weezer, replacing the band's longtime bassist Matt Sharp.





Welsh was part of the band's 2001 "Green Album" release, which featured "Hash Pipe." The single became one of the band's biggest hits, peaking at No. 2 on Billboard's Alternative songs chart.





Welsh left the band shortly after, saying he had suffered a nervous breakdown.





The band remembered Welsh as vital chapter to their history and one to never "shy away from the absurd, dangerous or strange," according to a statement on Weezer's website.





Weezer played as scheduled Sunday during Chicago's RIOTfest.





CNN's Denise Quan contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- You had a close encounter with a 40-yard-wide asteroid this week, but the astronomer who first spotted the large rock said it's nothing to worry about.



An asteroid (inside circle) passed within 38,000 miles of Earth on Monday.



Asteroid 2009 DD45 on Monday passed within 38,000 miles of Earth, less than twice the height of the geostationary satellites we depend on for communications, according to Robert McNaught of the Australian National University.



McNaught, who watches for asteroids with his telescope 250 miles northwest of Sydney, Australia, discovered the approaching rock last week.



"It's not something to worry about, but something to be aware of," he said.



While a direct hit on Earth could be a devastating natural disaster, McNaught said keeping track of asteroids can make a hit "potentially preventable."



"If discovered in advance and with enough lead time, there is the possibility of pushing it off course, if you have decades of advance warning," McNaught said. "If you have only a few days, you can evacuate the area of impact, but there's not a great deal [else] you can do."



In either case, he said, a global catastrophe as depicted in Hollywood movies such as "Deep Impact" is "very, very unlikely."



The 2009 DD45 asteroid circles the sun every 18 months, but its path will not threaten this planet at least for the next century, he said.



The number of "potentially harmful asteroids" discovered each year has grown dramatically over the past decade as "systematic programs" to scan the skies have been put in place, McNaught said. Nearly 100 new ones have been found in each of the past several years, he said.

***

(CNN) -- Two graduate students were found shot to death Thursday night in an apartment a block off the Louisiana State University campus, officials said.



LSU Chancellor Sean O'Keefe briefs reporters on the fatal shootings of two international graduate students.



No suspects have been identified in what police are investigating as a double homicide. Neighbors told police three strange men were seen in the area.



The bodies of Chandrasekhar Reddy Komma and Kiran Kumar Allam, both Ph.D. candidates from India, were found inside Allam's apartment at  the Edward Gay complex near the LSU band's practice field.



The complex houses graduate and married students.



A task force of LSU campus police and the Baton Rouge Police Department is investigating, university Chancellor Sean O'Keefe said.



"If anybody can find them, they can," O'Keefe told reporters Friday.  Watch O'Keefe discuss "a tragic situation" »



O'Keefe said campus police responded to a 911 call at 10:37 p.m. and encountered "a very, very tragic scene." Both men had been shot in the head. One was bound with phone cable and the other was lying near the door.



The apartment was cluttered and items were strewn about, so it has been difficult to determine whether anything was taken, O'Keefe said.



Emergency text messages were sent to students and faculty across the LSU campus late Thursday, but the campus remained open on Friday.



O'Keefe said officials decided against a campus lockdown after police determined that the slayings were not part "an escalating pattern."



People were warned in the text messages to use caution, but not all of the 8,000 students who had signed up for them received them, O'Keefe said. Officials are looking into what went wrong.



The Associated Press reported that Allam's pregnant wife found the bodies and called 911.



Although police have indicated they suspect the slayings occurred during a home invasion robbery, O'Keefe told reporters no motive has been determined. E-mail to a friend

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Britain's Prince William went hiking Friday with a group of homeless teenagers on a picturesque peak in northern England to raise awareness for two charities he patrons, spokespeople for the prince and one of the charities said.



Prince William, right, joined a group of homeless teams on a mountain climb in the UK.



William, 27, was joined by six teenagers from Centrepoint, a charity for homeless young people, as they walked up Helvellyn, a mountain in the Cumbria region of northeastern England.



Leading the group were members of Mountain Rescue, a volunteer-run charity. Prince William is the patron of both charities.



The aim of the walk was to provide some of Centrepoint's homeless teens with a memorable and challenging day, and also to have an event that both charities could participate in together.



Each teenager was paired with a Mountain Rescue volunteer as they climbed the mountain, said Andy Simpson, a spokesman for the charity who was on the walk.



After days of spotty storms, the group got lucky with the weather and had sunshine and big, billowy clouds for much of the two-hour climb, Simpson said.



He described Helvellyn as a moderate mountain that requires a certain level of fitness.



The prince, however, did very well -- not surprising, given his military training.



"He's a very fit bloke," Simpson said. "I had trouble keeping up with him."



The location of Friday's hike was kept a secret until the last minute. That meant other climbers on Helvellyn had no idea they would encounter royalty on an otherwise-normal day out.



"One or two of the people were quite surprised, to say the least, to see the future king of England coming the other way," Simpson said.



William stopped to chat to the people he met, he said.



"It was nice to see him engaging with so many members of the public. They just happened to be out for a walk and it's just made their day," he said.



Partway up the mountain, by a lake called Red Tarn, the prince flew a flag for the London 2012 Olympics, Simpson said. Monday marks three years until the Opening Ceremony of the Games.

***

BEIJING, China (Reuters) -- A Chinese couple tried to name their baby "@," claiming the character used in e-mail addresses echoed their love for the child, an official trying to whip the national language into line said on Thursday.



The unusual name stands out especially in Chinese, which has no alphabet and instead uses tens of thousands of multi-stroke characters to represent words.



"The whole world uses it to write e-mail, and translated into Chinese it means 'love him'," the father explained, according to the deputy chief of the State Language Commission Li Yuming.



While the "@" symbol is familiar to Chinese e-mail users, they often use the English word "at" to sound it out -- which with a drawn out "T" sounds something like "ai ta," or "love him," to Mandarin speakers.



Li told a news conference on the state of the language that the name was an extreme example of people's increasingly adventurous approach to Chinese, as commercialisation and the Internet break down conventions.



Another couple tried to give their child a name that rendered into English sounds like "King Osrina."



Li did not say if officials accepted the "@" name. But earlier this year the government announced a ban on names using Arabic numerals, foreign languages and symbols that do not belong to Chinese minority languages.



Sixty million Chinese faced the problem that their names use ancient characters so obscure that computers cannot recognize them and even fluent speakers were left scratching their heads, said Li, according to a transcript of the briefing on the government Web site (www.gov.cn).



One of them was the former Premier Zhu Rongji, whose name had a rare "rong" character that gave newspaper editors headaches. E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service is battling a large grass fire in the marshlands of Jefferson County, Texas, an agency official told CNN on Tuesday.





The fire began Monday afternoon about 12 miles west of Sabine Pass and about 200 yards from the Intracoastal Waterway, Jim Stockie, spokesman for the fish and wildlife service said. He estimated the area burned by Tuesday afternoon to be between 10,000 and 12,000 acres, but he said the fire was not threatening any structures.





Smoke from the blaze was drifting into the Houston/Galveston area more than 100 miles from the fire.





Just a dozen firefighters were working the blaze, Stockie said.





"We don't like to put firefighters out in a sea of grass. We retreat to levies and burn off the fuel," Stockie said.





Texas has suffered its worst fire season in state history with more than 3.5 million acres burned, according to state officials.





In October, the Bastrop Complex Fire torched more than 1,500 homes and 34,000 acres of land north of Austin before officials were able to contain it, the Texas Fire Service said.





An unusual La Nina weather pattern led to a nearly 11-month fire season in the state, fire service spokeswoman April Saginor said.





A survey released last month by the Texas Forest Service estimated between 100 million and 500 million trees, or 2% to 10% of the state's 4.9 billion trees, were killed by the severe drought and consequent fires. The dry spell that began in 2010 was the worst the state has seen since 1895, Texas Lt. Gov. David Dewhurst has said.





The drought conditions also caused concern for the state's water supply, especially in smaller towns.





CNN's Dave Alsup and Chandler Friedman contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- German Bundesliga side Schalke have announced Huub Stevens as the replacement for recently-departed coach Ralf Rangnick, on the same day that former Danish international Michael Laudrup left his role as coach of Spanish club Real Mallorca.





Rangnick, 53, guided Schalke to the semifinals of the European Champions League last season but left the Veltins Arena earlier this month, citing fatigue as his reason for leaving the club.





Dutchman Stevens, 57, previously spent six years as Schalke coach between 1996 and 2002, guiding the Gelsenkirchen outfit to a UEFA Cup triumph against Italian giants Inter Milan in 1997.





Stevens, who has also had spells in charge of Hertha Berlin, Hamburg and PSV Eindhoven, has signed a two-year deal.





"Huub Stevens, who coached the Royal Blues from 1996 to 2002, has returned to his former stomping ground with immediate effect," read a statement on the club's official website. "Stevens has put pen to paper on a contract to 30 June 2013."





Schalke currently sit fifth in Germany's top division, having won four and lost three of their opening seven matches.





As Schalke appointed a new coach, Laudrup ended his one-year tenure in charge of Mallorca.





Laudrup, who represented Denmark on 104 occasions, announced his decision to leave the club at a press conference on Tuesday.





The former Spartak Moscow coach made the decision due to his relationship with club owner Lorenzo Serra Ferrer becoming damaged beyond repair.





"This situation cannot continue like this," Laudrup, 47, said. "From now on, Mallorca will be whatever it is Serra Ferrer wants."





Laudrup guided Mallorca to a 17th-place finish last season as the one-time Copa del Rey winners avoided relegation by just one point.





The club sold star midfielder Jonathan de Guzman to Spanish rivals Villarreal in August and Laudrup saw his assistant Erik Larsen sacked on Monday.





"Yesterday one of my assistants was fired," he said. "Once again, it is very difficult -- if not impossible -- to find the peace required to work here.





"The team is hurt by this situation. What we need is calm and I cannot go home every night, angry, disappointed. I have a family."





Laudrup's final game in charge was a 2-1 win over Real Sociedad on Sunday, and his former charges travel to Osasuna on Saturday.

***

(CNN) -- Authorities are investigating six possible cases of bacterial meningitis -- including two deaths -- in rural Oklahoma elementary school students.





The Rogers County Health Department and Oklahoma State Department of Health said two children from Oologah-Talala public school district have died from the disease. One of them was an 8-year-old, said Superintendent Rick Thomas.





Thomas said school was canceled Friday for the district.





"We just feel like we would rather err on the side of caution," he said, although he has urged parents to remain calm.





The state health board said it was providing antibiotics to the schools to help prevent the spread of meningococcal disease -- caused by the bacteria Neisseria meningitidis -- which can appear as pneumonia, septicemia or meningitis.





Meningitis is a disease caused by the inflammation of the meninges, the thin lining that surrounds the brain and the spinal cord, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.





A medical team at Oologah Lower Elementary School screened more than 100 people including faculty, CNN affiliate KOTV reported. Authorities said the team is offering antibiotics to other students and faculty in the district, and there is enough medication for about 1,000 people, the affiliate reported.





Last year, 16 cases of meningococcal disease were reported in Oklahoma and one person died, the board said.





Symptoms of meningococcal disease may appear two to 10 days after infection, but typically within three to four days, the state board said.





People ill with meningococcal septicemia may have fever, nausea, vomiting and a rash, it said. Those with meningitis will have fever, intense headache, nausea, vomiting and a stiff neck.





"It is important to seek care from a physician as soon as possible if these symptoms appear," the board said.





Oologah is about 30 miles northeast of Tulsa.

***

(CNN) -- Doctors chose a woman who survived a shotgun wound to her face as the first recipient of a face transplant after treating her for nearly four years.



This image projects what Connie Culp, 46, may look like two years after the face transplant.



Connie Culp knew of the Cleveland Clinic's interest in face transplants and approached the medical staff, doctors said at a news conference Tuesday.



Dr. Maria Siemionow, the Cleveland, Ohio, hospital's director of plastic surgery research and head of microsurgery training, had more than 20 years of experience in complex transplants. By 2004, Siemionow was looking for the right candidate for a face transplant who wasn't doing it for vanity.



"They are not looking to go out on the street and be beautiful," Siemionow told CNN in a 2006 interview. "Some of these patients, when they were interviewed just said 'I want to walk on the street and just make sure I am not sticking out.' They just want to have a normal face."



The doctors examined the patient's history, motivation and ability to understand the risks of the transplant. And they found Culp to be an ideal candidate.



Five years after a gun blast shattered her nose, cheeks and upper lip, she had a band of scar tissue extending across her face.



"The most devastating of all was the fact that society had rejected her and children were afraid of her," said Siemionow, who led the December 10 transplant operation.  See before and after photos of Culp »



Culp, a mother of two and a grandmother, told her doctors she could understand that some adults would shun her.



"But what really bothered her the most were children -- the children that shied away from her," said Dr. Frank Papay, the chairman of Institute of Dermatology and Plastic Surgery at the Cleveland Clinic. "That sense of innocence, and her not being able to see that innocence really, really affected her."



The shooting



In September 2004, Culp's estranged husband shot her in the face in an attempted murder-suicide outside a restaurant in Hopedale, Ohio, according to CNN affiliate WTOV in Steubenville, Ohio.



Culp was 8 feet away from her husband, Thomas Culp, when he pulled the shotgun's trigger. He then turned the weapon on himself, according to local news reports. They both survived. Thomas Culp was sent to prison.



Despite her wounds, she told WTOV in 2008, "I'll always love him. He was my first love."



At the same time, Culp said, she felt angry. "I wouldn't be human if I didn't. I forgive him, but I have to go on, you know?"



After the shooting, Culp recuperated in a hospital and in a personal care home for two years. Culp told WTOV she had vision problems and was learning Braille.



Her approach to life was to "keep motivated. Don't sleep your life away -- that could have happened. I could be depressed. I'm not." As she spoke, her breaths emitted a small whistle from her tracheotomy tube, which protruded from a surgical opening in her neck.



"I cannot smell. I will never be able to smell," she said in the interview.



Culp was wrong.



How doctors transplanted a face



The doctors at the Cleveland Clinic analyzed Culp's injuries using CAT scans and developed plastic models of her skull. They practiced face transplant operation on cadavers several times.



Culp met with the hospital's surgeons, ethical committee members and psychiatry and psychology specialists who determined that she was an ideal candidate for the surgery. Then, the wait for the right donor began in 2008.



"We thought we were going to wait a long time because we had to find a Caucasian female in her mid 40s to match Connie, so we expected a year before we were able to find a donor," said Papay, who is also head of craniofacial surgery. "Well, three to four months later, I got

***

Washington (CNN)  -- It feels like it went by in the blink of an eye. Tai Shan, the giant panda cub so many people have come to know and love, is about to board a flight to China.



"It's very bittersweet. We love him. We love having him here," said Erika Bauer, curator at the National Zoo in Washington.



Tai Shan was born in the nation's capital, so you can confidently call him a Washingtonian. But he is to be sent to China, under an agreement between the two nations, to help replenish the endangered species' numbers in the wild.



At 4½ years old, Tai Shan is more of a panda adolescent than a cub, but to Tai Shan fans, he will always be their baby.



"We watched him as he grew up and it's kind of sad to see him go," said Kathleen Ryland of Highland, Maryland.



Ryland brought her two children to say their goodbyes to Tai Shan at a farewell party at the National Zoo Saturday. Despite the snow falling on the panda exhibit, there were plenty of warm and fuzzy feelings about Tai Shan.



"He's so cute. I'll miss him," said Claire Ryland, 7.



It's often said that a visit to Washington is not complete without a stop at the zoo to see Tai Shan. Over the years, some have even gone as far to say that Tai Shan was Washington's No. 1 resident -- even getting top billing over the president.



Tai Shan will leave for China on Thursday via the "FedEx Panda Express." He'll be joined by Mei Lan - a 3-year-old panda born at Zoo Atlanta in Georgia. Eventually, they will take part in a breeding program aimed at increasing the panda population. Giant pandas are currently on the endangered list. The National Zoo estimates that about 1,600 giant pandas are currently in the wild.



Bauer says that's all the more reason to say goodbye to Tai Shan.



"It's very important to get Tai Shan into the breeding population to help conserve the species in general. This is a very good day for him," she said.

***

(CNN) -- Fabio Cannavaro is to join the Italian national squad on Sunday for their World Cup qualifier against Cyprus next week, despite being under the cloud of a drug test controversy.



Fabioo Cannavaro's proudest moment came in 2006 when he led Italy to World Cup glory.



It was revealed on Thursday that the 36-year-old Juventus defender recently failed a drug test after taking a medicine that contained the banned substance cortisone.



Cannavaro was interviewed by the Italian Olympic Committee's (CONI) anti-doping prosecutor Ettore Torri on Thursday night in Turin but national coach Marcello Lippi does not expect his star to be absent from the squad.



"I have not spoken to Cannavaro," Lippi told reporters. "Will he be here with us on Sunday? Of course he will.



"I have not spoken to Cannavaro," added national team doctor Enrico Castellacci. "But he is calm and serene. This is just a bureaucratic case."



Juventus claimed the defender needed cortisone treatment for an insect sting in August. The player requested an exemption from taking drugs tests on the grounds of having taken a medication in an emergency situation but his request did not include a document necessary to complete the application.



While awaiting a decision, Cannavaro took an anti-doping test after a Serie A game at Roma which returned a positive result.



"When he came to the national team, after the Roma game, he told us what had happened and he told us that without the medicine that contained cortisone he would have had a reaction, an anaphylactic shock," Castellacci said.



"We asked Juventus for all the necessary documents regarding the medicine taken by Cannavaro and all the communication is in our possession."



Cannavaro will not travel to Dublin for Saturday's World Cup qualifier against Ireland as he serves a one-match ban, but is expected to lead the Azzurri in Wednesday's qualifier against Cyprus in Parma.

***

(CNN) -- A 6.9-magnitude earthquake shook the Pacific Ocean near the Solomon Islands Tuesday night, one day after a string of earthquakes rattled the same area and another quake hit the Philippines, the U.S. Geological Survey said.





The quake, considered strong in terms of earthquake magnitude, hit near sparsely populated islands in the archipelago at 11:15 p.m. (7:15 a.m. ET) at a depth of 35 km (22 miles).





By 12:56 a.m. local time Wednesday, there had been five aftershocks, according to the USGS Web site.





"Usually when we see earthquakes of this size, we see aftershocks," said USGS geophysicist Jessica Sigala. "The aftershocks are usually smaller in size, but are earthquakes in their own right."





No tsunamis were expected, according to the Pacific Tsunami Warning Center.





The island located closest to the initial quake's epicenter was Tetepare, located eight miles to the north.





Geophysicist Amy Vaughan said the USGS had received no reports of damage, and it was hard for the agency to predict what might have occurred until it hears from media or people living in the area.





There was property damage from Monday's quakes, but she didn't know how extensive it was.





On Monday, the Solomon Islands were hit by eight quakes in 14 hours, starting at 8:48 a.m. local time and causing damage to at least one village.





Rattling the islands were a strong 6.5-magnitude quake at 8:48 a.m. and a more powerful 7.2-magnitude tremor less than an hour later.





The Solomon Islands are situated in the so-called Ring of Fire, an arc of fault lines circling the Pacific Basin that is prone to frequent earthquakes and volcanic eruptions.

***

(CNN)  -- Liberia's president has declared a state of emergency after hordes of ravenous caterpillars infested the country.



The African armyworm caterpillar is chewing its way through Liberia's food crops.



Tens of millions of the worm-like larvae have appeared in the northern part of the country, where they are destroying green crops like cabbage and collard greens and contaminating the water supply, Liberian Information Minister Laurance Bropleh told CNN Wednesday from the capital of Monrovia.



"I am not aware that they have been here before, ever, and certainly not in this great number," Bropleh told CNN. "That is why it was so overwhelming initially when we first discovered it."



The state of emergency covers the three northern Liberian counties of Bong, Lofa, and Gbarpolu, Liberian officials said.



President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf told legislators Monday that 350,000 people in 62 communities in those three counties may have been affected.



There are also indications the bugs have spread to neighboring Guinea, Sierra Leone and Ivory Coast, Bropleh said.



"This is indeed a crisis," the president said Monday. Johnson Sirleaf said she appointed a task force, including members of the U.N. Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), to identify the species and commence spraying.



Investigators suspect the caterpillars are African armyworms, the FAO said.



The infestation is "quite alarming," said Winfred Hammond, the FAO representative in Liberia.



Hammond said the caterpillars started showing up sometime during the week of January 12 but spread quickly. In just a week, he said, the caterpillars had spread to 50 villages.



The pests multiply rapidly and adult moths are able to fly long distances at night, the FAO said.



Worsening the situation, the area's water supply has been contaminated by the huge volume of feces dropped by the caterpillars, the FAO said.



"The plague is being described as Liberia's worst in 30 years," the FAO said. "The last African armyworm outbreak in the sub-region occurred in Ghana in 2006."

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- An $80 million research project aimed at giving people 50 active years after the age of 50 was launched by scientists at the University of Leeds in northern England Tuesday.



The challenge is to ensure old people stay as fit as Brisbane centenarian Ruth Frith, seen competing at shot put during World Masters Games in Sydney this month.



About half of the babies born in Western countries today will live until they are 100 years old, according to recent research published in the medical journal The Lancet, so the challenge is to ensure they remain active throughout their old age.



While most of us will live longer than our parents and grandparents, the aging population means that in coming decades more people will suffer from age-related conditions such as osteoarthritis, heart disease and chronic back pain. Obesity and increased physical activity also put more pressure on our joints, causing them to wear out faster.



Scientists at Leeds University envisage that many of the body parts that flounder with age could be upgraded using own-grown tissues and more durable implants. This will mean artificial hips, knees and heart valves, for example, lasting far longer than the current 20-year typical lifespan.



"Our work is driven by the concept of 50 more years after 50 -- that is, making our second 50 years of life as healthy, comfortable and active as our first, so we can enjoy a higher quality of life," explains Professor John Fisher, who is an expert in artificial joints and tissue regeneration.



"We now have the technology available to do astonishing things, such as repairing the body by growing healthy new tissue through biological scaffolds and stem cell therapy. And a new generation of prosthetic hip and knee joints that last longer will avoid the need for further replacements."



Fisher says the center also hopes to gain a better understanding of degenerative diseases to allow for early diagnosis, rather than having to treat someone when they are already in crippling pain.



"For example, we're developing biosensor tools that can detect the presence of antibodies and proteins in the blood. All of these technologies will ultimately reduce suffering in patients through more timely interventions, shorter hospital stays and quicker recovery times."



So how do you feel about this. Are you looking forward to your old age? Do you believe you will remain active? Click here to send us your comments and we will try to use as many as possible in tonight's show.

***

(CNN) -- In India he's an icon and to the rest of the cricketing world he's simply known as one of the greatest ever batsmen.



One the game's greats, Sachin Tendulkar is more than just a player in India, he's an icon.



Sachin Tendulkar picked up a bat at the age of 4 in Mumbai and from that day on fell in love with the game.



"The only thing that was on my mind was, 'I want to play for India one day,' and I was pretty sure and confident that one day I will," he told CNN in Mumbai.



In fact he made his Test debut for India at the age of 16 facing Pakistan's fearsome bowling attack, just two years after making his first-class debut for Mumbai.



Despite a baptism of fire in that first international match and getting hit on the mouth by a ball from Waquar Younis, he took his own game forward and has become known for the positivity of his play and the compact efficiency and brilliance of his shot-making.



Making his first Test hundred at the age of 17 against England he has racked up the records in a 19-year career.



In 2000 he became the first batsman to score 50 international hundreds, and is the highest scorer in One Day internationals. He joined an elite group in 2007 when he became only the third player to pass 11,000 runs in Test cricket.



Nicknames in cricket are common, but only if you're a really exceptional player do you get one that's complementary. Tendulkar has joined that elite as the "Little Master" which sits nicely next to other great batsmen, Viv "Master Blaster" Richards and Brian "The Prince" Lara.



But perhaps no higher praise came from Australian cricketing legend Donald Bradman who once said that Tendulkar was the only player that reminded him of himself.



Like all sportsmen he's suffered from injury, and now 35-years-old, many are wondering if his best days are behind him.



Playing for India against England and Australia last summer and at the beginning of 2008, many commentators thought that his normal aggression and daring were missing from his game. His form was also heavily criticized after the 2007 World Cup, and injury forced him out of the international series against South Africa.



But for the man used to batting away tricky deliveries, this criticism gets a typical positive response: "I'm not one to dwell on the past. I like to move forward and these challenges, these hurdles in between, they bring the best out of me. They motivate me even more."



He's currently facing the challenges of the rapid-fire version of the game in the Indian Premier League (IPL), masterminded by Lalit Modi, that despite it's glitz and hype has been criticized for losing some of the finer points of the sport.



"It's so full of excitement. I personally don't feel that it's dumbing-down the game. It's just another version of cricket. If the game is going to be globalized in the form of IPL, then why not? It's better for cricket," he told CNN.

***

(CNN) -- One of Africa's most successful footballers, Nwankwo Kanu, has had a glittering career on the pitch.



The 6 ft 5 in Nigerian footballer has used his sizable stature in the game to help many others.



Winning a gold medal with Nigeria in the 1996 Olympic Games he has also won the European Cup with Ajax; the English Premier League Title and FA Cup with Arsenal in 2002, and in 2008 scored the winning goal for Portsmouth in the FA Cup Final.



But off the pitch, Kanu has worked just as hard to improve the lives of others.



He set up the Kanu Heart Foundation in 2000 that raises money to help children with hearth defects. It's an issue that Kanu is particularly connected to.



In 1995, when he was already a double-European Cup finalist, Kanu was told by a doctor for Inter Milan, the club he had just signed for, that he a faulty value in his heart.



He was told he could never play football again. However he spent 14 months rehabilitating and then moved to Arsenal in England and arguably had the most successful years of his career.



Now nearing the end of his career, Kanu has set up another foundation. Founded in 2008, The Kanu Football Foundation aims to help advise young African footballer who can face all sorts of pressures when trying to become a professional football and avoid being exploited.

***

(CNN) -- A snowstorm that could last up to 18 hours was on its way to southern New England, and Boston, Massachusetts, could be snowed under with up to 15 inches, the National Weather Service said Sunday afternoon.



A snowstorm is threatening parts of the Northeast with as much as 15 inches of snowfall.



Monday's commuters in the region could face a nightmare with blowing and drifting snow, freezing temperatures, gusty winds and periods of sleet. Flight delays and cancellations were likely, the weather service said.



Boston Mayor Thomas Menino declared a snow emergency starting 10 p.m. Sunday in anticipation of the storm, CNN affiliate WCVB reported. Boston public schools will be canceled on Monday. At 2:15 a.m. Monday, light snow was starting to fall, WCVB reported.



Winter storm warnings straddled Interstate 95 from Maine to the Carolinas, and they also were issued in parts of Georgia and Alabama.



Delta Air Lines canceled 300 flights, most of them to or from Atlanta, because of snowy weather, spokesman Brian Kruse said Sunday. It was snowing in Atlanta, where Delta is based, and 2 to 4 inches was expected.



David Spear, a spokesman for the Georgia Department of Transportation, expected traffic chaos.



"People tend to get a little animated out here at the sight of snow," he told CNN. "Our concern is going to be -- as we move into the evening hours and the temperature drops -- that that slush becomes ice and then we have a real situation for our morning commute tomorrow."



He said about 200 DOT trucks were deployed to help make roads safe for motorists.



In northern Connecticut, southern New Hampshire and most of Rhode Island and Massachusetts, a winter storm warning was to be in effect from 9 p.m. Sunday to 5 p.m. Monday, the weather service said. Such a warning is issued when winter weather conditions are expected to make travel dangerous.



As the storm continued its northward trek late Sunday, Greenville-Spartanburg International Airport in South Carolina was closed at 9 p.m. for snow removal from runways, according to the Federal Aviation Administration. Farther north, Richmond International Airport in Virginia was closed at 10:45 p.m. for the same reason, the FAA said.



Both airports were expected to reopen before midnight.



The heaviest snow, up to 15 inches, was forecast for the heavily populated I-95 corridor between Boston, Massachusetts, and Providence, Rhode Island, northeast Connecticut and north into the Merrimack Valley in northeast Massachusetts, the weather service said. As much as 3 inches per hour could fall between 10 p.m. Sunday and 10 a.m. Monday.



In Washington, Mayor Adrian Fenty declared a snow emergency Sunday afternoon, meaning any street designated as "snow emergency route" by signs would be cleared of any parked vehicles, towed if necessary, so snow plows could work unimpeded.  Watch report on the storm system »



"It is important that our crews have access to the roads from curb-to-curb in order to plow the snow," said Fenty, whose city was expected to get up to 8 inches of accumulation Sunday night and early Monday with accumulations up to 10 inches by Monday night.



"This is one of the first plow events we have had this season, and we want to ensure we are able to maintain clear and safe roadways as we move into Monday morning," Fenty said.



Forecasters said as many as 14 inches of snow could pile up in Philadelphia and New York City, starting Sunday night.



Lesser amounts of snow were reported as far south as Alabama, although Charlotte, North Carolina, could see up to 8 inches.  Watch snowfall in Georgia »



In Memphis, Tennessee, CNN iReporter George Brown said Sunday that forecasters had predicted "Teflon snow," which wouldn't stick to the ground. But the snow that fell was much heavier, he said. iReport.com: Share photos of icy, snowy weather in your town



"We were getting an inch or more an hour," he said. "Some roads are impassable because the folks here aren't use to dealing with slick streets. Many cars

***

Bangkok, Thailand (CNN)  -- Thai authorities seized a cargo aircraft carrying tons of weapons from North Korea during a refueling stop in Bangkok, a government official said.





The pilot told Thai authorities the aircraft was headed to Sri Lanka, but its final destination was unknown, according to Panitan Wattanayagorn, a spokesman for the Thai prime minister.





It contained about 35 tons of weapons, including rocket-propelled grenades, shoulder-launched rockets and tubes that may be missile components, the spokesman said.





The plane, which was detained Saturday, had five people onboard -- four from Kazakhstan and one from Belarus. They will appear in court Monday on charges related to illegal weapons smuggling, the spokesman said.





Thai government officials acted after working with several intelligence agencies for several weeks, the spokesman said. The cargo was taken to a military base while the plane, which is registered in Georgia, remains at Don Muang.





Sri Lanka officials said there were no shipments scheduled in the country either by air or sea from North Korea.





"We have asked the Sri Lanka embassy in Bangkok to obtain details from the Thai authorities," the ministry said. "We will have more information on the progress of their investigation later on Sunday."





Such an aircraft could not have landed in any of Sri Lanka's airports without prior authorization, officials in Colombo said.





Last year, two arm dealers were arrested in Thailand. The men's arrest came after a series of events that involved law enforcement agencies from at least five countries, including two undercover agents from the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration.





Viktor Bout and his associate, Andrew Smulian, made millions of dollars delivering weapons and ammunition to warlords and militants, officials said.





Bout is accused of supplying weapons to war zones around the world -- from Sierra Leone to Afghanistan. He has repeatedly said he has not broken any laws and the allegations against him are lies





A Thai court rejected a U.S. extradition request for Bout in August.





CNN's Dan Rivers and journalist Iqbal Athas contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Juventus are back on top of the Italian Serie A table after a comfortable 3-0 home win over Palermo on Sunday maintained their unbeaten start to the season.





Goals from Simone Pepe, Alessandro Matri and Claudio Marchisio put Juve ahead of Lazio, who drew 0-0 at Napoli on Saturday, on goal difference -- with Antonio Conte's side also having a vital game in hand.





Pepe opened the scoring in the 20th minute when he was left unmarked to head home Giorgio Chiellini's cross.





Andrea Pirlo then hit the post with a curling effort before Matri doubled the advantage three minutes into the second half when finishing from a tight angle.





And the points were sealed in the 65th minute when Marchisio netted from close range after a smart dummy from Matri deceived the Palermo defense.





Although Juventus are back on top of the table, the race for this year's Scudetto promises to be the tightest for years with just one point separating the top four teams.





Champions AC Milan are third, a point behind the top two, after their goalless draw at Fiorentina on Saturday, while former leaders Udinese are now in fourth place -- level on points with Milan -- after losing 2-0 at Parma.





A Jonathan Biabiany header and a Sebastian Giovinco penalty gave Parma a victory that lifted them up to ninth place in the table.





Despite their defeat to Juventus, Palermo remain fifth, although they are five points behind Udinese.





Meanwhile, at the bottom of the table, Marco Parolo scored seven minutes from time to give Cesena their first win of the season, 1-0 at fellow strugglers Bologna.





Despite that win, Cesena remain bottom on six points, one behind Novara who were beaten 1-0 at Genoa.





Two matches were played in the German Bundesliga, with Thorsten Fink collecting his first win as Hamburg coach with a 2-0 success at Hoffenheim.





Jose Guerrero and Marcel Jansen secured Fink's maiden success after three successive draws as Hamburg moved out of the relegation zone and into 14th place.





The day's other match saw Austrian striker Martin Harnik score both of Stuttgart's goals in a 2-1 win over bottom club Augsburg, who are three points adrift at the foot of the table.





The victory lifts Stuttgart up to sixth place in the table, seven points adrift of leaders Bayern Munich.

***

BAGHDAD, Iraq (CNN) -- At least 14 people were killed and dozens more were wounded in explosions across Iraq on Saturday, officials said.



A woman adjusts a memorial of plastic flowers this week at the bombed Foreign Affairs Ministry building.



Nine police officers were killed and 19 wounded in a suicide bombing north of Baghdad on Saturday morning, local officials said. The incident occurred in the Salaheddin province town of al-Shirqat.



Local police said the suspected bomber had been driving a minivan near the outer checkpoint of a police base. The bomber detonated when police opened fire, police said.



Twenty shops and dozens of cars were damaged.



Later in the evening, a motorcycle rigged with explosives detonated outside a busy coffee shop in a southeastern Baghdad district called New Baghdad, killing two and wounding 13 others, according to the Ministry of Interior. The attack occurred about 9 p.m. (2 p.m. ET) as people had gathered to break their fast for Islam's holy month of Ramadan.



In other violence Saturday, at least three people were killed and 40 wounded when a roadside bomb detonated in a marketplace in northern Iraq, an Interior Ministry official said.



The bomb detonated in the town of Sinjar, a predominantly Yazidi town west of Mosul near the Syrian border.



Yazidis are a minority group mainly concentrated in Iraq's north and have been often targeted by insurgents. The deadliest attack since the start of the war was in August 2007, when coordinated truck bombs hit Yazidi villages, killing more than 500 and wounding hundreds.



Despite the improved security situation across the country, there has been a spike in attacks in recent weeks. Last week, two massive suicide truck bombs hit the foreign and finance ministries in Baghdad, killing at least 100 people and wounding hundreds more.



The attacks come at a time when Iraqi security forces have come under a lot of criticism after they took control of security in cities and towns after the withdrawal of U.S. combat forces two months ago.



CNN's Jomana Karadsheh and Mohammed Tawfeeq contributed to this report.

***

BUENOS AIRES, Argentina (CNN) -- President Cristina Fernandez on Tuesday defended an increase in export taxes on grains that has riled many farmers, and she called on them to respect the law in protesting her policies.



President Cristina Fernandez: Calls on rally Wednesday to support her policies.



"All my life I have soldiered in this party, which always believed in social justice, in the redistribution of income, which caused us to win and lose elections," she said in a nationally televised address from the presidential palace. "But we were always respectful of the popular will."



Fernandez, of the center-left Peronist movement, made her plea for comity a day after massive demonstrations in various cities blocked traffic and paralyzed much of the country.



In a concession to her critics, Fernandez said the increase in taxes on exports of grains that she instituted in March by decree will be debated by Congress. But there is little likelihood that the Congress will order major changes, since her party controls both houses.



But Hilda Duhalde, an opponent of Fernandez, was not persuaded.



"It's true that they have a majority in both houses, but we have to put white on black and watch out for the small- and medium-sized producers, who are the ones suffering," she said.



Argentina raised export taxes in March by more than 10 percent. Fernandez has said growers have benefited from rising world prices and the profits should be spread to help the poor.



Farmers have countered that they need to reinvest the profits and that the higher taxes make it difficult for them to make a living.



Fernandez said she was open to dialogue, but a dialogue that does not countenance the blocking of roads or other disruptions to the lives of Argentines. "Democracy for the people, not the corporations," she said.



She called on Argentines to take to the Plaza de Mayo Wednesday in a show of support for her policies.



"It doesn't matter what party, place or sector you're from," she said. "What is important is not where you're from, but where you are going -- what kind of country do we want?"



To those who do not agree with her policies, she had other advice. "If they want to change the economic model, what they should do is organize a political party, participate in elections and win them," she said.



CNN's Carolina Cayazzo contributed to this report.

***

Editor's Note: The following story contains spoilers regarding the show "House." If you'd rather not know what happens, stop reading now.



Kal Penn, left, with Peter Jacobson on "House," is joining the Obama White House.



LOS ANGELES, California (CNN) -- When Dr. Lawrence Kutner killed himself on the latest episode of "House: MD," it was the beginning of a new career for actor Kal Penn.



The demise of Penn's character cleared the way for the actor to move on to another "House," the White House.



Penn, 31, will be an associate director for the Obama administration's Office of Public Liaison.



"It seemed like something I would enjoy doing," Penn said. "I figured it was something to do."



He's not retiring from acting, just pursuing a longtime desire for public service that was rekindled when he campaigned for Barack Obama's election, Penn said.



Penn played a teen terrorist on Fox's "24" before joining the network's "House" two years ago. He's also known as Kumar Patel in the "Harold & Kumar" movie series.



The White House job likely ends his Kumar roles, he said. In fact, he will not consider any acting jobs until he leaves the Obama administration, he said.



Penn will take a big pay cut to work for the government, but he has committed to at least one or two years in the job, he said.



His focus will be as a liaison for the arts community and the Asian-American community, he said. He filled a similar role in the Obama presidential campaign, he said.



"We want to make sure that everyone's concerns are heard and they are familiar with the president's plans and proposals," he said.



Penn said he spoke briefly with Obama after the election about "trying to find the right fit" for him in the administration.



He said he has bittersweet emotions as he leaves Hollywood to search for an apartment in Washington next week.



The writers' decision to have Dr. Kutner commit suicide ensures Penn will not return to the show, although he said he leaves on good terms.



He felt "more than a little bit of shock and loss" to learn that his character would die in his final episode.



Even though he spoke no lines in the episode -- and only his legs are seen when his body is found -- he was on the set for the filming, he said.



CNN's KJ Matthews contributed to this story.

***

JACKSONVILLE, Florida (CNN) -- Eduardo Gonzalez, a petty officer second class with the U.S. Navy, is about to be deployed overseas for a third time. Making his deployment even tougher is the fact his wife may not be around when he comes back.

Mildred and Eduardo Gonzalez worry about what would happen to their family if she is deported.

His wife faces deportation to Guatemala -- her home country that she hasn't seen since 1989. He also doesn't know what would happen to his young son, Eduardo Jr., if that happens.

"I like being in uniform and serving my country, but if she goes back I'm going to have to give it all up and just get out and take care of my son and get a job," he said.

"Defending the country that's trying to kick my family out is a thought that always runs through my mind."

Gonzalez, who works on helicopters that bring cargo, supplies and military personnel in and out of Iraq, testified before a House Judiciary Committee panel last month, detailing his situation and urging officials to consider some sort of policy to deal with cases like his, where military members' families could be deported while they're defending their country overseas.  Watch "they're tearing families apart" »

"I want to serve my country 100 percent. But with this issue in the back of my mind, I feel I can't do that," he testified on September 6.

The U.S. military does not have a policy to deal with such cases. Each is handled case-by-case, not by the military, but by immigration authorities. The government doesn't have numbers on how many military members are in predicaments similar  to Gonzalez's.

Immigration officials also said marrying a U.S. citizen does not mean the spouse is automatically entitled to U.S. citizenship or permanent legal status.

Lt. Col. Margaret Stock, a member of the U.S. Army Reserves who teaches immigration law at the U.S. Military Academy at West Point, New York, said she believes there should be an overall policy dealing with the potential deportation of family members of active duty military members.

"You got to understand. When you're in a combat zone, you need to be focusing all of your energies on fighting the enemy. You can't be worried that your loved ones back home could be shipped off to a foreign country where you're never going to see them again," she said.

Stock also said the government is conflicted about how to treat such cases. On the one hand, the government is supposed to be providing military families with assistance, housing and other forms of benefits while their spouses are overseas. On the other hand, the same government is trying to deport the very same people.

"What's happening right now is, because of the dysfunction and complexity of our immigration laws, we've got people fighting overseas who are facing the impossible situation of having family members facing deportation back home," she said.

In Gonzalez's case, his wife, Mildred, came to the United States with her mother in 1989 when she was 5 years old. They were granted political asylum because of their status as war refugees from Guatemala.

In September 2000, Mildred's mother applied for legalization and included her daughter in that application. Her mother was granted legal status in July 2004, according to Gonzalez.

However, six weeks earlier, Gonzalez and Mildred got married, canceling Mildred's ability to apply for legal status through her mother because she was no longer an unmarried daughter under the age of 21. As a result, her legal status still remains in jeopardy.

A judge in June granted her a one-year extension to remain in the United States. If her legal status does not change by June 8, 2008, she will have 60 days to voluntarily leave the country or face deportation.

That's just fine, according to Mark Krikorian, the executive director of the Center for Immigration Studies, which lobbies for tougher laws on illegal immigration.

"What you're talking

***

(CNN) -- Americans are spending less time stuck in traffic and wasting less gas, according to a new report.





Americans spend a little less time in traffic, a study shows, but drivers on I-110 in Los Angeles might not notice.





Rising joblessness and stinging gas prices have put the brakes on worsening trends in traffic congestion, according to a study issued Wednesday by the Texas Transportation Institute, the nation's largest university-based transportation research facility.





"It's temporary, but real," said institute spokesman Bernie Fette about the declines. "As goes the American economy, so goes traffic. There's fewer people going to work."





The institute attributed the changes to the recession, but the U.S. economy did not begin to slow significantly until the end of 2007.





The organization began tracking traffic trends in 1982, and by "every measure, congestion has increased substantially" in those 25 years, the latest Urban Mobility Report said. Not in 2007.





Researchers surveyed 439 urban centers in the United States and found that travelers spent one hour less stuck in traffic in 2007 than they did in 2006 and wasted 1 gallon less of gasoline.





Congestion delay per traveler in 1982 was 13.8 hours. In 2005, that number had almost tripled to 37.4 hours. But it was down to 36.1 hours in 2007, representing a "rare break in near-constant growth," the report said.





Because the changes were nominal, most people may not have noticed any change in their commutes. The average person still needs 25 percent more time to travel during rush hour than during other parts of the day, Fette said.





"Things were so congested and bad, it was kind of hard to notice," Fette said.





Among the report's other findings:





• American travelers still wasted 4.2 billion hours stuck in rush-hour traffic jams. That amounts to nearly one full work (or vacation) week for every traveler.





• The overall cost, based on wasted fuel and lost productivity, reached $87.3 billion in 2007, the report said. That's more than $750 per person.





• The amount of wasted fuel, from sitting idle with the motor running, topped 2.8 billion gallons, or three weeks' worth of gas, for every traveler.





Congestion has slowed but, said the report's authors, that means only that things are getting worse slower, "hardly a positive goal statement."





The Urban Mobility Report database includes a few similar periods from regional recessions in the past -- northeastern states in the early 1980s, Texas in the mid-1980s, California in the early 1990s. In every case, when the economy rebounded, so did the congestion problem, the report said.





That means congestion trends are likely to swing upward once the economy starts picking up. Americans might then have fatter pocketbooks, but they'll go back to staring through their windshields a bit longer.





CNN's Moni Basu contributed to this report.

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- Twenty-four people, including eight children, were injured in an apparent gas explosion at a Harlem apartment building, the New York Fire Department said.



The explosion blew out some of the windows in the five-story building.



John Rodgers, a spokesman for New York-Presbyterian Hospital, said Sunday that four of the eight children were from the same family.



The conditions of all those injured were not immediately known.



One child was in critical condition and the three others were in serious condition, New York Fire Department Commissioner Nicholas Scoppetta said.



All four had burn injuries. One of the injured is an infant.



A firefighter was also injured, but was in stable condition Saturday evening. He apparently was struck by falling debris, Scoppetta said.   About 200 firefighters responded to the scene of the blast on West 119th Street in Harlem.



New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg visited the five-floor building after the explosion.



The 4 p.m. ET blast blew some of the building's windows out, according to firefighters.  Watch rescue workers tend to injured »   Although the blast was still under investigation, Scoppetta said the cause appeared to be a gas leak. New York police said the blast was at the rear of the structure.



Residents who assisted in pulling the injured out of the building said some kind of restaurant was being operated on the bottom floor of the building. Scoppetta refused comment on those reports, citing the ongoing investigation.



An emergency room worker at Harlem Hospital Center said the facility received five to six people from the explosion about 4:30 p.m., but would not provide an update on their conditions.



The building, which has 20 apartments, was evacuated, as were apartment buildings on both sides, Scoppetta said. Building inspectors will examine them to determine their structural integrity.  E-mail to a friend



CNN's Caleb Silver, Jim Acosta and Richard Davis contributed to this report.

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN) -- John Travolta, still in mourning over the death of his teenage son earlier this year, issued a rare public statement urging fans to see his latest movie, "The Taking of Pelham 123," which he filmed last year.



John Travolta stars as a villainous ex-inmate in "The Taking of Pelham 123," which opens in theaters Friday.



"I promise, you won't be disappointed," said Travolta, who plays a deranged ex-inmate who takes hostages on a New York subway.



Travolta did not join co-star Denzel Washington in the promotional tour for the movie -- which hits theaters Friday -- because he said his family needed "additional time to reconcile our loss."



His son Jett, 16, was found unconscious on January 2 while on vacation with his family in the Bahamas. The teen was taken to a hospital, where he was pronounced dead on arrival, local police said.



Washington, who plays a subway train dispatcher forced to face down Travolta's character, said he talked to the actor about three weeks ago.



"Needless to say, he's struggling," Washington said in an interview last week.



Travolta's statement, which can be read on his official Web site, said Washington, director Tony Scott and the producers "stepped up without hesitation to help promote this wonderful film, and their unselfish efforts have allowed my family the additional time to reconcile our loss."



Making the movie was "a labor of love," Travolta said.



"Tony gave me the freedom to define, and then to become, the ultimate evil mastermind," he said. "This role as an actor gave me the chance to dispense with all moral and ethical limitations, and explore just how bad this character could really be. I believe you will like the result."



Much of the movie is a dialogue between Washington and Travolta's character over a two-way radio.



Many of the action shots were filmed in New York subway tunnels.

***

(CNN) -- NASA scientists say new data provided by twin spacecraft analyzing the sun will help them more accurately predict how so-called solar tsunamis wreak havoc on our planet.

NASA says new data on so-called solar tsunamis will help predict how they will affect our planet.

The tsunamis -- powerful explosions known as coronal mass ejections, or CMEs -- produce solar cosmic rays that can interfere with technology, causing power blackouts and disrupting air traffic communications and cell phone networks.

NASA says images captured by its twin Solar Terrestrial Relations Observatory, or STEREO, spacecraft have enabled scientists to map the tsunamis in 3D to examine their structure, velocity, mass and direction.

The solar ejections, its says, can release billions of tons of high-velocity plasma into space, producing a shockwave that generates cosmic rays which then plow into our atmosphere.

These can create the brightly-colored auroras, more commonly known as the Northern or Southern lights, but also have more damaging effects, posing particular threats to spacecraft and astronauts.

Solar physicist Angelos Vourlidas of the Naval Research Laboratory in Washington said the new data from the STEREO craft -- launched into orbit in October 2006 -- will revolutionize the study of cosmic weather patterns.

"Before this unique mission, measurements and the subsequent data of a CME observed near the sun had to wait until the ejections arrived at Earth three to seven days later," he said in statement.

"Now we can see a CME from the time it leaves the solar surface until it reaches Earth and we can reconstruct the event in 3D directly from the images."

***

MACAU, China -- Pete Sampras rolled back the years to upset current world number one Roger Federer in an exhibition match in Macau on Saturday.



Sampras enjoyed the spoils of victory in Macau after two previous defeats to Federer.



Federer had one the two previous clashes in an Asian series in straight sets but was handed a 7-6 6-4 defeat in the finale.



American ace Sampras downplayed his victory, noting Federer was coming off a long season and that he was helped by his big serve and the fast indoor carpet surface.



He had only aimed to win one set during the three-match series.



"Let's not get carried away," he said at a news conference.



Sampras ruled out a comeback from retirement, telling the audience after the match, "I had my time in the 90s."



Federer tried to put on a positive spin on the loss, saying he wasn't embarrassed to lose to his idol, but still showed some disappointment.



"It's been tough beating my idol the last two times. I'm happy that he got me at least once," he said, but adding, "I hope we can do it again in the future. I'd like to get him back."



The two players have won a combined 26 Grand Slam titles, but Sampras, 36, retired five years ago after winning the U.S. Open in 2002.



Federer is coming off another outstanding season in which he won three grand slams and last week's Masters Cup in Shanghai.



"I'm sort of surprised. This guy can play tennis, you know," the Swiss player said after his loss Saturday.



Federer beat Sampras 6-4 6-3 in Seoul on Tuesday and edged the American 7-6 7-6 in Kuala Lumpur on Thursday.



In Macau, Federer was never able able to force a break point on the powerful Sampras serve, but had set points at 6-5 and 8-7 in the tiebreak.



But Sampras saved both and a run of three points, capped by a forehand winner, gave him the opener.



The ninth game of the second second proved vital as a forehand error by Federer gave Sampras a break point which he gratefully took with another fine forehand.



Sampras closed out the match as a Federer backhand return sailed long.



Federer said he thought Sampras could still beat the world's top five players on a fast surface.



Sampras then predicted that Federer could beat his record of most grand slam wins (14) "if not next year, pretty soon."



"He's a great, great player. He's got things in his game that I couldn't do," he said. E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- The death of a Canadian soldier in battle-scarred Afghanistan on Thursday brings this month's toll of international military fatalities in the war to 47, the highest monthly tally so far, a CNN count of official statistics shows.



Lt. Col Thorneloe was  one of 15 British troops killed in action in Afghanistan this month.



The Canadian soldier was killed while he was conducting operations in the Panjwayi District in Kandahar province, the Canadian military said.



The previous monthly record was 46, a mark reached twice last year, in June and August.



The growing death toll, which only accounts for the first half of July, comes amid an uptick in fighting across Afghanistan, where international forces and Afghan troops have been battling the Taliban.



The push, called Operation Khanjar, targets militants in Helmand province, a Taliban stronghold and poppy-growing region. The forces are trying to gain and hold ground in the perilous region ahead of national elections this August.



Some of the deaths resulted from nonhostile incidents such as accidents, but most have occurred during hostilities.



According to a CNN count of figures from various governments, the U.S.-led coalition and NATO's International Security Assistance Force, the deaths in July have included 23 Americans, 15 Britons, five Canadians, two Turks, an Italian and a NATO-led soldier whose nationality has not yet been disclosed.



The news coincides with another grim milestone for the British military, which has seen the number of troops killed in Afghanistan surpass the death toll in the Iraq War.



An especially bloody 10 days in Afghanistan's Helmand province, the staging ground for several major recent offensives, claimed the lives of 15 British soldiers in July, putting the number of the country's dead in Afghanistan at 184, the Defense Ministry said.



The British military has lost 179 soldiers in Iraq.



The 15 deaths in July also put the British military on track to be the deadliest month yet for British troops supporting Operation Enduring Freedom.



Britain's deadliest month in Afghanistan so far has been September 2006, when 19 died -- 14 in a single incident, the crash of a Royal Air Force plane near Kandahar.



Since the United States launched Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan in 2001, 652 U.S. troops have died in hostile and nonhostile activities throughout the country.

***

(CNN) -- The only surviving gunman in the 2008 attacks on Mumbai that killed more than 160 people was sentenced to death by hanging on Thursday.





Mohammed Ajmal Kasab, a Pakistani, was convicted on Monday of murder, conspiracy, and waging war on India. He was sentenced to death on five separate counts, and life imprisonment on five others.





On receiving the sentence, Kasab lowered his head. He was silent when the judge asked him if he wanted to say anything.





Kasab is the only man to have been sentenced in connection with the three-day siege in November 2008. During the raids, 10 men attacked buildings including the luxury Taj Mahal Palace and Tower and Oberoi-Trident hotels, the city's Victoria Terminus train station, and the Jewish cultural center, Chabad House.





Kasab was photographed holding an assault weapon during the attacks.





India blamed the attacks on the Lashkar-e-Tayyiba, a Pakistan-based terror group allied with al Qaeda.





Authorities said Kasab was trained by the organization, which was banned in Pakistan in 2002 after an attack on India's parliament. The group denied responsibility.





Indian forces killed nine suspects in the attack. Their bodies were embalmed and kept in a hospital morgue as some local Muslim groups refused to bury them in their graveyards, saying the attackers were not true followers of Islam.





An Indian official in Maharashtra state, where Mumbai is located, has said a burial took place in January this year. He did not give the date or the exact location of what he described as a secret funeral.





Two Indian nationals accused of conspiracy were acquitted in the trial.





The prosecutor said he would fight their acquittals.

***

(Mashable) -- Yesterday, Tweetie 2 for iPhone disappeared from the App Store. Its replacement, simply titled Twitter, is now available.





This comes a little more than a month after Twitter acquired Tweetie from its creator, Loren Brichter. In addition to being free, the app now carries the distinction of being "version 3.0."





If you were expecting a big update and iPad support alongside the new name, brace yourselves; Tweetie -- er -- Twitter has remained relatively unchanged from its prior release.





That's not a bad thing; as we reported in our original reviews of Tweetie 2 and Tweetie 2.1, Tweetie is one of the best Twitter experiences for any platform and, in our opinion, was the winning app on the iPhone by a wide margin.





That said, check out some of the new features and tweaks that you can find in the newly rebranded app:





• You can use Twitter without an account. Spy on your friends without having to actually use Twitter.





• You can sign up for a Twitter account within the app itself, complete with Suggested User List.





• The "More" tab has been reorganized and popular actions have been moved to the main action bar.





• Search results include Top Tweets.





In acquiring Tweetie, Twitter raised the ire of its developer community, who worried about what this means for their own applications now and in the future. Twitter has argued that it needs to have an official client to improve basic user experience.





Earlier this month, Twitter for Android was released and RIM launched its own Twitter application for the BlackBerry. This means that the three hottest smartphone platforms all have official Twitter clients.





If you never used Tweetie, we highly recommend downloading Twitter for iPhone. It's just a great application and now that it's free, there's really no excuse not to give it a try.





What is your favorite Twitter client for the iPhone? Let us know in the comments below.





© 2010 MASHABLE.com. All rights reserved.

***

TEHRAN, Iran (CNN) -- Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad said Monday he did not call for a ban on Facebook during the country's presidential election.



President Ahmadinejad's challengers are using new technology to spread their message.



"I should make an inquiry and ask about this," he said when asked about reports that his government blocked access to the online social networking site.



He added, "I believe in maximum freedom of expression."



The hardline Iranian president made the comment in response to a question from CNN at a news conference.



Asked whether he would order that access to Facebook be reinstated, Ahmadinejad responded that he would "see if there is a complaint" that may be presented to the judiciary.



The semi-official Iranian Labor News Agency reported over the weekend that the Iranian government had blocked Facebook amid political jockeying for the June 12 presidential election.



Reformist candidate Mir Hossein Mousavi -- a former prime minister considered a threat to Ahmadinejad -- has created a Facebook page for his campaign and has more than 5,000 supporters on the site.



Those attempting to visit Facebook were receiving a message in Farsi saying, "Access to this site is not possible," according to CNN personnel in Tehran.



The news agency reported the Masadiq Committee, made up of representatives from Iran's intelligence ministry, judiciary and others, had ordered the action. After a few hours, the block was lifted, but then reinstated later, the agency said. No reason was given.



"We are disappointed to learn of reports that users in Iran may not have access to Facebook, especially at a time when voters are turning to the Internet as a source of information about election candidates and their positions," a Facebook spokesperson said in a written statement. "We are investigating these reports.



"We believe that people around the world should be able to use Facebook to communicate and share information with their friends, family and co-workers. It is always a shame when a countries' cultural and political concerns lead to limits being placed on the opportunity for sharing and expression that the Internet provides."



Ahmadinejad's challengers are increasingly turning to new technology to spread their message, according to a May 13 article in the Financial Times newspaper.



Iran's population -- estimated at more than 66 million by July 2009, according to the CIA World Factbook -- has a median age of 27. The Financial Times, which put the country's population at 70 million, said 47 million Iranians have cell phones and 21 million have Internet access.



"We are using new technologies because they have the capacity to be multiplied by people themselves who can forward Bluetooth, e-mails and text messages and invite more supporters on Facebook," Behzad Mortazavi, head of Mousavi's campaign committee, told the Financial Times.



At a Mousavi rally at a stadium Saturday, the Facebook blockage was a topic of conversation among reporters. Many said they had accessed Facebook on Friday night and believe the site was blocked Saturday morning.



CNN's Reza Sayah and Shirzad Bozorgmehr contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- At 51 years of age, Polish prime minister Donald Tusk has come a long way. As part of the Kashubian minority living in the Gdansk Region, he was born to working-class parents -- his father a carpenter and his mother a nurse.



Polish Prime Minister Donald Tusk was elected in November 2007.



As a student of History at the University of Gdansk in the late 1970s, a period of growing discontent with the Communist regime in Poland, he became actively involved in the creation of the opposition Students' Solidarity Committee, founded in reaction to the murder of student activist Stanislaw Pyjas by the State Security Service.



Despite his anti-communist activities, he successfully finished his studies in 1980 and joined the Independent Solidarity Trade Union movement.



When the Communists imposed martial law in 1981 he continued with his underground activities, writing pamphlets about the ideas of liberal economist Friedrich Hayek and the concept of private property. His heroes became former U.S. president Ronald Reagan and British prime minister Margaret Thatcher.



With the fall of Communism in 1989, the Solidarity Movement splintered. Lech Walesa, the former Solidarity Leader was elected President, while Tusk went on to co-found the KLD (Liberal and Democratic Congress Party) with other well-known figures. The Party stood for among other things: free market economy, privatization, individual freedom of Polish citizens and Polish accession to the EU.



The following year, during the 1991 Parliamentary elections, the KLD won 37 seats in the lower house of the Polish Parliament. Not being able to follow up on their success in the 1993 elections, the KLD merged with the larger Democratic Union Party (UD) to form a new party called Freedom Union (UW).



Tusk soon became Deputy Chairman and in the 1997 elections, he was voted into the Senate.



In 2001, Tusk formed the Civic Platform Party (PO), winning seats in that year's parliamentary elections and becoming Deputy Speaker in parliament.



But the Civic Platform was not able to sustain its success in the 2005 elections. Tusk and his party lost both the presidential and parliamentary elections to Lech Kacczynski's PiS (Law and Justice Party). This setback was not to last as Tusk triumphed over Jaroslaw Kaczynsky's PiS in the October 2007 elections and became prime minister of Poland.



Tusk's economic policies are pro-business: less bureaucratic hurdles and state interference making it easier for entrepreneurs to start businesses. He is also trying to woo back more than a million Poles who left the country to work in other European Union countries after it joined the EU in 2004.



Tusk is a keen footballer, viewed in his youth as a promising striker. He is married to historian Malgorzata and has two children, Kasia and Michal.

***

Baghdad, Iraq (CNN) -- The Kurdish bloc in the Iraqi parliament intends to boycott the vote on a proposed election law if the oil-rich province of Kirkuk is banned from voting in next year's national elections, two Kurdish lawmakers said.



A vote may be held Thursday on a proposal that would govern the elections, now set for January 16, legislators Mahmoud Othman and Abdul Bari al-Zebari said on Wednesday.



Kirkuk, north of Baghdad, was excluded from provincial elections last January.



Kurds displaced under Saddam Hussein's rule settled on land they say is rightfully theirs. However, Arab and Turkmen residents claim many more Kurds have moved into Kirkuk than were displaced, and that allowing them to vote would create an unfair advantage.



Without the Kurdish lawmakers there will be no quorum, thereby blocking the vote, Sunni lawmaker Salim al-Jabouri, a member of the small Sunni political bloc, the Iraqi Front for National Dialogue, told CNN.



Before conducting balloting next year, Iraq needs an election law that lays out basic rules. If one is not adopted, the government may have to either reschedule the election or rely on the law used in the 2005 national elections, officials say.



Lawmakers failed to reach agreement on the issue a week ago.



The other contentious election issue is that of open lists versus closed lists on ballots. Open lists would name candidates and their parties; closed lists would name only parties. Existing law, used in the 2005 election, mandates a closed list.



President Jalal Talabani, Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki and other political leaders -- members of the Political Council for National Security -- reached a tentative agreement on the draft bill Tuesday evening. Talabani's office released no details on the content.



The constitutional deadline for the elections is January 31. The election commission needs at least 90 days after passage of the law to carry out elections, which U.S. and Iraqi government officials call a vital step in Iraqi efforts to solidify a democratic system in the post-Saddam Hussein era.



CNN's Mohammed Tawfeeq contributed to this report

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- The Taliban in Afghanistan -- whose government was toppled by U.S.-led forces after the September 11 attacks in 2001 -- has strengthened its military and technical capabilities even while suffering heavy combat losses, says a State Department report released Wednesday.



Afghan policemen stand Wednesday outside the ruins of a house destroyed during clashes with Taliban insurgents.



"The Taliban-led insurgency remained a capable, determined, and resilient threat to stability and to the expansion of government authority, particularly in the Pashtun south and east," according to the "Country Reports on Terrorism 2007."



The Taliban's information operations have become "increasingly aggressive and sophisticated," and their ability to obtain al Qaeda support and recruit soldiers from the Taliban base of rural Pashtuns is "undiminished," the report says.



But new civilian-military counterinsurgency approaches in the east, particularly Nangarhar, have begun to yield successes, the report says.



The Taliban is funding its terror activities with money from supporters in neighboring Pakistan and from narcotics trafficking and kidnappings. Kidnappings of foreigners have increased, the report says.



The group also has increased its use of improvised explosive devices, and suicide bombings have become more frequent and more deadly, it says. Quoting U.N.-compiled figures, the State Department said terrorists launched about 140 suicide-bomb attacks in 2007.



The number of terror attacks in Afghanistan increased from 969 in 2006 to 1,127 last year, and the number of people killed, injured or kidnapped as the result of terrorism rose from 3,557 in 2006 to 4,673 in 2007, the report says.



In the face of attacks by the Taliban and related groups on coalition forces and others, Afghanistan has struggled to build a stable, democratic government. However, it has taken steps to build strong relationships with neighboring Pakistan and address problems such as poverty that help fuel terrorism, the report says.



The Program for Strengthening Peace and Reconciliation has persuaded more than 5,000 Taliban members and other insurgents to stop their lives of violence, it says.



The shifting situation in Afghanistan prompted the top U.S. military officer to say in early April that he is "deeply concerned" about the situation there, and that maintaining troops in Iraq is harming overall U.S. military capabilities.



"The Taliban is growing bolder, suicide attacks are on the rise, and so is the trade in illegal narcotics," said Adm. Mike Mullen, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.



U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates said the United States needs more troops to hold areas of southern Afghanistan -- the region of highest concern -- and to train local army and police personnel.



The two men testified before the Senate Armed Services Committee.



The United States recently sent an additional 3,500 troops to Afghanistan, but commanders in the region would like 10,000 to 12,000 more, Gates said. He said he doubted NATO would make up the difference.



Although 25 NATO allies and 13 other countries have contributed forces, the bulk of the recent fighting in Afghanistan has been done by U.S., Canadian, British and Dutch troops. Canadian troops are based in the southern province of Kandahar, once a Taliban stronghold. E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- A Tennessee man -- accused in a fatal attack at a military recruiting center in Arkansas in June -- wants to plead guilty and claims to have ties to al Qaeda in Yemen in a letter he wrote to the judge presiding over his case.



In the handwritten letter dated January 12, Abdul Hakim Muhammad said he did not want a trial and insisted the shooting was "justified" under jihad.



"This was a jihadi attack on infidel forces that didn't go as plan," he wrote. "Flat out truth."



It was not immediately clear whether the judge, Herbert Wright Jr., would accept the plea.



Muhammad's lawyer, Claiborne Ferguson, called the letter "highly inappropriate."



"If my client had the intention of pleading guilty, it is misguided and misinformed as to Arkansas law," Ferguson said from Memphis, Tennessee, on Thursday. "He can't plead guilty to a capital crime."



That response is why Muhammad said he decided to bypass his lawyer with a letter to Wright. He wrote that he believed it was "a lie" that he could not plead guilty.



Muhammad, formerly known as Carlos Bledsoe, is charged with killing Pvt. William Long, 23, and wounding Pvt. Quinton Ezeagwula, 18. The attack happened on June 1 at a recruiting center in Little Rock, Arkansas.



In June, Muhammad pleaded not guilty to one count of capital murder and 16 counts of engaging in a terrorist act.



Before pleading not guilty, Muhammad waived his Miranda rights and gave a video statement indicating political and religious motives, authorities said.



He "stated that he was a practicing Muslim ... that he was mad at the U.S. military because of what they had done to Muslims in the past," Detective Tommy Hudson wrote in a police report at the time.



Muhammad told police "he fired several rounds at the soldiers with the intent of killing them," according to Hudson's report.



In his letter to the judge, Muhammad claimed he had links to al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula in Yemen, a group that has claimed responsibility for the attempting bombing of a U.S.-bound airliner on Christmas Day.



"My lawyer has no defense," he wrote. "I wasn't insane or post traumatic nor was I forced to do this act. Which I believe and it is justified according to Islamic laws and the Islamic religion jihad -- to fight those who wage war on Islam and Muslims."



CNN's Charley Keyes contributed to this report.

***

TEHRAN, Iran (CNN) -- For years Ahmad has been unable to find true love. So the 27 year-old bachelor who lives in Tehran is turning to a professional matchmaker.



Jafar Ardabili's matchmaking service provides one option for Iranian singles.



"I'm searching for a love that lasts," Ahmad said.



What's unusual is Ahmad's matchmaker wears a turban, a robe and could be the first-ever Iranian cleric who plays cupid.



"First they say 'wow'," Jafar Ardabili said, "then they take a closer look and say 'since he's a cleric we have faith in him.'"



Ardabili made his first love match 10 years ago while he taught at a Tehran university. One of his students had a crush on a person, so Ardabili arranged for the two to meet. A few months later they married.



The set-up worked so well that Ardabili and his wife opened the Amin International Family and Cultural Institute, a service that matched Iranian singles in a supervised setting.



In Iran, Islamic law restricts social interaction.



"You can't just go after someone in public and say would you like to live with me?" Ardabili said. "Especially the women, who often don't have any right to choose their companion, but in our institute women do have the right to choose."



Ahmad would love nothing more than one of those women to choose him. On a Thursday morning he anxiously sat in the institute's waiting room. Ardabili had arranged for Ahmad to meet a young lady. Could she be the one?



Ahmad had paid a $100 fee, submitted a picture and his information. In return he has access to thousands of other applicants.



Once applicants approve of one another's pictures and profiles Ardabili arranges up to two meetings inside his office. After each meeting, the applicants report back to Ardabili.



"When there's no connection they look like wrinkled potatoes," Ardabili said. And when cupid's arrow hits the mark?



"They look very eager. They're as happy as an ice cream cone."  Watch Ardabili describe how his service works »



The third meeting for couples takes place outside the institute without supervision. If all goes well, Ardabili arranges for the families to meet and then the couple ties the knot.



"You feel good because you're serving humanity," Ardabili said.



Ardabili said that during the past 10 years his institute has had more than 50,000 applicants. More than 2,000 of his couples have married without a single divorce, he said. Ardabili gave credit to his 10-member staff that offers counseling to married couples, even sex therapy.



"We want to reduce divorce, give families a strong foundation," Ardabili said.



On his Web site, Tehran's matchmaking mullah has posted wedding pictures of some of his success stories.



Ahmad can't wait to see his picture among them.



"At this very moment I'm counting down the days."

***

(CNN) -- An Egyptian court on Thursday confirmed the death sentences of a business tycoon and a former police officer convicted of killing rising Lebanese pop star Suzanne Tamim.



Hisham Talaat Moustafa, a real estate mogul, has been found guilty of Suzanne Tamim's murder.



In a case that has captivated Egypt and the region because of the fame of the victim and one of the defendants, a judge sentenced to death real estate mogul Hisham Talaat Moustafa and former officer Muhsen el Sukkari last month. Tamim's body was found stabbed, with her throat slit, in her apartment in the United Arab Emirates in July 2008.



The court's latest decision came after a review of the sentence by Egypt's grand mufti, the country's highest religious official. Because the two men were sentenced under Islamic law, it is widely expected they will be hanged.



The court usually seeks to get the Mufti's "advice only on any death sentence, according to the law," a legal source in Cairo told CNN.



"However, the Mufti's advice to the court is not binding at all," added the source, who asked not to be named.



"Even if the Mufti was against the death sentence, that will not have any effect on the judge's decision, who will have the final say," the source said.



Since his 2003 appointment as grand mufti, Sheikh Ali Gomaa has received about 480 cases from the court that included death sentences. He supported the judge's decision in 478 and opposed twice, but the rule was implemented according to the court conviction.



Moustafa's lawyer previously told reporters that he would appeal the conviction, saying there was "a 1 million percent guarantee" the sentence would be overturned.



Prosecutors alleged Moustafa, a parliament member for the ruling National Democratic Party, paid el Sukkari $2 million to kill Tamim.



During the trial, Moustafa's lawyer told CNN his client loved the singer but could not take Tamim as a second wife because his family objected.



Polygamy is legal in Egypt, and it's not unusual for men such as Moustafa, a married father of three, to take on additional wives.



Prosecutors have said Tamim's death was a "means of taking revenge" but have not elaborated.



Moustafa and el Sukkari claim the prosecution's evidence could have been fabricated or tampered with by UAE authorities and should not be used against them.



Although Tamim was killed in the UAE, the Egyptian judiciary tried the case in Cairo because the accused were arrested in Egypt.



After Moustafa's arrest in September, Egyptian authorities indicted him, stripped him of his parliamentary immunity and jailed him pending trial.



He also resigned as chairman of Talaat Moustafa Group -- a conglomerate with construction and real estate arms that was founded by his father, Talaat Moustafa. Moustafa's brother, Tarek Talaat Moustafa, now chairs the company.



CNN.com Arabic's Mahmoud Gharib contributed to this story.

***

(CNN) -- Why is goal line technology not used by football? Is Africa's hosting of the 2010 World Cup a step in the right direction? Are the world's best players being asked to compete in too many global competitions? These are just some of the issues that may be puzzling you about the beautiful game.





Well worry no more because here is your chance to quiz the man in charge of global soccer, Sepp Blatter, the head of world football's governing body FIFA.





CNN will speak to Blatter in an exclusive interview at FIFA's headquarters in Zurich, Switzerland on Monday 29 March where we will ask him the questions you want answered -- just add your query to the bottom of the page.





Are you a World Cup super fan? Represent your team





Joseph (Sepp) Blatter, a former Swiss amateur footballer, was voted in as the FIFA president in 1998 before securing a second term in office in 2002, and a third in 2007.





His tenure has seen him lead world football through three World Cups -- the fourth will kick off on June 11 in Johannesburg's Soccer City stadium -- five Confederations Cups and the creation of the World Club Cup which has taken place annually since 2005.





The 74-year-old  has been heavily involved with charitable programs during his presidency.





These include UNICEF's "Say Yes for Children" campaign, which aims to increase awareness of children's rights, and the more recent "1Goal" program, that seeks to increase education opportunities in Africa.





Blatter was a key figure in securing Africa's inaugural World Cup for 2010 after he introduced a system which saw each regional confederation take turns in hosting the tournament.





The soccer chief has also courted controversy during his 12 years in charge, most recently by ruling out the introduction of goal line technology into the game.





"The application of modern technologies can be very costly, and therefore not applicable on a global level," Blatter told FIFA's official Web site.





"Many matches, even at the highest level, are not even televised. The rules need to be the same for all association football matches worldwide."





Blatter has views on the English Premier League's domination of the global game. "In France they have an expression 'l'appetit vient mangeant' [the appetite comes with eating]. It means when you are at a good table you like to eat more and more and more. And this is the success story of the Premier League," he told a FIFA meeting held in Northern Ireland in March 2009.





The Swiss administrator has also condemned the hold big clubs have over star players. When Spanish side Real Madrid were negotiating with Manchester United over the transfer of Cristiano Ronaldo, Blatter told British broadcaster Sky News: "I think in football there's too much modern slavery in transferring players or buying players here and there, and putting them somewhere."

***

COPENHAGEN, Denamrk (CNN) -- What makes someone decide to become an actor? It sometimes seems as if the average Hollywood star is motivated mainly by the promise of a fat pay check.



Connie Nielsen shot to fame playing Lucilla in "Gladiator."



Or perhaps they're drawn to the celebrity lifestyle. Maybe they crave the love of an adoring public, or perhaps they see the movies as a way to leave their mark on the world, to be immortalized on celluloid.



For Danish actress Connie Nielsen it was something quite different. For her, being an actor means being an outsider. "As an artist you actually do have to make a choice to be an outsider. If you're an outsider you have the freedom to say what people on the inside don't dare to say," she told CNN.



So Connie Nielsen is not your typical movie star. As a 5-foot-10-inch blonde Scandinavian beauty she has the looks of a classic silver screen siren, but she has steadfastly resisted a career as Hollywood eye candy and rejected the lifestyle that goes with it.



"I absolutely refuse the fame part of my business," she says. "I refuse even the money side of my business. I try to do as good work as I can do, I try to grow in my art and reach for truth," she says.



Raised in Elling, a small coastal village in Denmark, she is fluent in seven languages and studied acting in France and Italy, making her screen debut in French comedy "Par Où T'es Rentré? On T'a Pas Vu Sortir" (U.S. title "How Did You Get In? We Didn't See You Leave") in 1984.



She appeared in more French and Italian movies before landing a role opposite Al Pacino and Keanu Reeves in "The Devil's Advocate" in 1997. But it wasn't until 2000, when she was cast in Ridley Scott's Oscar-winning "Gladiator", that Nielsen landed a role that really let her show her acting ability.



As Lucilla, the sister of the villainous Emperor Commodus, Nielsen brought some much-needed subtlety to the swords-and-sandals epic and held her own sharing the screen with Joaquin Phoenix and Russell Crowe.



The movie made Nielsen an international star and she scored other successes with "One Hour Photo" in 2002, and "The Hunted" in 2003. But while the success of "Gladiator" opened doors for her, it also meant she had to fight the kind of typecasting that would try to limit her to playing "the love interest" to a male lead who got all the good lines.



Nielsen has in the past been critical of Hollywood for its lack of female roles, saying "you think once you've shown what you can do, and your movies have been successful, that snap, you work. So to discover the difference between guys' roles and girls' roles made me plain mad. It's unjust."



But Nielsen has refused to be pigeonholed, seemingly drawn to difficult roles in controversial movies. She appeared in French movie "Demonlover", which dealt with pornography, violence and corporate amorality, while more recent films have taken on the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq.



Danish drama "Brødre" (U.S. title "Brothers") is about a soldier who returns from Afghanistan a broken man, unable to communicate his experiences from the conflict. Playing his wife, Nielsen put in a powerful performance that won her awards and served to highlight how Hollywood had underused her talents.



"The Situation" in 2006 was billed as the first film to be made about the Iraq war and told the story of ordinary Iraqis caught up in the conflict, while "Battle of Seattle" examined how peaceful protests erupted into riots when the World Trade Organization met in Seattle in 1999.



Of her choice of subject matter, Nielsen says that rather than making a political point she is trying to show the human aspects of the conflicts.



But Nielsen makes it clear that her career is not the focus of her life and she stresses the importance of making time

***

BEIJING, China (CNN) -- The head of China's quality watchdog is reported to have resigned over the tainted baby milk scandal that has killed four children and sickened nearly 53,000 others.



The official Xinhua News Agency said Li Changjiang had quit with the approval of China's State Council. Li's agency is responsible for ensuring that China's food supply chain is safe.



Monday's resignation came hours after the World Health Organization said the scandal had highlighted flaws in the country's entire food supply chain.



The chemical melamine blamed for causing kidney stones and kidney failure has been detected in formula milk powder from 22 dairies across China.



The crisis was initially thought to have been confined to baby milk powder, but tests have found melamine in samples of liquid milk taken from China's two largest dairy producers, Mengniu Dairy Group and Yili Industrial Group, as well as Shanghai-based Bright Dairy.



WHO China representative Hans Troedsson said on Monday quality issues could occur anywhere from the farm to the retail outlet.



He said "it's clearly something that is not acceptable and needs to be rectified and corrected," according to The Associated Press. Troedsson said the WHO was discussing with officials how to strengthen China's food quality system.



Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao has called milk manufacturers "heartless" and promised stricter laws to protect the public.



China's Health Ministry said Sunday that about 13,000 children were hospitalized, while another 40,000 had undergone outpatient treatment for illnesses related to suspected melamine-tainted milk products.



The scandal has spread beyond the mainland with melamine being found in three Chinese-made dairy products in Singapore.



The country's Agri-Food and Veterinary Authority said tests on "White Rabbit Creamy Candy" showed that it was contaminated with melamine and it ordered stores to remove the product from shelves.



Taiwan announced Monday it was banning the importation of all dairy products from China because of melamine contamination in milk supplies on the mainland, Taiwan's Health Ministry said Monday.



And a second child in Hong Kong has been diagnosed with a kidney stones after drinking the tainted milk as worried parents continued to take their children for health checkups, the government said Monday, AP reported.



The 4-year-old boy was in hospital in a stable condition, the Hong Kong government said in a statement. A three-year-old girl was sickened by a suspected melamine-tainted milk over the weekend -- the first known illness outside of mainland China.



The Chinese premier visited Beijing hospitals and a supermarket Sunday to show his concern for the crisis.



"What we need to do now is to ensure that nothing like this happens in the future, not only in dairy products, but in all foods," he said. "Manufacturers and owners of dairy companies should show more morality and social responsibility in these cases. They are heartless, so we have to create strict law and legislation. I'm sorry."



Investigators arrested two brothers who sold milk used to produce the contaminated baby milk powder last week. They could face death if convicted, according to China Daily, a state-run newspaper.



The raw milk had been watered down and the chemical added to fool quality checks, the newspaper said. Melamine is commonly used in coatings and laminates, wood adhesives, fabric coatings, ceiling tiles and flame retardants.  Watch CNN visit the company at the center of the scandal »



But anger has been directed not just at the producers accused of adulterating their milk to increase profits, but also at government regulators, Time magazine reported.



"Xinhua was quick to blame the dairy industry for their skewed rules, but what it didn't say was that the government also played a part in that ugly game," the magazine quoted a blogger, identified as sadmoon109, as saying.



Health experts say ingesting melamine can lead to kidney stones, urinary tract ulcers, and eye and skin irritation. It also robs infants of much-needed nutrition.



Thousands of tons of the tainted milk powder have been recalled.



Melamine is the same industrial contaminant from China that poisoned and killed thousands of U.S. dogs

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Nine of the 11 Pakistani nationals being held in an alleged terror plot in northern England were released Tuesday, according to police.



Police officers guard a house in Manchester, England, following raids and arrests of terror suspects.



The arrests were made the week before Easter and came quickly after Britain's chief terrorism officer, who has since resigned, exposed a list of people who were suspected of planning an al Qaeda-linked attack.



Britain's Greater Manchester Police said the men were released into the custody of the U.K.'s border agency, which will determine whether they can legally remain in England. Police and the border agency said they want the men deported, even though investigators apparently were unable to find enough evidence to charge them with crimes.



"We are seeking to remove these individuals on grounds of national security. The government's highest priority is to protect public safety," said a statement from the agency. "Where a foreign national poses a threat to this country, we will seek to exclude or to deport, where this is appropriate."



Twelve people originally were arrested April 8, and one had been released before Tuesday. Two people remained in custody, authorities said.



Police said that at the time of the arrests, their investigation compelled them to take action, even without the blunder made by Metropolitan Police Assistant Commissioner Bob Quick.



The document he was carrying when photographed outside 10 Downing Street contained the names of those to be arrested, and a source said photographers were able to easily read the names when they enlarged the photographs.



Once the word was out, police rushed to make the arrests. Authorities said those actions would have been taken in the following 24 hours anyway.



The men -- ranging in age from 18 to 22 -- were arrested in Manchester, about 200 miles northwest of London. They had been held for 13 days without being charged. Police will need to seek an extension by Wednesday to be able to continue holding the two remaining suspects without charges.



Police say they are continuing to review evidence collected in the case and are searching at least one more house



CNN's Paula Newton in London contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Prince William has spoken in depth publicly for the first time about death of his mother, Diana, Princess of Wales, 12 years ago, saying "mummy" is now a hollow word "evoking only memories."



Diana, Princess of Wales, died in a Paris car crash 12 years ago.



Prince William was only 15 and his brother Prince Harry 12 when Diana died in a Paris car crash along with Dodi Fayed in 1997.



The Prince made the comment Thursday during a speech to mark his new role as patron of Britain's Child Bereavement Charity -- a group his mother was once involved with.



The British Press Association reported that he told the launch of the charity's Mother's Day campaign: "My mother Diana was present at your launch 15 years ago, and I am incredibly proud to be able to continue her support for your fantastic charity, by becoming your royal patron.



"What my mother recognized then -- and what I understand now -- is that losing a close family member is one of the hardest experiences that anyone can ever endure.



"Never being able to say the word 'Mummy' again in your life sounds like a small thing. Tell us what you think about Prince William's moving comments



"However, for many, including me, it's now really just a word -- hollow and evoking only memories.



"I can therefore wholeheartedly relate to the Mother's Day campaign as I too have felt -- and still feel -- the emptiness on such a day as Mother's Day." Listen to Prince William discuss his mother. »



The charity wants to raise awareness of the problems suffered by mothers bereaved of a child or children bereaved of their mother.



Based in Buckinghamshire, a region west of London, it educates professionals and supports families after a death.



Writing in Britain's Daily Mail newspaper about his new role, the Prince said the reality of losing a child or parent was "awful."



"Initially, there is a sense of profound shock and disbelief that this could ever happen to you. Real grief often does not hit home until much later.



"For many it is a grief never entirely lost. Life is altered as you know it, and not a day goes past without you thinking about the one you have lost."



Mother's Day in the UK always falls on the fourth weekend of Lent, and this year is on March 22.



Earlier this week France's leading society magazine, Point de Vue, reported that the Prince would marry his long-term girlfriend, Kate Middleton, this summer.



The magazine claimed an official announcement was "imminent."

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- A New York Post cartoon Wednesday drew fire from civil rights activist Al Sharpton and others who say the drawing invokes historically racist images in suggesting an ape wrote President Barack Obama's economic stimulus package.

Al Sharpton says he wonders whether the cartoon "is making a less-than-casual inference" to a form of racism.

The artist, Sean Delonas, called Sharpton's reaction "ridiculous," and the newspaper defended its decision to run his cartoon. But other African-American leaders joined Sharpton, who has been the butt of previous Delonas panels, in attacking what they called the cartoon's racial overtones.

"Sean Delonas' cartoon in today's New York Post is insensitive and offensive," National Urban League President Marc Morial said in a statement issued Wednesday afternoon. "Comparing President Obama and his effort to revive the economy in a manner that depicts violence and racist inferences is unacceptable."

The cartoon showed two police officers standing over the body of a chimpanzee they just shot, a reference to this week's mauling of a Connecticut woman by a pet chimp, which police killed after the attack. In the cartoon, one of the officers tells the other, "They'll have to find someone else to write the next stimulus bill." New York Post: See cartoon

The nearly $800 billion stimulus package was the priority for Obama, the first African-American U.S. president, who signed it Tuesday.   Watch Sharpton raise racism concerns, and see the cartoon Â»

"The cartoon in today's New York Post is troubling at best, given the racist attacks throughout history that have made African-Americans synonymous with monkeys," Sharpton said.

Sharpton questioned whether Delonas "is making a less-than-casual inference to this form of racism."

"The Post should at least clarify what point they were trying to make in this cartoon, and reprimand their cartoonist for making inferences that are offensive and divisive at a time the nation struggles to come together to stabilize the economy if, in fact, this was yet another racially charged cartoon," he said.

In a brief phone interview with CNN, Delonas called the controversy "absolutely friggin' ridiculous."

"Do you really think I'm saying Obama should be shot? I didn't see that in the cartoon," Delonas said.

"It's about the economic stimulus bill," he added. "If you're going to make that about anybody, it would be [House Speaker Nancy] Pelosi, which it's not."

Col Allan, the Post's editor-in-chief, said the cartoon "is a clear parody of a current news event."  Watch CNN panel discuss the cartoon Â»

"It broadly mocks Washington's efforts to revive the economy. Again, Al Sharpton reveals himself as nothing more than a publicity opportunist," Allan said in a written statement.  But Sharpton and Morial were not alone in their criticism. Barbara Ciara, president of the National Association of Black Journalists, said the Post showed a "serious lapse in judgment" by running the cartoon.

"To think that the cartoonist and the responsible editors at the paper did not see the racist overtones of the finished product should insult their intelligence," Ciara said in a written statement. "Instead, they celebrate their own lack of perspective and criticize those who call it what it is: tone deaf at best, overtly racist at worst."

Jeff Johnson, a former activist turned Black Entertainment Television host, said provocative cartoons are good, but that "none of this is appropriate on any level."

"The Post ultimately has to answer ... [for] a specific reference to the president of the United States to violence and to his connection to an animal likeness," Johnson said.

In California, civil rights leader Earl Ofari Hutchinson called on the Post to apologize.

"In times past, that depiction of African-Americans has been vigorously condemned as racially offensive," Hutchinson said in a statement issued from his Los Angeles Urban

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN) -- The legal battle between Miss California USA pageant officials and former beauty queen Carrie Prejean ended Tuesday with an agreement to drop their claims, according to a pageant spokesman.



The pageant has dropped its lawsuit filed last month demanding Prejean repay $5,200 given her for breast implants, publicist Kenn Henman said.



Prejean, in exchange, withdrew her suit accusing the pageant of violating her privacy by confirming to reporters that her breasts were fake, he said.



Details of the agreement were not immediately available, he said Tuesday afternoon.



"We are moving forward from the past and looking towards the crowning of two winners and the new look of the upcoming Miss California USA pageant," pageant Executive Director Keith Lewis said in a written statement.



The public fight began last April when Prejean, 22, stepped into controversy by declaring her opposition to same-sex marriage while answering a judge's question at the Miss USA pageant. Prejean finished as first runner-up.



While state and national pageant officials publicly supported her initially, their opinions eventually changed after she continued to make public statements about same-sex marriage.



She held onto her crown through May -- despite a series of questionable photos that emerged on gossip Web sites.



She was dethroned in June by Miss USA pageant owner Donald Trump amid growing complaints by state officials that she was uncooperative and not meeting her contractual obligations.



Prejean filed a lawsuit in Los Angeles County Superior Court in August, claiming that her firing was religious discrimination because of her stand against same-sex marriage.



The pageant's countercomplaint said Prejean's belligerent behavior, lack of cooperation and contract breaches caused her firing, not her opposition to same-sex marriage.



Prejean also claimed pageant officials violated her privacy by acknowledging to reporters that her breasts were fake.



The truth about Prejean's breasts "ceased being private during the swimsuit competition of the nationally televised Miss USA pageant, in which Ms. Prejean walked the stage in a bikini," pageant lawyers said in their countersuit filed in October.



State pageant officials say they loaned the money for the breast surgery under an oral agreement with Prejean and she never repaid them.



The group also asked a judge to give them any profits from Prejean's tell-all book due out this month, which they claim was written in violation of her pageant contract.



One thing they all agreed on was that Prejean needed bigger breasts if she was to be competitive in the national pageant in April, the pageant's filing said.



"Ms. Prejean disclosed that she had been thinking about and wanting to have breast augmentation surgery for some time, but did not have the money to pay for it," the filing said. "She felt that if she had the surgery, in her opinion, she would be more competitive for the Miss USA pageant."



After pageant officials agreed to loan her the money, Prejean underwent breast augmentation in January, the pageant filing said.



The court documents gave an inside look at the hostile relationship between Prejean, California pageant officials and Trump.



After the Miss USA pageant, "With her new-found notoriety, an inflated sense of self, and the lure of financial gain available to her, Ms. Prejean turned even further against the Miss California USA organization, abandoned her obligations as the Miss California USA titleholder, and violated multiple provisions of the contract which governed her reign," the pageant filing said.

***

(CNN)  -- Manchester United are given more injury-time at the end of matches to equalize or score winning goals than their English Premier League rivals, a study has revealed.



Owen's 96th minute winner at Old Trafford left Manchester City livid.



As the row over the near seven minutes of added time accorded to United to win the Manchester derby with a last-gasp Michael Owen goal continues, the Guardian newspaper probed the official injury-time statistics.



They looked at league matches at United's Old Trafford ground since the start of the 2006-07 season and revealed  that, on average, there has been over a minute of extra time added by referees when the English champions do not have the lead.



This is compared to when they are in front, but United have a reputation for scoring late goals on their ways to claiming three straight Premier League crowns.



In 48 games when Alex Ferguson's men were in front, the average amount of stoppage time was 191.35 seconds.



In 12 matches when United were drawing or losing there was an average of 257.17 seconds.



In mitigation, the study revealed that the average stoppage time added at Old Trafford is below that at the home grounds of top four rivals Liverpool, Arsenal and Chelsea.



United's is 205 seconds, compared to Liverpool's 210 seconds, 224 seconds for Arsenal and Chelsea's 229 seconds.



But it is the disparity between the time added on when United are winning or losing which appears to assert the popular assertion that referees allow the match to continue until the Red Devils either equalizer or score the winner.



Manchester City manager Mark Hughes raged over the extra time in the 4-3 thriller on Sunday, speaking of feeling "robbed" as Owen slotted home his winner.



The 2007-08 season shows the greatest difference, with an average of 178.29 second added when United were winning, with official stats from Opta showing 254.5 seconds added when they were not.



The trend has continued in the first three United home games of the season.



In the two matches United have led they have played an average 304 seconds of injury time.



On Sunday, referee Martin Atkinson allowed the game to go on for another 415 seconds, despite his fourth official initially indicating 240 seconds should be added.

***

Moscow (CNN) -- Tens of thousands of people took to the streets Saturday in Moscow, braving bitterly cold weather to demand fair elections after what they claim were rigged results earlier this month that returned Vladimir Putin's party to power.





The protest, organized primarily through social media and word of mouth, comes on the heels of an announcement by President Dmitry Medvedev of sweeping political reforms, an effort to address discontent following the December 4 parliamentary elections.





The latest mass protest follows one earlier this month, when tens of thousands of people across Russia turned out to protest the election results that kept Putin's ruling United Russia party in power, albeit with a smaller majority. Police estimated crowds in Moscow at 25,000, while organizers said at least twice as many participated.





The protests were considered -- among analysts and political observers -- the largest in Russia in the past two decades.





Turnout at Saturday's protests was even greater, organizers said.





Besides blasting election results, demonstrators spoke about the presidential vote scheduled next year, repeating a popular refrain: "Russia without Putin."





Dozens of protesters were detained across Russia on Saturday, the state-run RIA Novosti news agency reported. Ten activists were held in St. Petersburg, 22 in Nizhny Novgorod, and about 20 in Barnaul, it said.





Police put the number of protesters in central Moscow at 29,000, but organizers and RIA Novosti correspondents estimated the real number was several times higher, the news agency reported.





Speaking this week before the newly elected parliament members in the Kremlin's St. George Hall, Medvedev proposed that Russia return to direct elections of regional governors; simplify the registration of political parties and presidential candidates; and establish a new editorially independent national public TV channel.





Medvedev also called for lifting many of the political restrictions imposed in the past several years by his predecessor, Putin, Russia's current prime minister and a candidate in the March 2012 presidential elections.





He also announced a number of new anti-corruption measures and called for the redistribution of power and financial resources from the federal government to local governments across the country.





At the same time, he rejected widespread public criticism of the parliamentary elections, which critics say were marred by fraud and other irregularities, and blamed anti-Kremlin opposition figures for their "attempts to manipulate the people and foment social discord."





"We will not allow instigators and extremists to involve society in their reckless schemes, nor will we tolerate interference in our internal affairs from the outside," Medvedev said.





"Russia needs democracy, not chaos. We need to have a faith for the future and justice. It is a good sign that society is changing, and citizens are expressing their position more actively, setting legitimate demands to the authorities. It is a sign that our democracy is growing more mature."





Protest organizers said Medvedev, who announced the reforms during his fourth and final state-of-the-nation speech Thursday, failed to address what authorities are planning to do about the recent alleged voting fraud, as well as whether fair and free elections are guaranteed in the future.

***

SRINAGAR, Indian-administered Kashmir (CNN) -- The state's governor gave his support to the embattled chief minister, who had tendered his resignation after an allegation that he was involved in a sex scam dating back to 2006.



Omar Abdullah denies any link to a prostitution ring, saying he has stepped down to clear his name.



The allegation was leveled Tuesday against Omar Abdullah, 38, by a senior leader of the opposition Peoples Democratic Party, Muzaffar Hussain Beigh, on the floor of the state assembly.



Omar's swift resignation plunged the state into a constitutional crisis that appeared to end Thursday when the New Delhi-appointed governor, N. N. Vohra, issued a communique asking Omar to "continue in office as (Vohra) had got the allegation investigated through the Indian home ministry."



The governor said that, "based on the information supplied to him by the union home ministry, there is no basis for Omar Abdullah seeking to resign."



Vohra urged the chief minister to "most vigorously devote himself to discharging responsibilities of chief minister of Jammu and Kashmir."



The opposition party dismissed the governor's communique, saying, "It has the potential of bringing the highest constitutional authority of the state also into controversy as the communique doesn't make mention about the chief minister's resignation."



A relaxed Omar told journalists Thursday evening that he had "full confidence" in his innocence.



Omar had delivered his resignation to the state governor after opposition member Muzaffar Hussain Beigh accused him, during a session of the state legislative assembly, of being connected to a prostitution scandal.



Muzaffar served as deputy chief minister in the previous government, when several top pro-India officials were arrested on charges that they had misused their authority to force girls and women into a prostitution ring in Kashmir.



Omar denied involvement but said he could not "continue in the office following the allegation" and would not serve again until he was cleared of the charges.



Omar entered office in January after elections in late 2008 that saw the highest voter turnout in the region in nearly 20 years, since the eruption of a secessionist insurgency. Voters went to the polls in large numbers, despite a separatist call for a boycott of the voting.



Most recently, the chief minister has been working to defuse tensions that are still running high after the arrest of four police officers in the probe of the alleged rape and murder of two young Muslim women in May.



Two people have died and many have been wounded in clashes between Muslim protesters and Indian security forces stemming from the case.



The arrests included the former police chief of south Kashmir's Shopian district and three of his subordinates, who are accused of "destruction of evidence" and "dereliction of duty" in connection with the deaths, which occurred in the town of Shopian.



Kashmir has been in the throes of a bloody secessionist campaign for nearly two decades during which, 43,000 people have been killed, according to official figures.



Various rights groups and non-governmental organizations in Kashmir, however, contend that the number killed during the last two decades is twice the official figure.

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN) -- Pop star Britney Spears was resting at UCLA Medical Center on Thursday, her mother said, hours after police escorted her to the hospital from her Hollywood home.



Britney Spears, left, and her mother Lynne Spears pose at the 2000 MTV Video Music Awards in New York.



A long convoy of police and a Los Angeles Fire Department ambulance transported the 26-year-old singer to the hospital after midnight, acting on what the Los Angeles Times reported was a "mental evaluation hold."



It was the second hospitalization for Spears this month. The police operation was planned far in advance and, according to the L.A. Times, followed a phone call to police from Spears' psychiatrist.



Asked if her daughter was resting, mother Lynne Spears said "Yes" to a throng of reporters as she departed the medical center.  Watch scene at Spears' home »



The pop star's father Jamie Spears and her manager Sam Lufti also appeared at the hospital, neither choosing to speak to reporters.



The latest incident in the troubled performer's saga began about 12:55 a.m. on Thursday when the North Hollywood Police Department sent about eight officers to Spears' hilltop house in Studio City, California, according to a law enforcement official, who asked not to be identified because he's not authorized to comment publicly.  See Spears timeline »



The group at Spears' house included plainclothes officers, motorcycle police, ambulance crews and some police "brass," the official said.



It took the better part of the day to arrange the transport plan, the officer said.



On January 3, Spears was taken to Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, where she reportedly underwent a psychological evaluation.  Watch how mental evaluations work »



Andrew Blankstein, a Los Angeles Times reporter who was at the scene of Thursday's incident, told CNN that a police convoy, stretching the length of a football field, accompanied the ambulance as it drove down Coldwater Canyon Boulevard -- in part to keep the paparazzi from getting too close.  Watch police motorcade at Spears' home »



Spears was whisked out a side entrance to her house.



"You couldn't really see what was going on [when officers first swept into the residence] but on the police radio, there was some reference to 'The package is on the way out,' 'We're leaving now. Go, go, go,'" Blankstein said.



A few hours earlier, two officers were sent to investigate a report of a large group gathered outside the singer's home, said David Grimes, watch commander for the west division of the Los Angeles Police Department.



The two officers found 20 to 25 people near the house around 11 p.m. Wednesday and they asked them to leave, he said.



ABC-TV host Barbara Walters reported on Monday's "The View" that she had been contacted by Spears' manager and "good friend," Lufti, who told her the pop star has seen a psychiatrist and "is suffering from what he describes as mental issues which are treatable," according to The Associated Press.  Watch experts discuss Spears' behavioral issues »



During Spears' earlier hospitalization, in addition to the psychological evaluation, she was examined for possible influence of alcohol or drugs. Police had been called to her home that night to mediate a custody dispute.  A day later, a California court refused to grant Spears visitation rights with her two children -- Sean Preston, 2, and Jayden James, 1 -- at least until mid-February.



Spears has been in a heated dispute with ex-husband Kevin Federline over custody of their sons. Federline, Spears' former backup dancer, holds primary custody of the children.



Spears has been in trouble with the court earlier concerning her compliance with court orders in the custody case.



After filing for divorce in November 2006, Spears was frequently seen enjoying Hollywood nightlife. Her behavior became increasingly erratic; in February 2007, she shaved her head as paparazzi looked on, then spent a month in rehab. E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- A 9-year-old girl was laid to rest Wednesday as a 15-year-old girl, described as an acquaintance, was in court on charges she carried out the younger girl's murder



Elizabeth Olten was coming home from a friend's house last week in St. Martins, Missouri, when she disappeared.



Distraught residents searched for days for Olten without luck, when the Cole County Sheriff's Department received a tip that led them to the alleged killer.



It didn't lead them to a stranger, a child predator or a convicted sex offender -- avenues police had originally considered because of Olten's age



Instead, it led them to a 15-year-old girl who, according to Peggy Florence, a family spokeswoman, had played with Olten.



The girl then led police to the body -- which was found in an area authorities searched before, the sheriff's department said, but was hidden so well they hadn't seen it. Authorities said both physical evidence and some written evidence led to the suspect's arrest. She has been charged with first-degree murder.



On Wednesday, Olten's family looked towards closure as two drastically different scenes unfolded in Missouri.



Olten's family and friends watched as two white horses pulled her casket in a glass hearse. Hours earlier, a judge had ordered the 15-year-old suspect to be held while he decides whether she should be tried in adult court. Authorities have not released the suspect's name.



Authorities released few details about the case, though they said an autopsy was conducted Saturday.



The Olten family spent the day of Elizabeth's funeral remembering a very special little girl and mourning their loss, choosing to celebrate her life, instead of attending the court hearing of the teen accused of killing her. After the funeral ceremony, they released pink balloons, in honor of Elizabeth Olten's favorite color.



For them, it was about their little girl -- the one who was always ready with a bright smile.



"She wanted to be a mother, she wanted to love others and take care of others," family spokeswoman Florence told HLN's Nancy Grace. "She was just a lovely child -- she never met an animal she didn't love and dress up and play with."



She loved to dress up and put on fancy dresses, Florence said, even in the snow and the mud.



"She was a beautiful little girly girl," Florence said. "She had everyone's heart."

***

TEHRAN, Iran (CNN) -- Iran's supreme leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei said Saturday he sees no change in U.S. policy toward Iran despite the U.S. promise of a "new beginning."



Ayatollah Khamenei said Iran would change its policy when the U.S. did so as well.



Khamenei said a change in rhetoric is not enough, and Washington must practice what it preaches, according to the English-language Press TV channel in Iran.



He also promised that Iran will change its policy if the United States does so as well, Press TV reported.



Khamenei's comments, which he made in a televised address to mark the start of the Iranian New Year on Friday, come a day after U.S. President Barack Obama reached out to Iran in a videotaped message.



A spokesman for Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad condemned U.S. foreign policy Friday in response to the video.



Obama's message spoke of "new beginnings" with the promise of a new year.



"My administration is now committed to diplomacy that addresses the full range of issues before us, and to pursuing constructive ties among the United States, Iran and the international community," the president said in his message Friday.



Obama said the United States seeks engagement with Iran that is "honest and grounded in mutual respect."



The president's message is part of a dramatic shift in tone from that of the Bush administration, which branded Iran as part of an "axis of evil" along with North Korea and Iraq. It also echoes Obama's inaugural speech in which he told the Muslim world, "We seek a new way forward, based on mutual interest and mutual respect."



Ahmadinejad said last month that Iran would welcome talks with the United States "in a fair atmosphere with mutual respect."



Khamenei also said world powers have come to realize they are not able to block Iran's nuclear progress. He looked back on the February 25 testing of Iran's first nuclear power plant, at Bushehr, as one of the "joyful developments" of the past year.



Last month, the Washington-based Institute for Science and International Security released a report saying that Iran has reached "nuclear weapons breakout capability" -- it has enough uranium to make a nuclear bomb.



The report was based on an analysis of data from the International Atomic Energy Agency. However, an IAEA official who asked not to be named cautioned against drawing such dramatic conclusions from the data, saying Iran's stock of low-enriched uranium would have to be turned into highly enriched uranium to be weapons-grade material. That hasn't been done, the official said.



The United States has had tortuous relations with Tehran since the Islamic revolution in 1979.



Meanwhile, the widow of the late founder of the Islamic Republic, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, died Saturday morning after a long period of illness, the Iranian-run Islamic Republic News Agency said.



A funeral for Khadije Saghafi was scheduled to be held Sunday in Tehran and she was set to be laid to rest in Khomeini's tomb, the agency reported.



Khomeini was the leader of the 1979 revolution that led to the toppling of the shah of Iran and the ushering in of an Islamic state. He died in 1989.

***

NEW ALBANY, Indiana (CNN) -- President Bush vetoed a $600 billion spending bill Tuesday, accusing Democratic leaders of wasting money and plotting tax increases, then took his budget fight with Congress on the road.

Congress should cut spending "and send me a responsible measure that I can sign into law," President Bush said.

"The majority was elected on a pledge of fiscal responsibility, but so far, it's acting like a teenager with a new credit card," he said in a speech in New Albany, Indiana.

The bill -- which Bush said was laden with $10 billion in "pork" -- would have funded the departments of Labor, Education, and Health and Human Services. It also would have funded projects such as a prison museum, a sailing school and a program to teach Portuguese.

"Congress needs to cut out that pork, reduce the spending and send me a responsible measure that I can sign into law," the president said.  Watch a report on the veto »

While polls show Bush's popularity remains at near-record lows, Congress ranks even lower as a whole. The president has taken numerous opportunities to mock the spending habits of the Democratic leadership and force confrontations over the appropriations bills needed to fund the government for the 2008 budget year, which began October 1.

The bill Bush vetoed Tuesday includes about $150 billion to run those departments and more than $450 billion in mandatory spending on Medicare and Medicaid, the federal health care programs for the elderly and poor, according to the House Appropriations Committee. The committee's chairman, Rep. David Obey, called Bush's veto "not responsible and not credible."

"This is a bipartisan bill supported by over 50 Republicans," Obey, D-Wisconsin, said in a statement issued after the veto. "There has been virtually no criticism of its contents. It is clear the only reason the president vetoed this bill is pure politics."

Bush said Democrats are supporting $22 billion in additional spending beyond his budget proposals this year and $205 billion over five years -- money he said would ultimately be raised by tax increases.

"When the bill for all that spending comes due, Congress is going to turn to the working people, to the small-business owners and the entrepreneurs," he said.

Tuesday's veto is the fifth cast since Democrats took control of Congress in 2006. Congress has overridden one of those, voting last week to authorize $23 billion in water projects nationwide over the president's objections.

Democrats will schedule another override vote this week, an aide to House Majority Leader Steny Hoyer said. But Antonia Ferrier, spokeswoman for House Republican Whip Roy Blunt, said Bush's GOP allies are confident they will be able to sustain the veto.

Bush signed a $470 billion Pentagon spending bill that covers the Defense Department's normal operations, but Democrats split $50 billion in spending for the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan off into a "bridge fund" to which they plan to attach demands for Bush to withdraw U.S. combat troops. The measure sets up another confrontation with the White House.

Bush also demanded Congress reform the alternative minimum tax -- a measure originally aimed at preventing the wealthy from evading taxes, but one that increasingly affects middle-class earners -- without raising additional revenue. He said a plan proposed by Rep. Charles Rangel, the Democratic chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, to eliminate the tax was unacceptable.

"Preventing a tax increase in one area should not be an excuse for raising taxes in other areas," he said. "Congress should eliminate the tax increases in the bill and send the AMT relief to my desk as soon as possible."

The elimination of the tax would cause an estimated $800 billion to be lost over 10 years. To replace that, Rangel's bill would add a 4 percent surtax on individual incomes over $100,000, after deductions, and close corporate tax loopholes. The bill also would cut rates for many individual and corporate taxpayers. Republicans have already started calling it "the

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- The top military and civilian leaders of the U.S. Air Force were forced out Thursday over the handling of nuclear weapons, the Defense Department secretary said.



Air Force Chief of Staff Gen. Michael Moseley, left, and Secretary Michael Wynne have stepped down.



Chief of Staff Gen. T. Michael Moseley and Secretary Michael W. Wynne resigned over the department's concern over two incidents, including the August flight of a B-52 bomber that flew across the country with nuclear weapons.



"Focus of the Air Force leadership has drifted" in terms of handling nuclear weapons and equipment, Defense Secretary Robert Gates said.



In August, a B-52 bomber flew from North Dakota to Louisiana with the crew unaware that six nuclear-tipped missiles were on board. Four officers were relieved of duty afterward, including three colonels.



Gates also cited this year's discovery that components designed to arm and fuse nuclear warheads were accidentally shipped to Taiwan in 2006.  Watch Gates talk about the firings »



Critics also cite last month's news that the Air Force's 5th Bomb Wing failed a defense "nuclear surety" inspection -- despite having months to prepare and being under close scrutiny after the previous incidents. The inspection found deficiencies in the wing's ability to protect its part of the nation's nuclear stockpile.



The resignations come after a report on a Navy admiral's investigation that criticized the Air Force's reactions to the incidents.



Gates said the report "depicts a pattern of poor performance" in which Air Force brass didn't act to improve security after mishaps and Air Force personnel handling nuclear weapons consistently failed to follow existing rules.



Air Force leaders "not only fell short in terms of specific acts, they failed to recognize systemic problems, to address those problems or, when beyond their authority to act, to call the attention of superiors to those problems," Gates said.



The investigation found that although the Taiwan incident didn't compromise the integrity of the U.S. nuclear force, it represented "a significant failure" by the Air Force to ensure sensitive military components, Gates said.



Gates said the report concluded that erosion in the branch's command and oversight standards helped lead to the incidents, and that they could have been prevented if the oversight programs had functioned correctly.



He said he asked for the resignations after consulting President Bush.



Sen. Carl Levin, the Democratic chairman of the Senate Armed Service committee, welcomed Gates' decision.



"Secretary Gates' focus on accountability is essential and had been absent from the office of the Secretary of Defense for too long," Levin said. "The safety and security of America's nuclear weapons must receive the highest priority, just as it must in other countries."



Rep. Edward J. Markey, a Massachusetts Democrat and a senior member of the House Homeland Security Committee, also welcomed the resignations.



Markey said he's long been concerned about what he called a series of dangerous Air Force missteps in handling nuclear weapons.



"The magnitude and frequency of these errors indicate a deep-seated problem within Air Force culture, practice and training," Markey said. "The entire Department of Defense should immediately recommit itself to ensuring the safety and security of our nuclear stockpile before one of these mistakes has lethal consequences."



A senior military source said the August nuclear weapons incident was the straw that broke the camel's back but that other leadership issues also factored into Moseley's and Wynne's resignations.



A previous investigation into the B-52 flight uncovered a "lackadaisical" attention to detail in day-to-day operations at the air bases involved, an Air Force official said in October.



Maj. Gen. Dick Newton, assistant deputy chief of staff for operations, said the investigation found "a failure to follow procedures" by "a limited number of airmen" at the two bases. Newton defended the procedures themselves.



Wynne is not the first secretary of a military branch to resign since Gates became Defense secretary.



In March 2007, Gates announced the resignation of Army Secretary Francis J. Harvey in the wake of reports of substandard conditions at Walter Reed Army Medical

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Britain's foremost aviation showcase celebrates its 60th anniversary this year.

The Spitfire is one of the aircraft from Farnborough's inaugural show getting airborne once again to celebrate the airshow's 60th year.

The 46th Farnborough International Airshow will commemorate the first show ever held in 1948 at this year's event in Hampshire which runs from July 14 to 20.

"As we look back on the past 60 years, we also are excited to continue looking forward to the next 60 years," said John Cairns, Head of Services at Farnborough International Limited (FIL) which runs the biennial airshow.

To mark the occasion, Farnborough's world-renowned flying display will include aircraft which flew at the first show like the Swordfish, Spitfire, Sea Hawk and Sea Fury.

Adding a modern twist to the mix will be the debut of The Blades, the world's only globally accredited aerobatic airline.

The airshow was first established as a way for the British public to see and learn about the best of aviation.

Staying true to its original purpose, on both Saturday 19 and Sunday 20 July -- Farnborough's "public weekend" -- there will be a four-and-a-half-hour flying display.

Highlights include perennial favourites the Red Arrows, the Royal Air Force aerobatic team who will close the show with their aerial gymnastics, as well as the debut of the Aero Sekur Shooting Stars, an Italian ladies' parachute team who will be providing daily skydiving displays.

"Farnborough, in essence, has always been about innovation, and I am delighted that to a long line of distinguished 'Farnborough Firsts' I am able to add some very worthy new firsts, including the first ever women's parachute team to appear at the Airshow; the world's first aerobatic airline and the first business aviation jet to have been developed at Farnborough," continued Cairns.

As well as displaying aircraft for the public, Farnborough has also established itself as one of the world's premier showcases for the aviation business world.

This year, 1,500 companies from 35 countries as diverse as Colombia and Bahrain will be exhibiting planes and other technologies in a show that is predicted to be Farnborough's biggest to date.

On the trade days which run from Monday 14 to Friday 18 July, business attendees will be able to see the world's latest aerospace innovations in the air.

A full range of civil, business and defence aircraft will take part in flying displays. These include the Airbus AB380; HAL helicopters; the Kestrel JP10 (originally conceived at Farnborough airfield); the MiG 29; the EADS Eurofighter; the F 16 and F18; the MB 346; the AB 609; MB 311.

In 2006, Farnborough trade week accumulated $42 billion worth of orders including $550 million in business aviation orders. The Airbus A380 also made its UK debut at Farnborough that year.

"Our intention has always been to build on the success of the 2006 event, and to ensure that this year's show delivers an incomparable business service for our exhibitors and their customers, ensuring that they can gain maximum benefit and opportunity from attending Farnborough Airshow -- whether that is taking orders, making sales or developing new business," said Amanda Stainer, the Airshow's Exhibition and Events Director.

To find out more about Farnborough International Airshow go to: www.farnborough.com/

***

GLASGOW, Scotland -- World champions Italy clinched qualification for Euro 2008 after goals in the first and last minutes gave them a pulsating 2-1 victory at Hampden Park -- killing off Scotland's hopes of reaching the finals.

Luca Toni celebrates his early goal as Italy won 2-1 in Scotland to clinch qualification from Group B.

Luca Toni shot Italy in front but Scotland recovered to dominate and Barry Ferguson bundled home a 65th-minute leveller.

However, Christian Panucci headed an injury-time winner after a controversial decision to award Italy a free-kick.

The result also means France have sealed qualification, along with Italy, from Group B without playing a game.

In a match played in torrential rain, Italy enjoyed the best possible start by taking the lead after just 70 seconds.    Gianluca Zambrotta spotted Antonio Di Natale unmarked in the box, and picked him out with a throw-in as Scotland were caught napping. Di Natale swept the ball into the path of Toni who delicately flicked into the top left corner from six meters out.

The home side almost conceded a second goal 60 seconds later. This time, Toni turned provider and his cut-back was met by Mauro Camoranesi who fired over from close-range.

Toni then shrugged off two challenges before drawing a decent save from Craig Gordon with a well-struck effort that the goalkeeper did well to block at the near post.

At the other end, Scotland were denied the opportunity to haul themselves back into the match when a thunderous drive from Lee McCulloch appeared to be handled by Zambrotta inside the area but penalty claims were ignored.

Spurred on by a sense of injustice, the hosts cranked up the pressure on their visitors. Ferguson fired over from a James McFadden corner, before Alan Hutton nodded agonisingly wide of the upright following another perfect delivery from the Everton man.

Scotland then produced some wonderful passing football, which culminated in a tight-angled drive from Ferguson, but Gianluigi Buffon dived low to smother.

Then came another scare for the home side. Gordon was forced to pull a save out of the top drawer to deny a point-blank effort from Massimo Ambrosini, before Di Natale rifled the rebound into the back of the net.

The assistant referee raised his flag for offside but television replays suggested the official may have called it wrong.

Only last-gasp defending from the Italians prevented the Scots from grabbing a morale-boosting leveller on the stroke of half-time.

David Weir rose above everyone else in a packed box to meet Ferguson's corner and his header appeared to be heading for the top corner before Andrea Pirlo somehow managed to nod off the line.

A free-kick in a dangerous area provided Italy with the chance to start the second half as emphatically as they had started the first when Paul Hartley hauled down Camoranesi just outside the box.

Pirlo seized on the chance and looped the ball over the wall but, despite a reputation as a dead-ball specialist, his effort was easily dealt with by Gordon.

Instead, it was Scotland who found the back of the net as Hampden erupted with 65 minutes gone. McFadden's free-kick deflected into the path of McCulloch in front of goal.

He was denied by Buffon, but the rebound fell kindly to Ferguson and the captain gratefully rifled home from close-range.

With just over 15 minutes to go, Scott Brown was withdrawn for Kenny Miller as Scotland went for broke. The Derby striker quickly began to cause the Italians problems and delivered a wonderful diagonal cross to the feet of McFadden but he fired wide when it looked easier score.

Scotland's impossible dream ended in the cruellest possible way when Italy snatched a last minute goal to secure their own qualification for Euro 2008.

Hutton appeared to be barged over in front of the corner flag but the referee inexplicably awarded the free-kick the other way and Panucci rose to meet Pirlo's cross and nod home the winner.

Italy coach Roberto Donadoni said: "We knew it was going to be a physical match given the atmosphere.

"But through

***

(CNN) -- Former Philippine President Corazon Aquino, whose "People Power" movement pushed out longtime strongman Ferdinand Marcos less than three years after her husband's assassination, has died at age 76, her family announced Saturday.



"She was the agent of change in Philippine democracy," said Ray Donato, the nation's consul-general in Atlanta.



Aquino, the first woman to lead the Philippines, had been battling colon cancer since March 2008 and died of cardio-respiratory arrest at 3:18 a.m. Saturday (3:18 p.m. Friday ET), said Mai Mislang, a spokeswoman for her son, Philippine Sen. Benigno Aquino III.



Funeral arrangements were being set up, Mislang said.  Philippine President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo has also announced a 10-day mourning period for the former president, said Ray Donato, the country's consul-general in Atlanta.



"She was the agent of change in Philippine democracy, and almost all the Filipinos I know revered her during her presidency," Donato said.



Aquino had been born into a wealthy family and was educated in the United States. She had not been involved in politics before her husband, opposition leader Benigno "Ninoy" Aquino Jr., was gunned down at Manila's airport in August 1983 as he returned from exile.



The political novice took over the leadership of her husband's movement after his death and challenged Marcos in a 1986 election, making a yellow dress her trademark and bolstered by the support of the country's Roman Catholic churches.



Marcos had been backed by the United States, the former colonial power in the Philippines, for two decades as a stalwart anti-communist. He and his wife Imelda were friends of then-President Ronald Reagan and his wife, Nancy. But widespread allegations of electoral fraud and a mutiny by the country's military led the Reagan administration to withdraw its support, and Marcos went into exile in Hawaii.



Aquino took office in a country with a $28 billion debt, widespread poverty and a persistent Marxist insurgency. She put in place a U.S.-style constitution that limited presidents to a single six-year term and survived seven coup attempts -- including one that was supressed with American help.



She also oversaw the closure of the major U.S. military bases in the country before leaving office in 1992. The bases had been a bulwark of American power in the Pacific since the early 1900s and employed nearly 80,000 Filipinos, but Aquino's opponents argued the country was too dependent on the United States. Aquino announced in 1990 that it was time to begin negotiating the "orderly withdrawal" of U.S. forces.

***

DECATUR, Georgia (CNN) -- One falling tree saved John Kiefer from another.

Windstorms in Atlanta, Georgia, uprooted several trees, including this one that fell through John Kiefer's home.

Kiefer was sitting on his sofa Monday morning while a brief but intense windstorm blew through the Atlanta, Georgia, area, including Decatur. He heard a tree crash in his backyard and got up to investigate.

That tree knocked down a chain-link fence, and Kiefer was getting worried about several other large backyard trees that were swaying in the wind.

"And as I'm watching those move and sway, this crashed down," he said.

"This" was a 50-foot red oak in the front yard that fell onto his living room, splitting his house in half and coming to rest a few inches above where he had been sitting on the couch.

"Yeah, it's a mess," he said as he surveyed the tangle of broken wood beams, plaster, bricks and gray insulation.

Curiously, Kiefer's electricity was still on, and cable TV was still playing less then 10 feet away from the massive tree trunk in his living room. An ancient upright piano and various collectibles on it were unharmed.

Kiefer had been away over the weekend, visiting a son in Cincinnati, Ohio, and his three dogs were still at the kennel where he boarded them. They'll be staying there a bit longer.

Three years of drought in Georgia have weakened trees' root systems, and recent heavy rains loosened the soil around them, said Kiefer, who works at a plastics recycling company in nearby Stone Mountain. The windstorm brought down hundreds of trees in the area, including one that crushed a car, killing the person inside, and one that fell on a nursing home, where no one was hurt, CNN affiliate WGCL reported. Service was disrupted on Atlanta's MARTA rail transit system, according to WGCL.

Power and traffic signals were out in many areas.  Watch CNN report about dangerous storms »

Despite having a tree lying across his living room, Kiefer seemed remarkably calm, but that was a new development.

"Couple of hours ago my knees where shaking pretty good," he admitted. But, he said, God was looking out for him.

"Actually, he saved my life," Kiefer said. "When I came outside to investigate that noise, that was my warning to get up off that couch. And then, not to go back in the house when it got real windy, but to stand right there where that tree stopped. There are no coincidences."

***

(CNN) -- Former Brazilian President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva will begin chemotherapy in the coming days to treat a malignant tumor in his larynx, a hospital official said Saturday.





Lula, 66, will be treated at Sao Paulo's Syrian-Lebanese Hospital, said hospital spokeswoman Mirtes Bogea. It is not clear what day the treatment will begin.





He was diagnosed Saturday morning after undergoing medical examinations, Bogea said.





"This is a localized tumor," noted Bogea, meaning that it has not spread elsewhere in the body. She added that the tumor has not metastasized, a characteristic of most cancerous cells.





Finance Minister Guido Mantega told reporters that he attended Lula's birthday party last week and noticed that his voice sounded hoarse.





"But since he has been traveling a lot and delivering speeches, we all thought it was normal," he told CNN affiliate Rede Record TV.





On Saturday, Mantega predicted Lula would beat cancer. He noted that former first lady Marisa Leticia has been with Lula ever since he came to the hospital for a check-up on Friday.





"He is a fighter," Mantega told reporters, adding he expected Lula will leave the hospital later Saturday. "He has overcome lesser obstacles and will overcome this one as well."





Raul Cutait, one of the doctors treating the former president told Rede Record TV that Lula appears well. He said it is also likely that therapy will begin early next week.





Sao Paulo's Syrian-Lebanese hospital is considered one of the region's top cancer treatment centers.





Founded in 1921 by Syrian and Lebanese immigrants, the facility's staff has also treated Paraguay's President Fernando Lugo and former Brazilian Vice President Jose Alencar, who died in March after a long battle against abdominal cancer.





Its patients also include current Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff -- Lula's handpicked successor and is the first woman to hold the presidency -- who was treated in 2005 for lymphoma.





Rousseff said on her Twitter account that she'd spoken to Lula's wife, and in a press release issued Saturday wished her predecessor a "fast recovery."





"As you all know, I went through the same thing, with the competent team of the Syrian-Lebanese hospital, which allowed me to completely recover," she said. "I am sure the same thing will happen to President Lula."





Lula, who rose from a childhood of poverty to become a union leader, won elections in 2002 to become Brazil's first working-class president.





He is widely credited with helping steer the nation into becoming an economic powerhouse, leaving office last year with high approval ratings. Presidents, however, are barred from running for a third consecutive term.





When Lula turned 66 years-old last Thursday, he addressed the Brazilian public via the Internet, saying that he had dedicated more than half his half to improving Brazil's democracy.





"The cake is not one of the biggest cakes," he said, with a wink, during a speech. "But I hope to give to all of you a tiny bite."

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- A soldier who reported for duty with her children in tow has been granted her request for a discharge, her lawyer said Monday.



Lisa Pagan was recalled to the Army after being honorably discharged four years ago.



Lisa Pagan, of Davidson, North Carolina, reported for duty Monday morning at Fort Benning, Georgia, with her two preschool children. She had been honorably discharged from active duty at the rank of specialist nearly four years ago but was recalled as part of the Individual Ready Reserve program.



The former Army truck driver asked for a reprieve from deployment because her husband travels for business and they would have no one to care for their children if she was sent overseas. Until Monday, her request had been denied.



Late Monday afternoon, Pagan's lawyer told CNN the Army would grant her request and begin the process of discharge again, this time for good.



"We are definitely heading in the right direction for Lisa and her family and her children," said Mark Waple, Pagan's attorney. "She has been told by her chain of command they plan on doing everything they can within reason to do this as expeditiously as possible."



Pagan enlisted in 2002 and was honorably discharged from active duty in June 2005. She was never deployed.



Before she left for Fort Benning, Pagan, 27, told CNN affiliate WCNC that her relatives weren't able to care for her children for various reasons, including her relatives' health.



She said her family couldn't afford having her husband give up his job. They would lose their house, she told the Charlotte, North Carolina-TV station.



"I'm a human being. I need to take care of my children. They don't have anybody else," Pagan told WCNC.



Since September 11, 2001, the Army has recalled about 25,000 soldiers. Nearly half requested a delay or a full exemption. Some just wanted to finish their school semester before reporting. Others had financial or medical problems that made it difficult to report for duty.



The Army says it granted nearly nine out of 10 delay requests and six out of 10 requests for exemption.

***

(CNN) -- American tennis legend Andre Agassi has admitted using crystal methamphetamine a year before he won the French Open in 1998, and that he lied to the sport's governing bodies in the same period about a positive drugs test to avoid a ban.



The 39-year-old, who is only one of six men in history to have completed a career grand slam of winning titles at all four majors, confessed in his autobiography that he took the highly addictive narcotic in 1997 while suffering poor form and to quell worries about his upcoming marriage to actress Brooke Shields.



The eight-time grand slam champion revealed in his book how he felt when he first took the substance -- possession of which carries a maximum five-year jail sentence in the United States.



"Slim [Agassi's assistant] dumps a small pile of powder on the coffee table. He cuts it, snorts it. He cuts it again. I snort some. I ease back on the couch and consider the Rubicon I've just crossed.



"There is a moment of regret, followed by vast sadness. Then comes a tidal wave of euphoria that sweeps away every negative thought in my head. I've never felt so alive, so hopeful -- and I've never felt such energy," Agassi recounted in an excerpt of his book that has been serialized by British newspaper The Times.



Following his use of crystal meth, the former world number one pulled out of the French Open and admitted he did not practice for Wimbledon a month later.



Later in the year an Association of Tennis Professionals (ATP) doctor confirmed to Agassi -- who is currently married to former number one women's tennis player Steffi Graf -- that his use of recreational drugs had shown up in a positive dope test and that he faced a three-month suspension.



The tennis great revealed how he lied in a bid to retain his reputation: "My name, my career, everything is now on the line. Whatever I've achieved, whatever I've worked for, might soon mean nothing. Days later I sit in a hard-backed chair, a legal pad in my lap, and write a letter to the ATP.



"It's filled with lies interwoven with bits of truth. I say Slim, whom I've since fired, is a known drug user, and that he often spikes his sodas with meth - which is true. Then I come to the central lie of the letter.



"I say that recently I drank accidentally from one of Slim's spiked sodas, unwittingly ingesting his drugs. I ask for understanding and leniency and hastily sign it: Sincerely. I feel ashamed, of course. I promise myself that this lie is the end of it,"  Agassi added.



Following the letter from Agassi the ATP dropped the case, allowing the American to regain a form that would see him go on to win the French Open in 1998 and the U.S. Open in 1999 before retiring in 2006.



The ATP have yet to comment following the revelations.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Deep into injury time in one of Manchester United's most important games of the English Premier League season a 17-year-old Italian on debut hit a stunning winner and lifted himself to instant stardom.

Man of the moment: Seventeen-year-old Federico Macheda is now a legend at Manchester United

Federico Macheda was the teenager who came on as a substitute and scored late on Sunday for the Red Devils -- helping them to a 3-2 win after they had earlier trailed 2-1 to Aston Villa at Old Trafford.

The finish was of the highest quality -- as he curled the ball past Villa goal-keeper Brad Freidel from a wide angle. His fine touch, turn and shot were made all the more amazing given their significance in the context of both the match and season.

But, who is this 17-year-old hero? And how did he get to live his fairytale?

Born in Rome in 1991 (yes, 1991), Macheda, known by team-mates as "Kiko", is a striker who developed his game through the ranks of the Lazio youth programme in Italy -- where he is considered as one of the brightest talents of the future.

He made a move to Manchester United in September 2007, and quickly moved up the ranks -- starting out in the under-18 side, before progressing to the senior reserve team. He officially signed a professional contract with the club on his 17th birthday, in August 2008.

Although Sunday's goal puts his name permanently on the minds of all Manchester United faithful, it's not the first time he has made an impression. Just six days before he scored a thrilling hat-trick for the reserve team in a 3-3 draw against Newcastle at St James' Park.

He has also represented Italy at under 19 level.

What did you think of Macheda's goal? Can he go on to become a top club and international player? Share your thoughts in the Sound Off box below.

Macheda was eventually booked for celebrating with the crowd after his strike -- though he later revealed he had hugged family members -- who were in the crowd to see his debut.

He was named man of the match for his goal (after playing just 30 minutes) and although he wasn't allowed the bottle of wine he won for the honor -- he told Manchester United television "this is the best day of my life."

In the post-match interview on Sky Sports, Macheda said: "I think this is the day of my dreams -- to score a goal like that on my debut."

The Manchester United Supporters' Web site has since been inundated with comments praising Macheda, and there are even several proposed supporters' chants being drafted for their new star.

English-based Italian football journalist Gabriele Marcotti told CNN he had been impressed by Macheda's progress at a young age -- but felt it was important he didn't get ahead of himself.

"When a guy scores like that on debut there's always excitement. But, he needs to keep his feet on the ground and keep working," Marcotti said.

Marcotti said the reaction from Italian fans was likely to be mixed.

While there would be happiness that he is emerging as a great prospect for Italy in future, there is also concern that players like Macheda are moving to England at a young age and the Italian clubs who train them gain very little in compensation, he said.

***

RIYADH, Saudi Arabia (CNN)  -- The Taliban in Afghanistan have momentum that makes any effort to negotiate with them difficult, the U.S. defense secretary said.



Defense Secretary Robert Gates arrived in Cairo, Egypt, on Monday. He's visiting Afghanistan on Wednesday.



Secretary Robert Gates spoke to CNN's Chris Lawrence in an exclusive interview Tuesday evening before leaving for Afghanistan, where he is visiting troops and bases Wednesday.



"The political level of the Taliban probably isn't ready to think about reconciliation or any kind of accommodation at this point," Gates said in the interview. "They probably feel like they have the momentum with them. And until that momentum changes, it will be difficult."



As part of the U.S. strategy in Afghanistan, the military and Afghanistan government are attempting to reach out to elements of the Taliban who are engaged in the battle for financial gain, rather than ideological gain.



"There are really two groups we're talking about -- the younger, or less committed, who do this mainly to earn a living and put food on the table for their families, and those that are more ideologically committed. The latter are going to be a tougher pull, and we'll probably have to wait awhile before there's an opportunity there."



On Monday, CNN's Nic Robertson interviewed a spokesman for the Taliban, Zabiullah Mujahid, who said the Taliban will only negotiate with the Afghanistan government when the United States leaves the country.



"Our conditions are clear, we want to negotiate and they [the U.S.] will not interfere in our affairs; secondly, they [the U.S.] will leave the country," Mujahid told CNN.



Gates said the stance was not surprising.



"Well I don't know what else he'd say. He's leading the opposition, he's leading this insurgency. He's not going to sort of, sort of throw down and say 'We're ready to negotiate, we're about done here,' " Gates said.



The United States is adding 21,000 troops to the Afghanistan battlefield. The majority will be moving to the south to confront the Taliban along the porous Pakistani border. The Taliban have had mostly free rein in that area with few U.S. or coalition forces to confront them until now. Gates admitted moving the battle to the south will mean there is "a tough fight ahead."



"I think, certainly, I have been pretty clear. As we move into areas of the south that have not seen any Afghan or coalition forces so far, we're clearly going to be going into areas where the Taliban are very entrenched," he said. "And, sad to say, I expect with the rising level of our activity and operations, there probably will be higher casualties."



In recent weeks, the Pakistani government has seen the Taliban gain control on its side of the Afghanistan-Pakistan border. Privately, Pakistani officials have expressed concern to the United States that the increased fighting in southern Afghanistan will only push the Taliban back to the Pakistani side.



"Well I think it's just the reality that there are extremists on both sides of that border. And they threaten both the elected government of Afghanistan and the elected government of Pakistan. So like it or not, they both have a certain common enemy," Gates said.



Gates said he is encouraged by recent cooperation efforts between the two countries to deal with the problem, and by Pakistan's recent confrontation with the Taliban in Bunir province, near the capital of Islamabad.



"The signs right now are pretty positive," he told CNN.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Investigators had a "significant break" in tracking the salmonella outbreak when they found the bacteria on a jalapeño pepper imported from Mexico at a Texas food supplier, the Food and Drug Administration announced Monday.





The FDA has discouraged all consumers from eating raw jalapeño peppers.





The FDA also warned consumers not to eat fresh jalapeños and products made with fresh jalapeños.





The discovery may provide a clue to the source of a recent outbreak of Salmonella Saintpaul. The bacteria have sickened more than 1,200 people in 42 states, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.    "One of the jalapeño peppers has tested positive with a genetic match to the Saintpaul strand," said Robert Tauxe, deputy director of the CDC's Division of Foodborne, Bacterial and Mycotic Diseases. Consumer Tips Blog: Hold the jalapeños  He said officials are "looking at the chain that the peppers would have passed through to decide if any of them are a point of contamination."   Watch more on the salmonella outbreak »  Tauxe called the discovery a "significant break."   "While this one sample does not give us the whole story, this genetic break is very important," he said. "This will hopefully help us pinpoint the source of this outbreak."





The bacteria were found at a distribution center in McAllen, Texas, and the distributor has agreed to recall the products. Although the pepper was grown on a farm in Mexico, Tauxe said, investigators are not yet certain where the bacteria originated.  Read food safety tips »  "This does not mean that the pepper was contaminated in Mexico," he said. "We aren't only looking for the source, but the reason for the spread [of the outbreak]."





The news comes just days after the FDA lifted its ban on consumption of certain raw tomatoes. The FDA has not ruled out tomatoes as the source of the original outbreak, but investigators have determined that tomatoes currently in fields and stores are safe, Dr. David Acheson, the FDA's associate commissioner for food protection, said Thursday.  Learn about the differences between salmonella and E. coli »  The FDA is still investigating fresh tomatoes as a possible source of the outbreak. It is possible that tomatoes were paired with another food that was contaminated, Tauxe said.  Watch more on the FDA investigation » Before Monday's warning, the agency had discouraged high-risk people -- elderly people, infants and those with impaired immune systems -- from eating serrano and jalapeño peppers.  Two elderly men with pre-existing conditions died while infected with Salmonella Saintpaul, and the FDA said the infection could have contributed to their deaths.

***

BRASILIA, Brazil (CNN)  -- A doctor excommunicated by the Catholic Church for performing an abortion on a 9-year-old rape victim received a standing ovation during a national convention on women's health, according to a local media report.



Archbishop Don Jose Cardoso Sobrinho excommunicated the doctors who performed the child's abortion.



The response came during the opening ceremony of an event hosted by Brazilian Minister of Health Jose Gomes Temporao.



The newspaper O Povo reported that Temporao called on the audience to acknowledge the "brilliant" work done by a medical team in the abortion, performed in Brazil's northeastern city of Recife.



The girl was pregnant with twins after being raped, allegedly by her stepfather, police were quoted in media reports as saying. The abuse had gone on since the girl was 6, authorities said.



The abortion was performed March 4 during the fourth month of pregnancy, according to media reports



Archbishop Don Jose Cardoso Sobrinho of Recife excommunicated the doctor, the child's mother and the medical team involved in the procedure.



However, the stepfather was not excommunicated, with Sobrinho telling Globo TV that, "A graver act than (rape) is abortion, to eliminate an innocent life."



The child was not excommunicated, Sobrinho said, because Catholic Church law says minors are exempt from excommunication.



"The church is benevolent when it comes to minors," he told Globo TV. "As for the adults, especially those who approved it, performed this abortion, the excommunication is applicable."



"God's law is above human laws," Sobrinho said.



The case has outraged the Brazilian public and fueled a controversy reaching the highest levels of church and state in a nation whose law bans abortion except in cases of rape.



Temporao recently said doctors must put law before religion.



"The question posed is very simple. There is a Brazilian law which states that a pregnancy can be interrupted in case of rape," Temporao said.



"It is legitimate for the church to have its dogmas, but these dogmas must not be imposed on society as a whole," he added.



Earlier, a verbal spat ensued between President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva and the archbishop over the church's decision.



"As a Christian and a Catholic, I find it deeply lamentable that a bishop of the Catholic Church has such a conservative attitude," Lula said on Globo TV.



"In this case, the medical profession was more right than the church," he said.



Meanwhile, a Vatican cleric told Italy's La Stampa newspaper that he supports the Brazilian archbishop's decision to excommunicate all involved in the abortion except for the child.



Dr. Olimpio Moraes, one of the doctors involved in the procedure, said he thanked the archbishop for his excommunication because the controversy sheds light on Brazil's restrictive abortion laws. He said women in Brazil's countryside are victimized by Brazil's ban on abortion.



Some of the doctors vowed to continue attending church services, despite being expelled.



"The fact that I was excommunicated will not keep me from going to Mass, praying, conversing with God, and asking him to illuminate me and my colleagues in our medical team to help us take care of people in similar cases," one doctor said.



TV Globo reported that the child, who is from a town outside Recife, has stayed in the city to recover and to escape media coverage. Her current condition is not known.



A new report by Brazil's IPAS, a non-governmental organization that works with the health ministry, indicates that more than 1 million women undergo illegal abortions in Brazil each year. About 250,000 are treated by doctors for traumas due to botched abortions, said Beatriz Jalli, an IPAS official.



Studies at a Brazilian hospital dedicated to treating female victims of violence, the Perola Byington in Sao Paulo, indicated that more than 40 percent of the cases involved children.



"This is why the Recife case is so important for women in Brazil," Jalli said.



Jalli said the liberated "Girl from Ipanema" image

***

HIGH BRIDGE, New Jersey (CNN) -- "The thought that I can reach out and permanently improve someone's life for the better is addictive," says Dave Schweidenback.



Dave Schweidenback saw transformative effects of bikes while in the Peace Corps in Ecuador from 1977-80.



Several times a year, the 55-year-old can be found prepping large shipments of used bicycles bound for a developing country. For Schweidenback, gathering and breaking down these bikes is a labor of love -- one that is helping to keep the bikes out of landfills and give them new life.



"Used bicycles can transform the economic and social condition of families," says Schweidenback. "[They] give people access to jobs, health care and education that is too distant for walking."



Since 1991, Schweidenback's nonprofit Pedals for Progress has collected and shipped more than 115,000 used bicycles to 32 developing countries worldwide, where they are sold at a low cost to local residents like Don Roberto Garcia.



"A used woman's mountain bicycle changed my life," says Garcia, 54, a house cleaning supplies salesman in Nicaragua who works six days a week to support his six children and buy medicine for his wife, who suffers from cancer.



For 20 years, Garcia walked six to seven hours a day, hauling his merchandise in a wheelbarrow along a 6 mile route. This earned him $2-$3 a day.



"More than anything, I would always return home so tired from the walk," Garcia recalls.



Little by little, Garcia saved his money and was able to buy a used bicycle six years ago from a Pedals for Progress partner agency in Jinotepe, Nicaragua.



"Because of a bicycle, I now earn about $4 a day," says Garcia. "I sell more and I do my rounds quicker. I tell everyone to go buy a bicycle."  Watch Garcia explain how a used bicycle has helped him in Nicaragua »



The seeds for Schweidenback's Pedals for Progress were planted years ago while he was volunteering for the Peace Corps from 1977-80 in Ecuador, near the Amazon Basin.



"Besides the bus that comes through town and one guy that owned a pickup truck, everybody walked everywhere all the time," he recalls.



"My landlord was the exception because he owned the only bike in a 500-mile radius. He was the most successful man in the region because he could access a job and get wherever he needed to go."



Years later, Schweidenback noticed used bicycles at garage sales and in garbage cans throughout his New Jersey community.



"I remembered how [the need] in developing countries was so great, that I couldn't stop thinking about it," he says.



Knowing the bikes could be put to better use, Schweidenback asked members of his community to donate 12 used bicycles; he planned to send them to Ecuador. The community brought him 140. Within a year, Schweidenback had created Pedals for Progress and shipped roughly 500 bicycles to developing countries.



Today, Schweidenback organizes 140 used bike drives each year and, on average, collects 90 bicycles in three hours. Donors are asked to pay a $10 fee per bike to help cover shipping costs and reduce the cost of the bicycle when it's sold overseas. Each bike is sold for about $15.  Watch how Pedals for Progress bikes get from donors to people in developing countries »



"There's a bike that's unloved in every garage in this country. Rather than put these old bikes in landfills for no reason, we can use them as economic stimulus to aid our neighbors," Schweidenback says.



"This is the transfer of wealth between nations because these have great value overseas. And they give people the ability to hold a job or a child the ability to go to school."  Watch Schweidenback talk about his inspiration for Pedals for Progress »



Pedals for Progress bicycles have been sent to countries in Central America, Africa, Eastern Europe and the Caribbean. For Schweidenback, knowing he's making an impact keeps him going.



"

***

Washington (CNN) -- Washington Wizards point guard Gilbert Arenas admits he drew guns in the team locker room in a highly publicized December 21 incident, but says he was only kidding around.



"I took the unloaded guns out in a misguided effort to play a joke on a teammate," Arenas said in a statement released Monday. "Contrary to some press accounts, I never threatened or assaulted anyone with the guns and never pointed them at anyone. Joke or not, I now recognize that what I did was a mistake and was wrong."



Citing NBA sources last month, the New York Post reported that Arenas and Javaris Crittenton both brandished firearms in the team's locker room.



Authorities continue to investigate the incident.



Crittenton's agent, Mark Bartelstein, told CNN Monday that his client "hasn't done anything wrong. I'm extremely confident he'll be exonerated."



Asked if Crittenton brought a gun into the Verizon Center that day, Bartelstein said, "I'm not going to get into details." He said Crittenton has not met with authorities, nor has such a meeting been requested or scheduled.



Arenas, a three-time NBA All-Star, spent Monday afternoon in a voluntary meeting with federal prosecutors at the U.S. Attorney's Office in Washington and with D.C. metropolitan police about the incident, according to his attorney, Kenneth L. Wainstein.



"From the outset of this incident, Mr. Arenas has been fully cooperative with the investigation," Wainstein said in a statement, noting that Arenas relinquished the guns to Wizards security officers and met with authorities to "tell the full story."



"Over the course of a two-hour interview this afternoon, Mr. Arenas answered every question asked of him," Wainstein said in Monday's statement.



A spokesman for the U.S. attorney's office declined to comment on Arenas' statement, citing the ongoing investigation. Arenas said he told authorities that he stored four unloaded guns in his locker the Verizon Center to keep them away from his children.



Arenas said he told authorities that he stored four unloaded guns in his locker the Verizon Center to keep them away from his children.



"I brought them without any ammunition into the District of Columbia, mistakenly believing that the recent change in the DC gun laws allowed a person to store unloaded guns in the District," he said in the statement.



He offered a public apology to the league, his teammates and his fans, saying, "I promise to do better in the future."



NBA spokesman Tim Frank declined to comment on Arenas' comments, deferring to an earlier statement: "There is an active investigation by DC law enforcement authorities, which we are monitoring closely. We are not taking any independent action at this time."

***

(CNN) -- Boeing is asking pilots who fly its 737 jets to pay careful attention to flight instruments after Dutch investigators said a faulty altimeter contributed to the recent crash of a 737 in the Netherlands.





Turkish Airlines Flight 1951 broke into three pieces near Schiphol Airport on February 25.





The 737 is the most widely flown jet in commercial aviation. More than 6,000 have been sold, according to Boeing.





"Boeing reminds all operators to make sure flight crews pay close attention to all primary flight controls during critical stages of a flight," Boeing spokesman Jim Proulx told CNN on Thursday.





On February 25, Turkish Airlines Flight 1951 from Istanbul to Amsterdam dropped from the sky on approach to the landing strip at Schiphol Airport, breaking into three pieces in a muddy field.





Nine people died and 80 people were hurt in the accident.





In a memo to pilots, Boeing says there was a malfunction in one of the plane's two altimeters, which measure the altitude above the terrain where the plane is going to land.





The left altimeter was giving "erroneous" information, indicating that the plane was below 7 or 8 feet from ground level when it was actually about 2,000 feet in the air, the memo said.





That caused the automatic throttles to slow the plane down.





"Boeing recommends operators inform flight crews of the above investigation details and the (Dutch Safety Board) interim report when it is released. In addition, crews should be reminded to carefully monitor primary flight instruments," the memo said.





The plane was on automatic pilot when it crashed, said Pieter van Vollenhoven, head of the Dutch Safety Board.





The weather was misty at the time of the crash, possibly keeping the pilots from noticing their altitude, Van Vollenhoven said. Automatic pilot should not be used for landings if altimeters are malfunctioning, he said. Dutch investigators said there had been faulty meter readings on two other flights of the same jet, but the pilots were able to land.





In the Amsterdam crash, the pilots did not recognize the altimeter problem until it was too late, Van Vollenhoven said.





The Boeing memo notes that "the autothrottle, which uses the left radio altimeter data, transitioned to landing flare mode and retarded the throttles to the idle stop. The throttles remained at the idle stop for approximately 100 seconds during which time the airspeed decreased to approximately 40 knots below the selected approach speed."





Proulx said he did not know what that speed was for that particular 737 model.





The warning issued by Boeing was for many other models of 737 jets, not just the 737-800 involved in the Amsterdam crash.

***

Kabul, Afghanistan (CNN) -- An attack in which the Taliban claimed to have infiltrated key government sites in downtown Kabul killed at least five people Monday morning, hospital and government officials said.



Among the five were two policemen and one national security staff member, Interior Minister Mohammad Hanif Atmar said at a news conference. Seventy-one others were injured, 36 of whom were police or security officers, he said.



His report of the death toll conflicts with those of Defense Ministry spokesman Zahir Azimi, who said 13 died, and the Taliban, which claimed even more were slain.



Seven attackers' bodies were recovered, with two or three of them burned beyond recognition, Azimi said. The Taliban said only five were killed.



Four explosions and gunfire shook downtown Kabul about 9:15 a.m. Monday, with the Taliban saying it was conducting a militant operation.



The attack started as 14 members of Afghan President Hamid Karzai's Cabinet were to be sworn in, said Parliament member Fawzia Koofi.



About 20 Taliban insurgents entered the presidential palace; the ministries of Finance, Mines and Justice; and the Serena Hotel, said spokesman Zabiullah Mujahid.



NATO-led forces said "several small explosions" and gunfire were reported near the Feroshgah e Afghan Shopping Center and the Serena Hotel, and later added that "numerous" suicide bombers had attacked government buildings close to the presidential palace and the Ministry of Justice.



Atmar said that the coordinated attacks struck the city over a span of two hours and 45 minutes and that they targeted civilians.



And the threat continued at 1 p.m., when three attackers took over Bayman Hotel, Atmar said. More than two hours later, Afghan security forces killed the men, he said.



At least two insurgents were killed at the shopping center, NATO-led forces said in a news release, which also said that Afghan national police had secured all roads in the area.



A separate news release condemned the attack, which NATO-led forces said took place amid many civilians. Atmar, the Minister of Defense and chief of the National Security Department also condemned the violence.



The Taliban claimed that they killed 31 officials and injured 31 people. Their account could not be immediately independently verified.



The terrorist group also disputed the government on the number of its militants killed. Five militants had died and 13 had returned to their safe houses, the Taliban's Mujahid said, adding that two were still fighting.



But Zmaray Bashari, a spokesman for the Interior Ministry, said security forces had restored Kabul to normalcy by Monday afternoon.



Monday's assault followed weekend violence that killed at least three international troops and 14 militants in Afghanistan, authorities said.



CNN's Dan Rivers and Atia Abawi contributed to this report.

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN)  -- Three men charged with sexually exploiting Cambodian children are being brought back to the United States to face prosecution, the Justice Department announced Monday.



The men are among the first charged under an international law enforcement initiative specifically targeting Americans traveling to Cambodia for the purpose of sexually abusing children.



The initiative, Operation Twisted Traveler, is an effort by the Justice Department and U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement to crack down on sex tourism.



"The men charged in this investigation apparently thought they could pursue their abhorrent desires by leaving the United States to prey on children in another country, but they were sadly mistaken," U.S. Attorney Thomas P. O'Brien said in a statement.



"We are now working closer than ever with officials in other nations and concerned private parties to take every effort we can to identify and prosecute sex tourists, as well as to provide every protection we can to the world's children."



Ronald Boyajian, 49, Erik Peeters, 41, and Jack Sporich, 75, are each charged with international travel and engaging in sexual contact with minors, a charge carrying a maximum prison sentence of 30 years, according to the Justice Department.



They are slated to make their first appearances in federal court on Tuesday, the Justice Department indicated in a news release.



The defendants are charged with international travel and engaging in sexual contact with minors, a charge carrying a maximum prison sentence of 30 years for each of their alleged victims, according to the department.



They are charged under the federal Protect Act, enacted six years ago to strengthen federal laws relating to predatory crimes against children outside U.S. borders, the department added.



The three defendants were apprehended, according to Immigration and Customs officials, as a result of information provided by the human rights organization International Justice Mission and the group Action Pour les Enfants, which combats child exploitation.



All three men have been previously convicted of sex offenses in the United States, the Justice Department noted in its statement.



"These types of cases are disturbing not only because young, defenseless children were victimized in unspeakable ways but also because the defendants went to such lengths to engage in their dark activities overseas," O'Brien said at a news conference.



He highlighted the case against Peeters, who was convicted on child molestation charges in 1990.



"Our case against Mr. Peeters outlines evidence of him allegedly molesting Cambodian boys, paying them small amounts of money -- $5 to $10 -- and possibly taking digital pictures of his young victims while they were naked," O'Brien noted.



He said Peeters molested at least three boys in Cambodia over the course of several months. One of the boys was 12 years old when the abuse is said to have started.



Boyajian is said to have "engaged in sexual activity with a 10-year-old Vietnamese girl in an area outside Phnom Penh frequented by child sex tourists known as 'Kilo 11,' " the Justice Department statement said.



Sporich, according to Action Pour les Enfants investigators cited in the government's criminal complaint, repeatedly hosted three Cambodian boys at a residence outside the city of Siem Reap. The complaint states that Sporich "was known to drive his motor bike through the neighborhoods while dropping Cambodian (money) on the street in order to meet kids."



The new charges "clearly demonstrate to the Cambodian people that the United States will not tolerate this type of abuse," said Carol Rodley, the American ambassador to Cambodia.



"These cases not only signal to the Cambodian victims our commitment to justice, but they will also act as a powerful deterrent for those individuals who are contemplating traveling to Cambodia to engage in illegal sexual activity with minors."



The International Labor Organization estimates that at least 12.3 million adults and children are victims of forced labor, bonded labor and sex slavery each year.



Cambodia is one of several countries recently added to a U.S. "watch list" because of what a State Department report calls a worsening human trafficking record in that country.

***

(CNN) -- Cuban President Raul Castro's daughter joined Twitter to set the record straight about an interview she did abroad, but ended up arguing with one of the communist island's prominent dissidents online.





Mariela Castro Espin wrote on her Twitter account, @CastroEspinM, that she recently made a trip to Amsterdam, the Netherlands, and toured the city's infamous red light district in her role as director for Cuba's National Center for Sexual Education.





An interview with Radio Netherlands characterized Castro Espin as "impressed" with the way the Dutch organize their prostitution. But on Twitter, Castro Espin said the conversation was taken out of context and that she would use social media to clarify her position.





"Without a doubt, there have been misunderstandings, manipulations, as always. At least there is the Web... and WikiLeaks," she wrote on Twitter.





Shortly afterward, Castro Espin was "welcomed" to the social networking site by Cuban dissident Yoani Sanchez, an outspoken critic of the Castro regime and avid Twitter user.





"Welcome to the plurality of Twitter," Sanchez tweeted to Castro Espin. "Here no one can shut me up, or deny me permission to travel or block my entry."





Castro Espin shot back: "Your focus on tolerance reproduces the old mechanisms of power. To improve your 'services' you need to study."





While there is long-running animosity between dissidents and the government, it is not common for the two sides to exchange barbs in such a public forum.





A bevy of critical replies to Castro Espin must have followed, for then she wrote on Twitter: "Despicable parasites: Did you receive the order from your employers to respond in unison and with the same predetermined script? Be creative."





In Cuba, where Internet access is limited or prohibitively expensive, many citizens use Twitter as a form of communicating, as Tweets can be posted from a simple text message.





Castro Espin is the niece of Fidel Castro. Her father, Raul Castro, assumed presidential duties from Fidel in 2006, and became president in 2008. Castro Espin's organization promotes gay rights in Cuba.





That fight for equal rights in Cuba led Sanchez to ask another question of Castro Espin on Twitter: "How can you ask for acceptance just for one issue? Is tolerance universal or not?" Castro Espin did not answer.

***

Islamabad, Pakistan (CNN) -- A blast hit near a building housing Pakistan's intelligence service, ISI, in the eastern city of Multan on Tuesday, killing at least 12 people and wounding 20 others, police said.



The explosion took place at a security checkpoint, said Jamshed Akram of the city police.



Four soldiers and four children were among the dead, said Dr. Kaleem Ullah of Multan's emergency services.



Pakistan has blamed the violence on Islamic militants who have vowed to avenge a intense military offensive to rout them from their haven along the country's border with Afghanistan.



The nation has come under increasingly frequent attacks. On Monday, a blast at a crowded market in Lahore killed 54 and wounded more than 150 people.



The same day two other bombing attacks -- in Peshawar and Quetta -- killed at least 11 and wounded at least 41.



The attacks came three days after militants armed with guns and grenades stormed a mosque in Rawalpindi frequented by military personnel. At least 36 were killed and 75 wounded.



The Pakistani Taliban claimed responsibility for the mosque bombing, but there were no immediately claims for Monday's attacks.



In an e-mail to CNN about the mosque attack, the Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan said: "We reconfirmed it, that the TTP has done it, and will do more which are already planned. We once again mention that we are not against the innocent people and the state of Pakistan but against those officers and ministers who are American by hearts and minds and Pakistani just by faces."



The United States has pressed Pakistan to rout out Taliban militants.



Fighting the war in Afghanistan is "inextricably linked to our partnership with Pakistan," President Barack Obama said Tuesday of U.S. strategy.



"We are in Afghanistan to prevent a cancer from once again spreading through that country," he said in a speech at West Point. "But this same cancer has also taken root in the border region of Pakistan. That is why we need a strategy that works on both sides of the border."



The United States says Pakistan looms large because Taliban and al Qaeda militants operating in Afghanistan also have had a presence in Pakistan's northwestern region near the Afghan border and have threatened the governments and troops in both countries.

***

(EW.com) -- Although it didn't set a franchise record, "The Twilight Saga: Breaking Dawn -- Part 1" had one of the best openings in box-office history by debuting to $139.5 million, according to studio estimates.





That's the fifth-best opening weekend ever, behind "Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows -- Part 2," "The Dark Knight," "Spider-Man 3," and "The Twilight Saga: New Moon," which held on to the franchise record.





"New Moon" debuted to a slightly better $142.8 million on the same November weekend two years ago. What's interesting is how closely "Breaking Dawn" followed "New Moon's" trajectory. "New Moon" grossed $72.7 million its first day, and then dropped 42 percent on Saturday and 34 percent on Sunday. By comparison, "Breaking Dawn" earned $72 million on Friday (the third-best opening day ever), and then fell 44 percent on Saturday and a projected 34 percent today.





"New Moon" ultimately finished its domestic run with $296.6 million, and it's too early to tell whether "Breaking Dawn" will wind up a bit short of that final figure. Even if it does, Summit Entertainment won't be complaining about grossing nearly $300 million from the fourth movie of its franchise. And, of course, the domestic box office is only a part of the equation here. "Breaking Dawn" took in $144 million from 54 foreign territories this week, pushing its worldwide debut to a staggering $283.5 million.





Summit reports that "Breaking Dawn" attracted a crowd that was, unsurprisingly, 80 percent female. What is surprising is that the PG-13 movie's audience wasn't as young as you'd think, with 60 percent over the age of 21. According to CinemaScore, 30 percent of the film's audience was under 18, but an even larger 42 percent was between the ages of 18 and 34. The popular conception is that The "Twilight Saga" is merely a teenage phenomenon, but these figures seem to prove otherwise. The $110 million movie received a good-but-not-great B+ rating from CinemaScore graders.





In second place was Warner Bros.' 3-D animated sequel "Happy Feet Two," which fell far short of expectations by dancing to only $22 million. The 2006 original, an Oscar winner for best animated feature, opened to $41.5 million -- and that was without the benefit of 3-D surcharges.





"Happy Feet Two" was saddled with mediocre reviews, which might have discouraged some parents. Furthermore, five years could have been too long of a wait, especially for a sequel that appeared very similar to its predecessor. The original "Happy Feet" was released a year after March of the Penguins, when the Antarctic birds were having a moment in the cultural zeitgeist. That moment has clearly passed. The $135 million sequel earned a B+ rating from CinemaScore moviegoers, and 3-D theaters accounted for 50 percent of its weekend tally.





The rest of the top five consisted of holdovers. The 3-D action flick "Immortals" dropped a harsh 62 percent for $12.3 million -- a second-weekend decline that was larger than both "300" (54 percent) and "Clash of the Titans" (57 percent). "Jack and Jill" witnessed a typical Adam Sandler fall of 52 percent for $12 million. And even though "Happy Feet Two" underperformed, "Puss in Boots" lost much of its family audience. The animated adventure dropped 57 percent for $10.7 million in its fourth weekend.





In limited release, Alexander Payne's "The Descendants," starring George Clooney, debuted to $1.2 million from 29 theaters -- enough for a tenth-place finish. The Oscar hopeful raked in an impressive $42,150 per location. Only "Midnight in Paris," "The Tree of Life," and "Jane Eyre" opened to stronger per-theater averages this year, and those movies started out on far fewer screens than "The Descendants."

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- This month on the Screening Room we're turning to the wonderful world of animated films.

"Shrek the Third," the latest in Dreamworks' inverted-fairytale franchise

Blockbusters like "Finding Nemo" and Dreamworks' franchise "Shrek" have turned animation into a multi-billion-dollar industry, and a market once dominated by Disney is becoming crowded with competition.

This year, Pixar celebrates its 20th anniversary. From "Toy Story" to "Ratatouille," the company has transformed expectations about what's possible with animated film.

Pixar's position as a world leader in animated film is largely down to John Lasseter - considered by some to be the Walt Disney for a new generation. From "Toy Story" and "A Bug's Life" to "Monsters, Inc." and "Cars," the Pixar back-catalogue is a testament to his creative genius. And when Pixar merged with Disney he became one of the most powerful players in the movie business.

The first Pixar production released since the merger is "Ratatouille," the story of an unlikely alliance between a blundering trainee chef and a gourmet-loving rat.

"Ratatouille" director Brad Bird's credits for Pixar include the Oscar-winning feature "The Incredibles," which won critical plaudits for its ground-breaking animation.

He told CNN, "I think that one of the nice things about Pixar is that they don't feel like they have discovered the secret formula to making a good movie. They just keep focused on trying to make a movie that they would want to see. We are challenged and surprised every time they work out."

But while Pixar and Disney may be the giants of animation they face formidable competition from another box-office monster -- Shrek.

The adventures of the world's favorite ogre have generated a total of two billion dollars in takings.

Actor Mike Myers, who voices Shrek, told CNN that he thinks the movies' appeal is their unlikely hero. He said, "With 'Shrek,' they took fairytales and turned them on their heads. Everything is inverted. Traditional villains are heroes, traditional heroes are villains. The whole team decided, we're going to look at somebody who has been told he was a villain and we're going to make him a hero. That's when I knew they were on to something."

The success of the Shrek franchise, supported by other big budget features such as "Madagascar," has cemented Dreamworks' position as a major force in the animated world.

Another successful franchise -- "Ice Age" -- has been a hot seller for 20th Century Fox.

And the polar climate has also been kind to Warner Brothers with last year's Oscar-winning "Happy Feet" charming audiences around the world with a tale of dancing penguins, while the Tom Hanks-voiced "The Polar Express" also scored well on its way to becoming a seasonal stocking-filler on DVD.

The life-like motion-capture technique used in "The Polar Express" will also feature in Warner's forthcoming release, "Beowulf" featuring Angelina Jolie.

But in a market dominated by 3-D CGI animations, one of the big three summer blockbusters this year belongs to a more traditional form of the art.

"The Simpsons Movie" is the world's longest-running animated television series, and fans have eagerly awaited its move to the big screen. Creator Matt Groening told the Screening Room, "We've had fans clamoring for a movie for the past 18 years. We've had kids, they've grown up, they've become adults, they've become writers for the Simpsons, so we had to do a movie after all this time."

So, will Springfield's most famous inhabitants break all former animation records? Groening and co. will certainly be hoping that the movie gets a box-office "Woo hoo!" from its fans.

"Happy Feet" is a Warner Bros. film; Warner Bros., like CNN, is a unit of Time Warner. E

***

TEHRAN, Iran (CNN)  -- The bodies of 152 people killed in a fiery plane crash in Iran Wednesday have been returned to their families, an Iranian state broadcaster reported Sunday.



An Iranian Armenian woman places flower at crash site.



Ahmad Majidi, the head of the special working group investigating the Caspian Airlines crash, also said a Russian team had arrived in Iran to help study the crash of the Russian-made plane, Islamic Republic of Iran Broadcasting said.



The plane went down in a field near the city of Qavzin Wednesday, killing all 168 people on board and leaving a huge smoldering crater.



Majidi did not say what had happened to the 16 bodies that have not been handed over.



The plane's flight data recorders have been recovered and are being studied by Iranian and Russian experts, IRIB said. Fragments of the plane are also being examined to help determine the cause of the crash, Majidi said.



The plane "disintegrated into pieces," said Col. Masood Jafari Nasab, security commander of Qazvin.  See a map of the crash location »



Video of the crash site showed a huge crater in the earth scattered with charred pieces of the plane and tattered passports.  Watch as the flight data recorders are recovered »



"The aircraft all of a sudden fell out of the sky and exploded on impact, where you see the crater," a witness told Iran's government-backed Press TV from the crash site.



Ten members of the country's youth judo team were aboard the plane, several sources including Press TV reported. The government-backed network said the dead included eight athletes and two coaches.



It was at least the fifth major airline accident in the world this year, following crashes of planes flown by Colgan Air, Turkish Airlines, Air France and Yemenia Airways. A US Airways pilot managed to land his plane safely on the Hudson river in New York City in January, with no major injuries, after the plane lost power.



But aviation safety expert John Wiley said there was no reason to fear air travel in general, and no one airline or aircraft is particularly dangerous.



Caspian Airlines Flight 7908 -- a Russian-made Tupolev Tu-154M plane -- went down near the village of Jannatabad near Qazvin at 11:33 a.m. (2:03 a.m. ET) Wednesday, Press TV reported.



Conversations between the pilot and the ground were normal and did not indicate any technical problems, the network's Web site reported, citing the managing director of Iran's airport authority without naming him.



The Tupolev 154 is essentially banned in the West because it does not comply with European noise and pollution regulations, but it has a safer-than-average accident record, Wiley said. Wednesday's crash is the first on record for Caspian Airlines, which was founded in 1993, he added.



The plane crashed 16 minutes after takeoff, said the newspaper Hamshari, quoting a spokesman from Iran's civil aviation organization.



That would have put the flight in one of the safest stages of travel, according to International Air Transport Association data. Only about 5 percent of accidents take place during the phase called en-route climb, 16 to 20 minutes into a flight, when a plane climbs to cruising altitude of 35,000 feet.



About half of accidents take place during landing.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Is the United States the "greatest country on earth"? You hear that a lot, or phrases like that, during this presidential campaign. Candidates may attack other candidates, or the sitting president, but they never attack the idea that America is special, a "city upon a hill." "The last, best hope of Earth."



It's part of America's ideology and its tradition of political rhetoric.



To many Americans' ears, it sounds normal. But to citizens of other countries it's sometimes jarring, as if Americans put their country ahead of any other, as if the United States thinks it has the right to tell the rest of the world what to do.



We went to the Jefferson Memorial in Washington, D.C. and asked visitors if they agree America "knows best" and the United States has an obligation to spread its values around the world.



Almost everyone we talked with did not agree.



Rachel Army, a teacher with a Washington, D.C. non-governmental organization, said: "I have a lot of pride in our government however, at the same time, it is ours and I don't think that it is right to force it on other people."



Jermane Bonilla, from Los Angeles, said he thinks the United States is a special country, "the most powerful nation on earth and the most beautiful country on earth, in my mind." But, he told us "it might not be the same model that everybody should be using."



They're not the exception, it turns out. In their book, "America Against the World," Pew Research Center President Andrew Kohut and journalist Bruce Stokes say it's more often U.S. leaders who want to impose American values in other countries -- not the American people.



The authors analyzed international surveys of people around the globe going back to the 1980's as well as more than 100,000 interviews in 60 countries.



Their conclusion? "Contrary to widespread misconceptions, Americans' pride in their country is not evangelistic. The American people, as opposed to some of their leaders, seek no converts to their ideology."



Citizens of many other countries, too, may think their national way of life is the best but, these authors say, "they don't dominate the globe."



Americans may not be that different from others but the differences that do exist are magnified, fueling resentment around the world. E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- The 9-year-old boy who was the lone survivor of a plane crash that killed 103 people in Libya plans to return to the Netherlands on Saturday, the Dutch Foreign Ministry said Friday.





He is scheduled to leave Tripoli, Libya, at 10 a.m. Saturday and fly home with an aunt and uncle, as well as a doctor, the ministry said in a statement.





Ruben van Assouw suffered multiple fractures to his legs and underwent surgery at Al Khadra Hospital, said a doctor who declined to give her name.





Both of Ruben's parents and a brother were killed in the crash, a Foreign Ministry spokesperson said.





Acting on a request from the boy's relatives, authorities do not plan to say where the plane will land, and the media will not be present when it does, the ministry statement said.





"His relatives have appealed to the media to exercise restraint and to leave Ruben and his family in peace at this difficult time," it said.





Authorities said Ruben was the only survivor after an Afriqiyah Airways plane crashed at 6 a.m. Wednesday.





The boy's aunt and uncle arrived in Tripoli to visit him Thursday.





Saif al Islam Gadhafi, the second eldest son of Libyan leader Col. Moammar Gadhafi, visited the boy in the hospital along with airline chairman Capt. Sabri Shadi, according to a statement on Afriqiyah Airways' website.





More than two thirds of the passengers killed in the plane crash were Dutch, the foreign ministry said. Passengers from Libya, South Africa, Belgium, Austria, Germany, France, Zimbabwe and Britain were also among the victims, the airline said on its website.





The plane, an Airbus A330-200, departed Johannesburg, South Africa, and was at the end of its nearly nine-hour flight when it crashed.





Officials recovered the plane's flight data recorder, but investigators are still trying to determine what caused the crash.





CNN's Stephanie Halasz contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Army Maj. Steven Hutchison fought battles in the jungles of Vietnam. Then he fought an epic battle on the home front. And at age 60, he still wasn't done fighting for his country.



Maj. Steven Hutchison served 22 years in his first Army stint, then returned at age 57. He died Sunday.



The battle ended for Hutchison on Sunday. He died in Basra, Iraq, of wounds from a roadside bomb in Al Farr. He is the oldest U.S. service member to die in Iraq or Afghanistan.



Hutchison joined the Army in 1966 and served two one-year tours in Vietnam, according to a news release from Fort Riley, Kansas, home of Hutchison's 1st Infantry Division, the famous "Big Red One."



Over the next 22 years, he was a platoon leader in Germany and commander of a basic training company at Fort Jackson, South Carolina.



Along the way, he earned a doctorate in psychology from the University of Delaware and became an assistant professor of military science at Claremont College in California. He was awarded the Bronze Star Medal and the Meritorious Service Medal, among others.



Hutchison retired from the military in 1988 and took up the quiet life of a college professor. He taught at several small colleges in California and became a researcher for a health care company in Scottsdale, Arizona, said his brother, Richard Hutchison.



But Hutchison felt compelled to return to military service after the terrorist attacks of September 11. His wife, Kandy, vetoed that idea, however.



That decision proved fateful, as Hutchison was able to stand by his wife's side through her battle with breast cancer. She died of the disease in January 2006.



The always-athletic Hutchison channeled his grief by whipping himself into shape and returning to active duty at age 57 the following year, his brother said. Military rules say retirees may be recalled up to age 64 for general officers, 62 for warrant officers and 60 for all others.



Hutchison served a tour in Afghanistan and then was sent to Iraq, where he was part of a team training Iraqi forces to secure their own country.



"He's been a soldier his whole life," Richard Hutchison, of Mesa, Arizona, told CNN affiliate KNXV-TV.  Watch a report on Hutchison's life »



"He was a great guy," he said. "We hung around together; we went to the movies together, went out to dinner together. He loved to shoot pool; we used to shoot pool all the time, either at my house or at his house. He was just a great friend and a great brother."



The soldier-psychology professor, who is also survived by two daughters and two half-siblings, had a mischievous side, too.



"He liked to tease me about him being younger than me, even though he was five years older than me," Richard Hutchison said with a soft chuckle. "He would tell everyone he was the youngest one. And they would believe him. Made me feel real good."



Richard Hutchison plans to fly to Dover Air Force Base in Delaware over the weekend to claim his brother's body and return it to Scottsdale for burial.



The last communication the brothers had was a routine e-mail Steven Hutchison sent from Iraq about two weeks ago. He rarely wrote about his experiences in Iraq, Richard Hutchison said.



However, there was one matter on the ground that the soldier involved his brother in.



"When he was in Iraq, they found a dog and were taking care of it. He sent me an e-mail asking me to send some dog food and dog supplies," Hutchison said. The Army made Hutchison's team give up the dog, but they left it in good hands, his brother said.



"He had a big heart."



CNN's Adam Levine, Larry Shaughnessy, Barbara Starr and Joe Sterling contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Iran's supreme leader on Sunday blasted U.S. plans to overhaul the setup for a missile defense shield in Europe, calling the Obama administration's intentions "anti-Iranian," state-run media reported.



Ayatollah Ali Khamenei says the U.S. president is following "anti-Islamic and anti-Iranian" policies.



Ayatollah Ali Khamenei also called Western concerns about Iran's nuclear ambitions -- which Tehran says are only for energy purposes -- "purely a fabrication by the United States," according to the Islamic Republic News Agency.



"This is something that is in the doctrine of anti-Iranianism, since the policy and the 30-year-old history of the Islamic Republic has proven that Iran wants to live in peace and under the spirit of equality and fraternity, with its Muslim neighbors and the rest of the world," Ayatollah Ali Khamenei said.



On Thursday, President Obama said the United States is significantly overhauling Bush-era plans for a missile defense shield in Europe, based partly on the latest analysis of Iran's offensive capabilities.



The "new missile defense architecture in Europe" will be ready faster, work with existing technology and provide better missile defense than the program proposed by former President George W. Bush, Obama said.



Obama said the change of gears was based on an "updated intelligence assessment" about Iran's ability to hit Europe with missiles. The Islamic republic's "short- and medium-range" missiles pose the most current threat, he said, and "this new ballistic missile defense will best address" that threat.



Khamenei, speaking on the first day of Eid al-Fitr, a festive end to the Muslim holy month of Ramadan, countered by comparing Obama to his predecessor.



"America, under its former president, spared no efforts against the Muslim world as well as against Iran," Khamenei said. "Even the current administration -- with the apparently friendly words and messages -- follows that same anti-Islamic and anti-Iranian policy of the past."



The Bush-era proposal called for the United States to set up a radar site in the Czech Republic and 10 missile interceptors in Poland to counter the threat of Iran launching long-range missiles at America's allies in Europe. The new system will have "hundreds" of missile interceptors instead, a Pentagon official said last week.



It also will have mobile radars, including some in space, "that can move to wherever the threat actually emanates and wherever we feel we need to defend ourselves," said Gen. James Cartwright, vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

***

NEW YORK (CNN)  -- Good, but not enough, the Rev. Al Sharpton said in response to New York Post Chairman Rupert Murdoch's apology for a controversial editorial cartoon published in the newspaper. Online Wednesday, some Post readers reacted similarly.





Rev. Al Sharpton, center, leads protests against the New York Post cartoon on February 19 in New York City.





Sharpton has lead a chorus of criticism and allegations that the cartoon published Feb. 18 was racist.





He said Murdoch's apology was a "good gesture," but he still had questions.





Public debate on the issue continued to rage on the New York Post Web site early Wednesday, with some saying they were offended enough to cancel their subscriptions. Others defended the cartoon, calling it harmless and calling critics of it oversensitive.





Murdoch's "apology leaves a lot more questions than it gives answers," Sharpton said Tuesday. "The question is what will guarantee that these kinds of things will not happen again. Let us make no mistake about it: We have seen two apologies in one week -- really one and a half apologies -- which is unprecedented, but clearly not far enough."





The cartoon by Sean Delonas referenced the mauling of a Connecticut woman by a chimpanzee who was later shot and killed by police. In its caption, one of the officers says, "They'll have to find someone else to write the next stimulus bill."





The cartoon was published the day after President Obama signed the stimulus bill.  Watch CNN's Lou Dobbs talk with Sharpton »





The Post issued a statement the following day, apologizing but noting that the cartoon was meant to mock what it called an "ineptly written" stimulus bill.





Many critics said the cartoon played on historically racist images by appearing to compare Obama, the nation's first black president, to the chimpanzee.





Murdoch apologized Tuesday.





"Today I want to personally apologize to any reader who felt offended, and even insulted," according to the statement from Murdoch, who is also chairman and CEO of News Corporation, which owns the paper.





"I can assure you -- without a doubt -- that the only intent of that cartoon was to mock a badly written piece of legislation.





"It was not meant to be racist, but unfortunately, it was interpreted by many as such. We all hold the readers of the New York Post in high regard, and I promise you that we will seek to be more attuned to the sensitivities of our community."





Leaders of the NAACP on Saturday called for the firing of Delonas.





Delonas called the controversy "absolutely friggin' ridiculous."





"Do you really think I'm saying Obama should be shot? I didn't see that in the cartoon," Delonas told CNN. iReport.com: Should Murdoch, N.Y. Post do more?





"It's about the economic stimulus bill," he added. "If you're going to make that about anybody, it would be (House Speaker Nancy) Pelosi, which it's not."

***

(CNN) -- It's hard to imagine Meryl Streep having second thoughts about tackling any role, but the actress admits that she had doubts about "Doubt," her newest project.

The cast of "Doubt," from left: Viola Davis, Amy Adams, Meryl Streep and Philip Seymour Hoffman.

The film -- based on a Tony Award- and Pulitzer Prize-winning play by the same name -- examines what happens when a strict nun who heads a Catholic school in the Bronx suspects a charismatic priest of having an inappropriate relationship with a student.

"I actually didn't think it would ever be a movie," Streep said. "It was so thoroughly realized on stage, and it was so minimal. It was hard to imagine how or why you would make a movie out of it."

But Streep, who plays the terrifyingly severe and determined school principal, Sister Aloysius Beauvier, said she changed her mind when she saw the final product.

"How did they make the play without any children in it? It is just sort of amazing to me, because to me they are sort of the landscape. They are the lambs of the movie. They are the stakes. They are why everybody is passionate."

Her co-stars are passionate about sharing the screen with a Hollywood legend. Philip Seymour Hoffman, who plays the priest targeted by Streep's character in the film, says he "adores" her. Amy Adams calls Streep "a sweetheart." Viola Davis says she's "just fantastic."

Davis' performance in the movie is generating Oscar buzz, with Streep advising the actress to pick out a dress for the Academy Awards.

Davis, who plays the mother of the student at the center of the sexual abuse allegations at the school, said she drew on the experiences of her mom and other women she knows to bring the role to life. She expressed awe about any suggestion of an Oscar nomination.

"It's surreal. I don't know how to respond to that anymore," Davis said. "All I wanted to do was good work. ... Everything else is just the icing on the cake."

The movie is set in 1964, but the play was written by John Patrick Shanley after the sexual abuse scandal that rocked the Roman Catholic Church several years ago. Hoffman -- who plays Father Flynn, the priest under fire -- said the lurid headlines about molested children weren't even on his mind when he took on the project.

"It is really about something else. If people see it, they will know what I mean about that," Hoffman said.

Some have suggested that the play served as a criticism of the Bush administration's dogged belief that there were weapons of mass destruction in Iraq. Shanley, who won an Academy Award for his screenplay of "Moonstruck," told Entertainment Weekly that the play did have a political point.

"I'm not interested in morality," he told the magazine. "One of my larger premises in doing this play, in what's not said, is that doubt itself is a passionate exercise. I think it's perceived in this culture as something weak or denatured, and that's a huge mistake."

Adams said she became "a little obsessed" with the adaptation of the play to the big screen. She plays Sister James, a nun who expresses her suspicions about Father Flynn's relationship with the student to Sister Aloysius.

The movie is a departure for Adams, who became famous for sunnier roles in films like "Enchanted" and "Talladega Nights." But she said she doesn't mind being known as an eternally cheerful actress, because that description reflects "75 percent" of her real persona.

"There's 25 percent that's probably dark and grumpy and not personable at all, but I keep her at home," Adams said.

As for Oscar buzz surrounding her performance, the actress said she's keeping her fingers crossed for Streep and Davis to be nominated for their roles in "Doubt" but has no expectations for

***

QUEENS, New York (CNN) -- For Victor Guevares, winning a bid at a raucous foreclosure auction two months ago was just the first step toward achieving his dream of home ownership. And after getting through several obstacles along the way, he finally moved his family into the two-story, three-bedroom house in Queens.



Victor Guevares, second from right, bought a home at a raucous foreclosure auction two months ago.



The auction process isn't as easy as it looks, Guevares said.



"If you're going to an auction, do your research," he told CNN.



CNN first met the Guevares family in March when he grabbed a home once worth $527,000 for less than half that price.



Guevares had won an auction at USHomeAuction.com's foreclosure sale in New York. Banks and other lenders were unloading foreclosed houses, and many were selling at 50 percent to 60 percent below their highest values.



Foreclosures skyrocketed in March and the first quarter of 2009 to their highest levels on record as banks lifted moratoria on filings. Foreclosure filings -- which include default papers, auction sale notices and repossessions -- reached 803,489 in the first quarter, according to a recent report by RealtyTrac, an online marketer of foreclosed properties.  Watch Victor Guevares give a quick tour of his new home »



That is a 24 percent jump over a year earlier and a 9 percent increase compared to the previous quarter. Of those first-quarter filings, 341,180 happened in March, a 17 percent increase from February and a 46 percent jump from March 2008.



Sitting with his stomach in knots on that March 8 afternoon, Guevares made the opening bid and kept pace until they passed $100,000, then $200,000.



Looking shell-shocked, Guevares ended up with the winning bid: $230,000.



But he soon realized there was much more to it, after plunking down $7,000 in auction fees and another $5,000 required from every bidder.



And still, he couldn't immediately lock in a mortgage at the auction as he had hoped because records showed the home faced a possible code violation.



"I had a problem," Guevares said.



An inspection cleared that hurdle, and closing day ended happily with Guevares holding the deed to his first house.



But he wasn't through yet.



Guevares, a married father of two, wanted to have his family moved in by the end of May -- and had his work cut out, since the home was split into two apartments.



He broke down a wall, opened up a staircase, put in new floors, repainted and created a sunroom.



All that work brought his cost to roughly $280,000 -- about $20,000 less than the estimated value of the home, he said.



Guevares spent the past 12 years renting and trying to save for his first home, and believes he came out ahead with the auction win.



"I got a great deal on the house. My mortgage is $300 less than what I paid in rent," he said.



The backyard is filled with garbage bags filled with debris, but the family was able to move in last week.



Guevares' son, 8-year-old Devin, is reveling in his bright green room that has a window to peek out into his yard -- and the neighbor's.



"They have a dog named Rocky, just the same as the dog we have," he said.



Another perk: no more worrying about being quiet as he did at their apartment. "I can just scream," said Devin.

***

(CNN) -- The father of American figure skater Nancy Kerrigan is dead and her brother is behind bars, accused of assault and battery against 70-year old Daniel Kerrigan, according to Massachusetts authorities.





Daniel Kerrigan died Sunday after being taken by emergency personnel from his family home in Stoneham, Massachusetts, to a hospital, authorities said. His son Mark, 45, was arraigned Monday and pleaded not guilty to charges stemming from an alleged assault.





According to Middlesex County Assistant District Attorney Elizabeth Keeley, police responded to a 911 call at approximately 1:30 a.m. Sunday from Brenda Kerrigan, wife of Daniel and mother to Mark and Nancy Kerrigan.





Keeley told Middlesex District Court Judge Mark Sullivan during the arraignment Monday for Mark Kerrigan that there was a violent argument and struggle between the father and his son, resulting in the elder Kerrigan falling or collapsing on the kitchen floor. Keeley said that Mark Kerrigan told authorities "that he did in fact have an argument with his father, the argument became physical, he grabbed his father around the neck, and at some point the father collapsed to the floor."





The Middlesex District Attorney's office said Monday that authorities were still investigating the "entirety of the circumstances of the incident," along with the cause and manner of death. The county medical examiner is expected to release a report within a couple of weeks.





According to Keeley, police found Mark Kerrigan in the basement of the house, "clearly intoxicated" and "extremely combative." He refused to comply with police officers, said Keeley, and they had to subdue him with pepper spray before forcibly removing him from the home.





Mark Kerrigan wept softly during Monday's arraignment. His attorney, Denise Moore, told the judge that Kerrigan was in grief and "quite distraught about his father's death." Through his attorney, Mark Kerrigan denied any responsibility in the death.





Moore said in court that Mark Kerrigan was unemployed, was recently released from a correctional facility and was living at home with his parents. He is taking medications and seeking psychological help for post-traumatic stress, apparently from his time in the Army, Moore said.





Despite appeals from his attorney, Sullivan ordered Kerrigan held on $10,000 cash bail. His next court appearance is expected to be February 24.





Nancy Kerrigan first gained prominence by winning a bronze medal at the 1992 Winter Olympics in Albertville, France. In 1994 she earned an Olympic silver medal in Lillehammer, Norway. But she is perhaps best remembered for surviving an attack before the 1994 Winter Games by skating rival Tonya Harding's ex-husband and an accomplice.





Through a spokeswoman on Tuesday, the Kerrigan family released a statement saying: "Dan Kerrigan was a wonderful husband for 47 years, a caring and loving father to his daughter Nancy and two sons, Michael and Mark, and a grandfather of eight. ... The family's focus is on mourning Dan and honoring his life and many contributions."





CNN's Vanessa Juarez contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Internet attacks shut down the social networking site Twitter for about two hours on Thursday morning and caused glitches in other sites like Facebook and LiveJournal, a blogging site.



Some Twitter users expressed near-panic that the site was not working properly Thursday.



It's unclear if the attacks were coordinated against the social media sites.



Twitter says its site's blackout was caused by a "denial of service attack," which likely means a hacker used a herd of infected computers to send bad information to the site to overwhelmed it.



A post to Twitter's blog said its Web site was back online before noon ET, but the site's users still were reporting problems.



"We are continuing to defend against and recover from this attack," the message from the company says.



Facebook and other social networking sites appeared to be affected by Twitter's shut-down, too. Twitter runs applications through those sites and there was speculation that the glitches were related.



"Earlier this morning, we encountered issues within our network that resulted in a short period of degraded site experience for some visitors," said Facebook spokeswoman Kathleen Loughlin.



"No user data was at risk, and the matter is now resolved for the majority of users. We're monitoring the situation to ensure that users continue to have the fast and reliable experience they've come to expect from Facebook," she said.



Twitter's site went down around 9:30 a.m. ET on Thursday and was back online by about 11:30 a.m.



It's unclear who plotted the attack against Twitter and what their motives may have been. Internet attacks sometimes hit Web sites as they become popular. Security experts say financial motives often are behind modern cyber-attacks. Watch Mashable's Adam Ostrow on the Twitter outage



Twitter -- a micro-blogging site where users post 140-character messages to their followers -- has soared in popularity in recent months. According to comScore, a Web tracking firm, the site had 44 million unique visitors in June.



Thursday's incident highlights the degree to which people depend on online social networks to feel connected to the world.



Some Twitter and Facebook users expressed near-panic that the sites were not working properly. Others reacted with ambivalence.



This is not the first time Twitter has been hit with a cyber-attack. Last month, a hacker broke into the personal Google accounts of Twitter employees, stealing personal information and company financial reports and posting them online.



In an e-mail to CNN.com, Twitter co-founder Biz Stone said that incident is not related to Thursday's security breach.



"There's no indication that this attack is related to any previous activities. We are currently the target of a denial of service attack," Stone said in the e-mail.



"Attacks such as this are malicious efforts orchestrated to disrupt and make unavailable services such as online banks, credit card payment gateways, and in this case, Twitter for intended customers or users. We are defending against this attack now and will continue to update our status blog as we defend and later investigate."



Don DeBolt, director of threat research at CA, a computer security company, said it's too early to tell who or what may be behind the Twitter attack.



But he said denial-of-service attacks target specific Web sites.



"To be effective, [these attacks] need to be focused on a Web site or a series of Web sites," he said. "It's not going to be something where malware (harmful software) is going to be deployed and then randomly attacks Web sites."



John Harrison, a researcher with Web security firm Symantec, said it is very difficult to learn the identity of the attacker, or attackers, as they could be anywhere on Earth and the infected network could span several countries.



Logging on to sites such as Twitter while they are under attack only makes the situation worse because it adds to the overloading of the system, he said.



The U.S. Computer Emergency Readiness Team says it's impossible for Web developers to fully

***

(CNN) -- Verizon has been touted as having the biggest, baddest, fastest 4G around. It's been this way since the carrier debuted its LTE network in late 2010.





But now that AT&T has joined the LTE game, consumers looking for top speeds might consider turning their focus to AT&T instead.





If only for a while.





Metrico Wireless, a firm that does network and mobile device analytics, took a look at 4G LTE service in the U.S., focusing on two of the nation's largest carriers, Verizon and AT&T.





The company's latest report shows that AT&T's average LTE speeds are better than Verizon's (for now at least), and that LTE provides more than five times the performance of the carriers' respective 3G offerings.





Metrico used five 4G LTE handsets for its tests: two on AT&T, three on Verizon. On AT&T, the HTC Vivid and Samsung Galaxy S II Skyrocket were measured. The HTC Thunderbolt, Samsung Droid Charge and Motorola Droid Bionic were tested on Verizon's network.





In stationary download speeds, AT&T's 4G LTE handsets outperformed those on Verizon, but Metrico believes this disparity is likely due to the fact that Verizon's LTE service is more established and has significantly more subscribers using data on it.





Indeed, as of April, Verizon had over half a million LTE subscribers. AT&T, meanwhile, just launched its LTE network in five markets this summer.





But while AT&T's data speeds were better, web pages actually loaded faster on the three Verizon smartphones tested. "In general, the subscriber experience is not simply driven by the network or the device, but by the combination of the two," the report states.





"Even devices with similar specifications connected to similar network technologies still demonstrate variation in performance."





This was especially true with regards to video performance. Of the smartphones tested, the Samsung Droid Charge (on Verizon) consistently yielded the highest frame delivery rate, while the Motorola Droid Bionic (also on Verizon) had the lowest.





Also, if you're really concerned about web page load times, consider this: All carrier-to-carrier comparisons notwithstanding, both AT&T and Verizon handsets delivered web page load times that were 80 to 85 percent shorter on LTE relative to 3G.





What about battery life on an LTE device, notoriously reported as being poor? Well, depending on how you use your device, you may be able to squeeze out a few more hours, as the report found that battery life was heavily related to app use.





On the AT&T Samsung Galaxy S II Skyrocket, you're going to get 300 to 350 minutes of use out of your device, whether you're a power user or someone who's making calls all day long.





On the Verizon Droid Bionic, though, those who primarily use their phones for voice calling will gain about 150 minutes of usage over those who spend most of their time on Twitter and Facebook.





Verizon's LTE network is currently the largest in terms of nationwide coverage, but AT&T's is set to rival it as it expands.





And, indeed, we're finally beginning to see LTE infrastructure build-outs, industry-wide. Joining Metro PCS, Verizon and AT&T in the LTE game is Cricket Wireless, perhaps best known for its budget mobile phone and prepaid plan options.





Cricket will offer speeds up to 6 Mbps with a 5 GB data cap. Sprint will begin rolling out its 4G LTE network in mid to late 2012.





Subscribe to WIRED magazine for less than $1 an issue and get a FREE GIFT! Click here!

***

MEXICO CITY, Mexico (CNN) -- A killer bug is spreading like wildfire.



Armed guards stand outside the Mexico City Respiratory Hospital to control the flow of people.



Streets of one of the world's biggest cities are eerily empty. Bars and restaurants have been shuttered for days.



The president goes on TV to tell workers to stay at home for their own safety.



Those who venture outside are clad in surgical masks. Once healthy people are suddenly falling sick and dying from a new disease, H1N1 swine flu.



The government swears the situation is under control. But down at the hospital, medics scurry around behind the glass door of an isolation ward. They're clad from head to toe in biohazard suits, goggles and two pairs of gloves.



At the airport, officials set up a barrage of thermal imaging machines. If the picture flashes up red or orange, would-be passengers are whisked off to medical facilities.  See where the virus has been confirmed »



It may sound like a sci-fi movie. It's not. Welcome to Mexico City.



It's a nightmare scenario and despite twice-a-day news conferences featuring Mexican Health Minister Jose Angel Cordova, people on the streets fear the virus may be out of control and that the real death toll may be greater than anyone is letting on.  Watch how the city has been shut down »



"The measures we're taking are working and are helping us to slow the spread of the virus. But the situation continues to be serious," Cordova said at a news conference this week.



Government orders to its citizens are clear: wash frequently, don't shake hands or kiss, and stay away from crowded places.



That's easier said than done.



The doors on the subway car snap open at Hidalgo station. Dozens more passengers clad in surgical masks stream on.



It's rush hour deep below the streets of downtown Mexico City.



The subway system is the veins of the capital, ferrying millions of people from all social classes to and from work. It's hot and humid down there and there's little fresh air. It's just the kind of crowded place that Mexican authorities say could be a prime breeding ground for swine flu.



"I'm pretty nervous of this whole virus thing," welder Frontino Valdez mumbled  through one of the masks.  Watch passengers packed onto trains trying to protect themselves »



Sitting one carriage down, Berta Hernandez, a product demonstrator, tries not to show her panic and applies eyeliner like any other morning. But today she has a problem, she has no intention of lifting her mask to paint on lip gloss.



"I'm nervous of those people who aren't wearing masks. Maybe they will suddenly sneeze or cough," she said. In these days of swine flu paranoia, just coughing, or worse sneezing, in the subway, or "metro" as they call it here, brings black looks from fellow passengers.



This has been a strange epidemic since the outset. So far, the Mexican government has been unable to pinpoint where or when this outbreak started.



Authorities admit there was an outbreak of influenza in a village in the Gulf Coast state of Veracruz in early April. But only one patient -- 5-year-old Edgar Hernandez -- was diagnosed as having swine flu.  Watch Dr. Sanjay Gupta ask the boy about his symptoms »



The international media have taken to calling him "Patient Zero." He made a full recovery.



So far there's no evidence a pig farm near his home reported any problems with its livestock. The family hasn't explained how little Edgar could have infected a capital city let alone the world.



The authorities haven't drawn up a genetic map of Edgar's illness nor compared it to the lethal strain that swept through Mexico City and other parts of the country.



Lethal it is. But getting to the truth of who has really died from the virus is tough.



Since midweek, the government abandoned its initial reporting and began to speak only of confirmed

***

(CNN) -- Armenian President Robert Kocharian declared a state of emergency Saturday night after a day of clashes between police and protesters, a spokeswoman for the Armenian Foreign Ministry said.



The protesters claim last month's presidential election was rigged.



The state of emergency will "hopefully bring some order" to the capital, Yerevan, said Salpi Ghazarian, assistant to the Armenian foreign minister, who spoke to CNN early Sunday.



The state of emergency could last until March 20, she said, but the government hopes "that it will be lifted sooner."



The clashes began when authorities used force to clear Freedom Square of thousands of demonstrators who had camped there for the past 10 days, according to a U.S. Embassy official.



Ghazarian said the authorities "moved in" because "they thought that there were arms there, and it turned out that they were right."  Watch a report on clashes between police and the opposition »



The embassy official estimated that the demonstrations in Freedom Square grew to as many as 60,000 Armenians at times over the last 10 days.



As of early Sunday morning, Freedom Square was empty, Ghazarian said, but the protesters were demonstrating in a main square elsewhere in the city.  Watch Ghazarian discuss the situation in Armenia »



"What is happening on the streets of Yerevan is people protesting what they consider to be unfair elections," Ghazarian said. "After the president was forced to declare a state of emergency, things have quieted down. There are a couple of burning cars, and there are a few hurt people," she said.



"We're convinced that this will come to an end soon."



She did not elaborate on the number of people injured or the extent of their injuries.



Witnesses told CNN that Saturday morning's action by Armenian riot police was bloody, but the U.S. official said there were no confirmed deaths or serious injuries.



An Armenian woman interviewed by CNN said there was "huge chaos" when police moved in.



"These are innocent people," she said. "They just want their freedom. They just want to be heard. They are being beaten up, some people have horrible wounds." She asked that CNN not use her name because she feared for her safety.



As night fell Saturday, the sounds of gunfire could be heard from the direction of the protesters' gathering, and tracer fire could be seen in the sky, according to another Yerevan resident, who also asked not to be identified out of fear for his safety.



The man said his wife saw two demonstrators hit by a police car earlier in the day. The car initially did not stop, he said, but the protesters surrounded the car, dragged the officers out and burned the vehicle, he said. The officers were able to escape, he said, but he did not know the condition of the protesters who were struck.



The protests began soon after the February 19 presidential election. Opposition presidential candidate Levon Ter-Petrosian lost to Prime Minister Serzh Sarkisian, a political ally of outgoing President Kocharian.



The opposition party immediately accused the government of vote fraud and demanded that the results be voided.



Ghazarian said Sunday that the government had reached out to the opposition.



"We are hoping with the help of the international community, the opposition, the leader of the opposition, will come and enter a political dialogue rather than continuing this debate on the streets," she said.



Haroutiun Khachatrian, editor of the Noyan Tappan News Agency, told CNN that riot police arrested several hundred people in the square Saturday morning, including many opposition party officials. Ter-Petrosian was there but was not arrested, he said.



The opposition vowed to pursue its claims through legal means.



The Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) monitored last month's Armenian election and concluded that it was mostly in line with international standards, although it did include some criticism in its report.



The U.S. Embassy has warned the several hundred Americans living in Yerevan to stay at home and avoid the downtown area

***

(CNN) -- President Obama on Saturday urged a thorough investigation into a deadly explosion at a West Virginia coal mine that killed 29 people, hours after rescue efforts at the mine gave way to an operation to recover the dead.





"This has been America's worst mining disaster in forty years, and the toll on all West Virginians has been immeasurable, " Obama said of Monday's blast at the Upper Big Branch mine. "We cannot bring back the men we lost. What we can do, in their memory, is thoroughly investigate this tragedy and demand accountability."





Obama's statement came just hours after rescue efforts came to a grim end after crews found the bodies of the last four miners unaccounted for in the explosion. Twenty-five people were previously announced dead.





"My thoughts and prayers are with the families of all those who were lost in this tragic accident, and my gratitude goes out to the rescue teams who worked so tirelessly and heroically to search for the missing," Obama said in his statement.





The death toll makes the West Virginia mining disaster the worst in the U.S. since 1972, when 91 miners were killed in a fire at the Sunshine Mine in Kellogg, Idaho.





Of the 29 dead in the West Virginia blast, the bodies of 22 remain inside the mine.





The cause of the blast is unknown, and state and federal officials have pledged a full investigation.





The explosion has prompted renewed questions about mine safety.





Obama said Saturday that "all Americans deserve to work in a place that is safe, and we must take whatever steps are necessary to ensure that all our miners are as safe as possible so that a disaster like this doesn't happen again."





Obama will meet next week with Secretary of Labor Hilda Solis and a Mine Safety and Health Administration official to hear their initial assessment of what caused the blast, along with their recommendations for steps the federal government should take to improve mine safety.





Richmond, Virginia-based Massey Energy Co., which owns the mine, said in a statement released Friday that it will conduct "extensive" reviews of the mine accident "to ensure that a similar incident doesn't happen again."





It said the mine has had less than one violation per day in inspections by the Mine Safety and Health Administration and added that that rate is "consistent with national averages."





Most of the blast victims were working in an area where long wall cutting was taking place. The technique uses a large grinder to extract the coal and creates large amounts of coal dust and methane gas, both of which are explosive.





West Virginia Gov. Joe Manchin said Saturday that even though it's not clear what caused the explosion, there needs to be a focus on better ventilation and on sensors to alert mine personnel when gas levels become dangerous.





"There was no way to protect them against this," he said. "You just have to prevent it and make sure it doesn't happen again."

***

(CNN) -- Relief teams dug through rose gardens at the headquarters of the Bangladesh Rifles Sunday, looking for more than 70 army officers still missing -- and presumed killed -- after a deadly uprising by paramilitary forces last week.

Bangladeshi firefighters continued to uncover bodies Friday of Bangladesh Rifles officers from a mass grave.

By late Saturday night, 72 bodies had been found floating in a river or in three mass graves inside the compound of the Rifles, or BDR, in the capital city, Dhaka, the Home Ministry said.

Fifty of the dead were confirmed to be army officers, shot or stabbed to death. Another six were Rifles troops, or jawans. The rest of the bodies were too damaged for immediate identification, the ministry said.

But four days since the rebellion, grieving family members keeping vigil outside the headquarters were losing hope of seeing their loved ones alive again. Some men quietly recited verses from the Quran, Islam's holy book, or counted prayer beads. Several women howled in despair and collapsed hopelessly on the pavement.

Sympathy for the mutineers has dried up, a Bangladeshi journalist said.

"The first day of the incident, Bangladeshis were for the BDR. They thought they had legitimate concerns of army officer corruption and denial of basic necessities to them," said Ashraf Kaiser, host of the television show, "Road to Democracy."

"But from the second day, when we started getting news of missing officers and seeing pictures of one body after another being pulled out, the perception changed," he said.

One can see the shift in the media coverage of the mutiny, he said.

"What was being called Pilkhana revolt or rebellion" -- named after the area of the city where the BDR compounds are located -- "is now being dubbed the Pilkhana massacre."

Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina initially earned high marks for persuading the jawans to surrender in exchange for amnesty. But now she finds herself in a delicate balancing act: trying to appease an army that demands the killers, who stubbed out the lives of so many of its officers, be punished.

She met for hours Sunday with the army's top officials, and made several concessions.

A committee the Home Ministry set up to investigate the mutiny will be shuffled to include more members from the army's ranks.

She has also backtracked from her promise of amnesty. Killers will face trial, she said, and ordered jawans to return to their posts or report to police stations by the end of the day Sunday.

Hundreds of jawans lined up at a field outside the Pilkhana headquarters, insisting to reporters they fled the compound during the rebellion.

They kissed their loved ones as they waited, assuring wives and fathers they were innocent but asking for their prayers.

The fear of a military take-over is a pervasive one in Bangladesh. The country has experienced a series of coup since its independence in 1971, including one that killed Hasina's father -- the country's independence leader.

The current government itself came to power in December, after two years of an army-backed rule.

"Hasina has her responsibility to keep peace and tranquility and so she did what she did," said Aneeqa Khan, a student who lives not far from the BDR headquarters. "And you can't fault the army from reacting. They lost so many people."

The military did its part to allay fears of retaliation.

"I believe if exemplary punishment is meted out to the people involved directly or indirectly in the mutiny, it will help pacify the anger among our officers and soldiers," Brig. Gen. Mahmud Hossain told reporters.

The standoff started Wednesday when BDR troops rebelled against their commanders. The BDR is a paramilitary force distinct from the army, but its commanders are career army officers.

The Rifles is responsible primarily for guarding the country's borders. The force, more than 65,000-strong, also takes part in operations such as monitoring polls.

The troops staged their rebellion on the second day of BDR Week, when officers and troops from various BDR outposts along

***

(CNN) -- Three years after the killing of Mexican journalist Armando Rodriguez, his colleagues said they are more determined than ever to write about the nation's drug cartels despite the risks.





"Those who ordered the killing of Armando were wrong because those who are left are more seasoned and we are working," said Luz del Carmen Sosa, a reporter for El Diario de Juarez newspaper who took over Rodriguez's crime beat after his death. "Those who believed we were going to take step back, they were wrong."





On November 13, 2008, Rodriguez -- called "El Choco" by his colleagues because of his chocolate skin tone -- was about to take his two young daughters to school when a man approached the garage of his house and fired 11 shots into his chest. His daughters, one of whom witnessed the attack, have not spoken publicly since the incident and did not attend a memorial event for their father on Sunday. Rodriguez's wife declined an interview request from CNN.





His colleagues believe he was targeted because of his coverage of drug cartels in the border town of Ciudad Juarez.





Before his death, Rodriguez was among the first journalists to write at length about the violent shift in the city. He was a high-profile reporter for the most-read paper in the city, covering a dangerous beat. It was a job his friends believe cost him his life.





Local reporters now look at the killing as the first of many targeting journalists for their work.





Since 2000, 74 journalists have been killed in Mexico -- 14 since 2010.





On the third anniversary of his death, his newsroom colleagues gathered Sunday to pay tribute and "remember Choco ... friend, journalist, family man and a great man," the paper's editorial assistant Pedro Torres said at the public event.





His colleagues criticized the investigation into his unsolved killing, saying it is an example of the hundreds of unsolved murders throughout the city -- widely considered to be one of the most violent in the world.





Sandra Rodriguez Nieto, an El Diario reporter, said she believes that someone is "hiding those responsible" for Rodriguez's death.





It's a charge prosecutors with the Chihuahua State Attorney General's Office have denied. Early in the investigation they announced the detention of a suspect in the shooting, but never released details about who they held. The lack of information led to speculation among El Diario's newspaper staff that there was a cover up.





Making matters more complicated were attacks on the investigators working on the case.





In July 2009, a convoy carrying JosÃ© Ibarra LimÃ³n, the first federal prosecutor designated to Rodriguez's case, was riddled with bullets by unknown assailants. The following August, Pasillas Paul Fong, the secretary of the Seventh Agency who would inherit the case, was executed. Days later, a third investigator took the case, only to flee Juarez soon afterward.





"This is a situation that hurts, an unacceptable situation," Torres said.





Of the five publications in Juarez, El Diario de Juarez is the most popular paper in terms of circulation and has made a reputation for aggressively covering drug violence.





In September 2010, two of the paper's photographers were attacked -- one was killed. A clear motive was never established, but investigators at the time did note the car carrying the two young journalists was registered to the son of the inspector of the State Human Rights Commission, Gustavo de la Rosa Hickerson. Some believe the journalists were not the intended targets of the attack.





On the same day friends and family buried the slain photographer, the newspaper published an open letter to the drug cartels operating in Juarez. The letter, written by the editorial staff, pleaded for an end to violence against journalists.





No newspaper in Juarez had ever published an editorial directly addressed to the cartels; and no other paper has done so since.





"You are, at present, the de facto authorities in this city," the letter said, "because the legal institutions have not been able to keep our colleagues from dying."





In the

***

Jerusalem (CNN) -- Israel early Sunday released the names of the first group of Palestinian prisoners to be freed in exchange for captured Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit, setting in motion a process that will allow the public to file objections to specific releases.





The list features 477 names, including those of Ahlam Tamimi, serving life terms for being an accomplice in a suicide bombing at a Jerusalem restaurant, and Amneh Muna, who plotted the killing of a 16-year-old Israeli boy in 2001 and received a life sentence.





Israel approved the deal Tuesday night, agreeing to release in two stages 1,027 Palestinians prisoners, including hundreds serving life sentences for attacks on Israelis. The first swap is expected to take place early this week.





Twenty-seven of the prisoners are women. The second stage, which includes 550 prisoners, will occur later this year.





A spokesperson for Israeli President Shimon Peres said Saturday that the pardoning process formally commenced after a Justice Ministry official submitted the requisite paperwork.





Peres will allocate 48 hours to complete the procedure in order to allow public objections and petitions against the pardons.





Read the list (PDF)





The president is expected to voice his discomfort with the release of convicted murderers, but is unlikely to reject any of the pardon requests, spokeswoman Ayelet Frish told CNN. Any changes to the list negotiated with Hamas could potentially endanger the entire deal, she said.





The most notable name not in the list is jailed Palestinian lawmaker Marwan Barghouti, who is serving five life sentences. He was convicted in an Israeli court on murder and other charges related to his role in planning attacks on Israelis during the second Intifada.





Shalit has been a recurring topic in the country's national dialogue. Militants captured him in June 2006 after tunneling into the Jewish state and attacking an Israeli army outpost. Israel immediately launched a military incursion into Gaza to rescue Shalit, then 19, but failed to free him. Since then, he has been held incommunicado by Hamas, which controls Gaza.





Shalit's family has continuously petitioned Israeli government officials to broker a deal that would secure his release.





"Everyone wants to see Gilad Shalit safe and well and back home but I think there is a real failure to understand the price that is being paid, and the price is phenomenal," said Arnold Roth, who lost his daughter Malki in the Jerusalem suicide bombing in 2001. "We are releasing people who have dedicated their lives to killing Jews and Israelis."





Roth opposes the announced release of Tamimi, who was sentenced to multiple life sentences for her involvement in the August 2001 bombing of a Sbarro pizza restaurant in 2001, in which 16 people were killed.





Israeli radio reported Saturday that 182 files for pardons were submitted to the president for prisoners convicted in Israeli criminal courts. Remaining pardon requests will be handled by the Israeli Defense Forces officials.





On Friday, the terror victims association Almagor petitioned the Supreme Court to suspend the release until the deal is thoroughly examined.





More petitions against the deal are expected to be submitted Sunday by families of victims directly affected by the prisoners on the list.





The Ministry of Justice announced it will operate an information center "where information regarding prisoners on the list can be obtained."





Of the male prisoners on the list, 275 will return to their homes in Gaza. Most of the rest will be sent to the West Bank or East Jerusalem. Five prisoners who are Israeli citizens can return to their homes, and 39 are to be sent abroad.

***

(CNN) -- English football star Steven Gerrard has admitted punching a man in a bar, but the Liverpool captain insisted in his court testimony that it was in self-defense.



England international Steven Gerrard is in court defending his actions after a bar brawl late last year.



The 29-year-old is facing a charge of affray after an incident in the early hours of December 29, when he attacked businessman Marcus McGee following a dispute about the music that was being played.



If found guilty, Gerrard faces a maximum penalty of six months in jail and a fine of $7,200.



Gerrard, who denies the charge, told a judge on Thursday that he was sorry about his actions in Southport's Lounge Inn, but at the time he thought McGee was going to attack him.



They had been involved in an argument after Gerrard tried to change the music on the bar's sound system, but McGee would not let him, the UK Press Association reported.



"I thought he was going to hit me," Gerrard said. "He was on his way forward to me and his behavior had changed from when I was having a discussion with him. I didn't know why."



Gerrard said he was unaware that his friend John Doran had already punched McGee when he himself started to hit the 34-year-old.



"I am certainly mistaken in thinking he was coming towards me to throw punches at me," the midfielder said.



"Now I know, obviously, he had been struck, reacted and thought the strike was by me and he came into me and that's when I reacted. I am sorry about the whole incident.



"I grabbed the back of his jumper as he moved forward to me. When I had hold of Marcus, I remember swinging my right hand two or three times.



"I was trying to stop still and I felt I had arms all over me. I could see a melee around Marcus McGee. When I was getting pulled away I realized people were patting me, some of whom were my friends.



"I wanted to help control the situation. I was worried the fight I had with Marcus was going to get worse because people were going past me in that direction."



Gerrard said that his friends had earlier told him to "forget" the argument, but he felt he needed to confront McGee.



"I couldn't understand why the guy had such a problem with me, why he was so aggressive," he said. "I was also concerned that if I did leave it I would not have been able to enjoy my night, he may have come over to me.



"I wanted to see why he had such a problem with it, why a total stranger had such a problem with me putting my favorite songs on. I asked why I couldn't have an input in the music and tried to explain that I had permission from the manageress."



"I asked Marcus what was the problem with the music machine and why he treated me like that. Very quickly he came off the bar stool and was in my face right by me."



Gerrard had been celebrating after scoring two goals as Liverpool thrashed Newcastle 5-1 to remain top of the Premier League, and admitted that he had been drinking alcohol.



"I certainly knew I had had a drink. I was certainly in control of how I felt in my surroundings," he said.



The father of two said he had not been in trouble with the police since the age of 19, when he was banned from driving for nine months for drink-driving.

***

(CNN)  -- Glitzy Dubai lures globetrotters with its modern architectural wonders and a bounty of luxury shopping, dining and lodging.





This United Arab Emirates metropolis boasts "sunshine, shopping, seaside, sports and safety" as key selling points on its tourism website.





Caroline Faraj is CNN's chief operations director in Dubai and editor of CNN Arabic. Faraj, originally from Jordan, moved to Dubai in December 2001.





We asked Faraj to share her tips for visiting this dynamic city:





Where can you get the best view of the city?





At Burj Khalifa, which is the tallest building in the world. The tower's observation deck, At The Top, is located on level 124.





To which restaurant would you take your loved one for an anniversary or other special occasion?





Try Pierchic at Madinat Jumeirah Hotel. This romantic restaurant is at the end of a pier that stretches over the waters of the Persian Gulf. Time Out Dubai named Pierchic as the best seafood restaurant in 2010.





Where is the best place to people watch?





The Dancing Fountain at Burj Khalifa. On a lake outside, choreographed water shows are put on multiple times each evening.





What is your favorite neighborhood?





Zabeel Park, where you can run, walk, play games, barbecue, rent a boat on a small lake or visit the space and science museum. This park stretches over about 117 acres in central Dubai.





What's the best way to blend in?





Visit one of the souks (markets), like the gold market, or spice, textile or fish souks.





What's the biggest misconception about your city?





Some come to Dubai with a misconception that you can do whatever you want in Dubai. To a certain extent that might be true, but there are restrictions, rules and the need to respect the culture of the country.





For example, with regards to consuming alcohol, only Christian ex-pats can apply for a license to buy alcohol from special shops, but visitors can find it in hotels, too.





Where do you go to relax?





I go to a spa, and the best one is at the Park Hyatt. The hotel's Amara spa is on the banks of the Dubai Creek.





I also go sometimes to a resort to enjoy the beach.





What essential thing should visitors see/experience if they only have a few hours?





Take a creek tour in an abra, a small crossing boat. And if there is time, take the bus tour that gives you a quick briefing on the architecture and souks as well as the desert safari trip in the middle of the dunes.





Where's your favorite place to spend a night out on the town?





Trader Vic's with its Cuban live music.





Are there local specialty dishes or drinks that visitors must try?





If you like seafood, then I would recommend trying fish cooked the traditional way, which is either salt cured (called maleh), sun-dried (Al kaseef) or ground dried fish (sahnah).





What is a good local souvenir?





The United Arab Emirates is a federation of seven emirates, so I would suggest the bottles that have sands in seven colors coming from the seven emirates.

***

New York (CNN) -- A mix of protesters gathered again Friday in cities across the country, decrying a loosely defined list of financial problems and mixing in places with others marking the 10-year anniversary of the U.S.-led invasion of Afghanistan.





Demonstrators in New York and Washington appeared to congregate over both the Afghan conflict, arguably America's longest war, and in protest against the widening disparities between rich and poor and corporate greed, among other grievances.





New York Police Commissioner Ray Kelly said an investigation is under way after protesters claimed officers used excessive force when corralling demonstrators earlier this week.





He also noted that demonstrations had cost tax payers $1.9 million in overtime costs for the city's law enforcement.





CNN affiliate stations also broadcast images of crowds that gathered in Austin, Texas, as well as Minneapolis, Minnesota; Seattle, Washington and Atlanta, Georgia.





The activity came a day after President Barack Obama discussed the growing movement, saying demonstrators "are giving voice to a more broad-based frustration about how our financial system works."





Speaking at a White House news conference, Obama also defended the country's financial sector, which has taken the brunt of protesters' criticism, focusing on Wall Street and its regulators' purported role in expanding economic disparities.





"We have to have a strong, effective financial sector in order for us to grow," the president said.





Still, Obama discussed a need to pursue action aimed at improving government oversight and blamed Republican lawmakers for obstructing financial reforms.





Friday marked the 21st day of the grass-roots Wall Street protests.





Demonstrations have erupted in more than a dozen cities throughout the week, ranging from thousands who marched in lower Manhattan Wednesday after receiving support from local unions, to the dozens of college students who staged walkouts at various college campuses.





Open Story: See iReports from the protests.





The movement started in New York and some of the protests there have been marred by scuffles with police.





New York authorities set up at least one vehicle checkpoint as police appeared in larger numbers throughout the financial district Thursday and established a perimeter around Zuccotti Park, which is considered a rallying point for the largely leaderless movement in that city.





"We hope that our message continues to resonate with everyone who has felt disenfranchised by the current state of our country," said Tyler Combelic, a spokesman for the Occupy Wall Street group.





He said they plan to "continue the protest until the message reaches every house in the United States."





The specifics of that message remains largely unclear.





CNN's Susan Candiotti, Carey Bodenheimer, Ross Levitt and Jason Kessler contributed to this report.

***

HARARE, Zimbabwe (CNN) -- Zimbabwe's central bank introduced a $10 billion note worth less than 20 U.S. dollars, as the once-prosperous southern African nation battles against spiraling hyperinflation.

Zimbabwe President Robert Mugabe at Zanu-PF National Political Commissar Elliot Manyika's burial last week

The new note, expected to buy just 20 loaves of bread, comes just a week after Zimbabwe issued a $500 million note to ease a cash shortage.

Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe Governor Gideon Gono said the $10 billion note was being introduced for the "convenience of the public ahead of the festive season."

On Thursday, the U.S. dollar traded for about 600 million Zimbabwe dollars, and the hyperinflation was expected to continue.

People slept overnight at the bank doors, hoping to get money for the next day.

President Robert Mugabe apologized to his ZANU-PF party supporters Thursday for the problems Zimbabweans were facing but insisted his nation has turned a corner in its fight against its worst humanitarian crisis, the state-owned Herald newspaper reported.

Shortages of most essentials such as electricity, fuel, medicine and food have become a common feature in Zimbabwe, forcing people to flee the country.

Zimbabwe has slashed zeros from the amount of its worthless currency during the past two years -- the latest being 10 zeros in August.

Once one of Africa's most promising economies, Zimbabwe is reeling under its worst humanitarian and economic crisis. A cholera outbreak has killed more than 1,000 Zimbabweans since August, forcing hundreds to cross the border into South Africa and Botswana to seek treatment.

Five million people are in need of food aid in a nation that once exported food to its neighbors, the United Nations says.

But Mugabe -- blamed for the crisis by his critics -- said the worst was over.

He said he was optimistic about resuscitating the power-sharing deal he signed with opposition leader Morgan Tsvangirai in September, the Herald reported.

"We will be inviting the two leaders -- Mr. Morgan Tsvangirai and Professor Arthur Mutambara -- to come and discuss the way forward," Mugabe said.

The deal has yet to take effect, as Tsvangirai blamed Mugabe for grabbing all key ministries such as home affairs, local government, finance, home affairs, information and defense.

Mugabe said Western nations and neighboring Botswana were against the formation of an inclusive government in Zimbabwe.

"I was reading recent utterances by Condoleezza Rice that African leaders are not prepared to topple President Mugabe and bring about regime change," he said. "She condemned this inability on the part of African leaders. How could African leaders ever topple Robert Mugabe, organize an army to come? It is not easy. I do not know of any African country that is brave enough to do that.

"Botswana is making some stupid noises. They are just hollow noises to assure the MDC that the Botswana government supports it and also in response to Britain and America that Botswana is a good mouthpiece of the white men." The MDC is Tsvangirai's opposition party -- Movement for Democratic Change.

On cholera, Mugabe said the country was failing to import adequate water treating chemicals because of the sanctions imposed by the west.

***

CHATTANOOGA, Tennessee (CNN) -- An annual family fishing trip to the Florida keys took a bloody and life-changing turn for Jordan Thomas.



Noah Parton, 6, got prosthetics from foundation started by Jordan Thomas, right.



"It was a beautiful day and we were going to go out spear fishing that night," said Thomas, who was 16 during the 2005 trip.



But when he jumped into the water, the boat's wake dragged Thomas hard into its sharp, whirling propellers.



He immediately knew what was about to happen.



"I looked down -- my black fins were gone and all I saw was red just everywhere," said Thomas, an athletic teen who was captain of his high school's golf team. "But I had this unbelievable calmness over my body."  Watch video of Thomas telling his story »



His father and mother, both doctors from Chattanooga, Tennessee, jumped into action.



"All of a sudden, my 16-year old, happy-go-lucky captain of the golf team was potentially dying," said Dr. Liz Kennedy-Thomas.



She worked to stanch the blood flow from her son's legs while his father rushed the boat to shore and fetched paramedics.



Thomas was rushed to a hospital where he spent the next two weeks -- undergoing several surgeries on what was left of his legs and, along the way, discovering what would become his life's work.



While there, Thomas visited other amputees.



"I just remember seeing so many kids who didn't have parents, didn't have health care," he said. "I just knew that the future was grim for them."



The top-of-the-line prosthetics Thomas was fitted with -- the ones that helped him return to the golf links -- cost about $22,000. He learned that many insurance plans only cover about $5,000.



That's especially tough on child amputees, who will outgrow several limbs before adulthood.



"I had no clue," he said. "It's one of those things, unless you're affected by it, you just don't know."



Thomas knew he was lucky. With a financially stable family, he'll always be able to afford good legs. He asked his family to give a donation to help others, but ultimately they decided to launch a fundraising foundation together.



"By the time we got home, we had bracelets -- all kinds of stuff," Kennedy-Thomas said. "The foundation was just sort of started by the time we got home."



The Jordan Thomas Foundation has raised $350,000 through bracelets, charity golf tournaments and cookouts. Some of that is paying for prosthetics for three children until they reach age 18.



One of them is Noah Parton.



The precocious 6-year-old born with a congenital heart defect had a complication with a tube inserted in his right leg, leading to an amputation above his knee.



His family's insurance would only pay for what's called a "stubby" -- a wooden artificial leg without a bendable knee.



"His first bendable knee ... didn't have a certain number or something that would apply and they refused to pay for it," said Noah's mother, Nancy Parton, who lives with her son about an hour north of Chattanooga, in Evensville, Tennessee.



Noah couldn't run and play with other children. And even day-to-day activities were tough.



"It was hard to put him in the car because his leg stuck out straight and I'd have my seat up as far as it would go and it would still hit the back of the seat," she said.



Thomas's foundation stepped in, buying Noah several knee devices -- a new one for each new leg he needs as he grows.



Now, his mom said, Noah is unstoppable.



"He loves to climb stairs now; he tries to ride bicycles," she said. "You name it, he does it.



"Take him to the park