SAN DIEGO, California (CNN) -- You must know what's really driving the immigration debate. It's the culture, stupid.

Ruben Navarrette Jr.: Some opponents of immigration, even the legal kind, fear changes in local culture.

Immigration restrictionists -- and by that, I mean those who want to limit all immigration, even the legal kind -- like to pretend they're so high-minded. Yet they can't help themselves. They always take the low road and harken back to the nativism that greeted earlier waves of immigrants.

The restrictionists insist that what bothers them are merely practical concerns: that our borders aren't secure, that so many immigrants are coming into the country illegally, and that the new arrivals are burdening schools and draining social services once they get here.

Really? If that's the extent of it, then why does the conversation quickly turn to the impact -- both real and perceived -- that immigrants have on American culture through everything from taco trucks to Spanish-language billboards.

That seems to be the issue in North Dakota, where, according to a recent article in USA Today, towns facing tough economic times are nonetheless resisting a cultural transfusion that could save them. In Cooperstown, the locals opposed efforts to bring in a hog plant and a dairy, because those kind of dirty and hard jobs are likely to attract ... guess who? American kids who work at Starbucks? Nope.

The article quotes Orville Tranby, a local community leader in Cooperstown, who says that some residents have told him "face to face" that such facilities might attract Hispanic immigrants who could change the local culture.

You'll find the same fear in Lewisburg, Tennessee. Not long ago, an employee at a local library came up with the radical idea of a bilingual story time where children could hear tales read to them in Spanish. Townspeople wanted no part of that. They demanded that all books purchased by the library, or even donated, be in English-only.

These stories are ridiculous, but they're also helpful. They illustrate what some people are really concerned about with immigration, and it goes well beyond words like "legal" or "illegal."

It's the perception that the country is becoming more Hispanic, that Spanish is replacing English, that Hispanic immigrants are weakening American identity, and that Main Street is turning into Little Mexico. A leader of the vigilante Minuteman movement moronically called it the "colonization" of the United States.

This sort of rhetoric is all about fear -- that those who thrive in the dominant culture are losing their primacy, that the mainstream is being polluted by foreigners, and that our children are going to live in a world where they're going to have to work a lot harder to keep up.

It conjures up the alarm bells that Benjamin Franklin set off about German immigrants in the late 18th century, who he insisted could never adopt the culture of the English, but would "swarm into our Settlements, and by herding together establish their Language and Manners to the Exclusion of ours." It popped up in the mid-19th century amid worries that Chinese immigrants were "unassimilable," which led to Congress approving the explicitly-named Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882. And it helped welcome the 20th century when Massachusetts Sen. Henry Cabot Lodge warned that immigrants (read: the Irish) were diluting "the quality of (U.S.) citizenship" and others complained that Italian immigrants were uneducated, low skilled, apt to send all their money to their home country and prone to criminal activity.

Where have we heard that before? And when will we hear it again? After all, Hispanics may be the latest group to find themselves in a culture war with nativists. But they won't be the last.

Ruben Navarrette Jr. is a member of the editorial board of the San Diego Union-Tribune and a nationally syndicated columnist. You can read his column here.

The opinions expressed in this commentary are solely those of the writer. E-mail to a friend

***

LONDON, England -- Milan goalkeeper Dida has been cleared to play in next month's Champions League match at Shakhtar Donetsk after partially winning his appeal to UEFA against a two-match ban.

Dida has had one game of his two-match ban suspended for a year following an appeal to UEFA.

Brazilian Dida was also fined 60,000 Swiss francs by European football's ruling body following an incident involving a supporter during the Champions clash against Celtic in Scotland on October 3.

The 34-year-old Brazilian was initially banned for two games for his theatrics following a Celtic fan's encroachment onto the pitch during the 2-1 defeat at Celtic Park.

"Following Monday's appeals hearing, Dida is suspended for two matches, but one of the matches will now be deferred for a probationary period of one year," said a stement on UEFA's Web site.

Dida sits out the home tie against Shakhtar on Wednesday after an inquiry based on Article 5, paragraph 1 of the UEFA disciplinary regulations (Principles of conduct), under which "member associations, clubs, as well as their players, officials and members, shall conduct themselves according to the principles of loyalty, integrity and sportsmanship".

However, Dida will only serve the second match of his ban if he commits a similar offense -- a theatrical over-reaction --during the next 12 months, freeing him for the trip to Ukraine.

UEFA said that their Appeals Body "took note that Dida expressed his sincere regrets as regards his conduct during the match."

AC Milan vice-president Adriano Galliani was satisfied with UEFA's decision. "I believe it is fair -- I was against the two-game suspension but one seems OK.

"Dida has made a mistake but his error did not hinder anyone, not Celtic, nor any player," said Galliani.  E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- The ever-changing cast of "Saturday Night Live" is getting two new faces, but losing a couple of current members.



Michaela Watkins was known for her impressions of Barbara Walters and "Today" show co-host Hoda Kotb.



Michaela Watkins and Casey Wilson have been dropped from the show, while Jenny Slate and Nasim Pedrad are joining the cast, Entertainment Weekly reports.



Watkins -- who joined "SNL" mid-season last year and was known for her hilarious impersonations of Barbara Walters and Kathie Lee Gifford's suffering "Today" show co-host Hoda Kotb -- said she was shocked by the firing.



In an interview with EW, she recalled getting the news from Lorne Michaels, the creator and executive producer of "Saturday Night Live."



"I don't think anyone knows what Lorne Michaels was thinking," Watkins told the magazine.



"The only explanation I got from him -- and he's not known to say things just to make people feel better -- was that he felt deep down that I should have my own show. And I agreed. 'SNL' was a dream come true for me. It was a fantastic year. I don't have any regrets."



Watkins told EW she thinks the new hires will be "exquisite" on the show and said she would take Michaels' advice to pursue her own show.



Meanwhile, "SNL" veteran Darrell Hammond is still negotiating for a return to the show, Variety reports.



"Saturday Night Live" kicks off its 35th season on September 26.

***

(CNN) -- Australian authorities have declared several coastal areas near Brisbane disaster zones after a massive oil spill earlier this week, according to the Queensland government.



Large stretches of Queensland's coastline are being affected by the oil.



"This is a very serious situation," Queensland Premier Anna Bligh said, according to a news release on Friday. "It appears the volume of oil involved is much greater than originally reported by the Pacific Adventurer. And the effect of the oil spill is more widespread."



The Pacific Adventurer sustained damage early Wednesday when Cyclone Hamish struck the waters of eastern Australia with more than 125 kph (77 mph) winds. The cargo ship lost 30 of its 50 containers of ammonium nitrate about 13 kilometers (8 miles) off the coast of Cape Moreton. Those containers are still missing.



The damaged ship also spilled a large amount of oil that is covering at least 60 kilometers (37 miles) of beach in and around Brisbane, according to Australian Broadcasting Corporation (ABC).  Watch sludge washing up on shorelines »



The ship's owner, Swire Shipping, initially said no more than 42,000 liters (11,100 U.S. gallons) of oil escaped from the ship, but now says that "substantially more oil was spilled," ABC reported Friday.



The ship is currently in the custody of Australia's Maritime Safety Authority in Brisbane, as the investigation into the spill continues.



A massive clean-up effort is also under way. So far, 13 oil-covered birds have been recovered, according to the Queensland government.

***

Los Angeles, California (CNN) -- Actor Dennis Hopper died at his home in Venice, California, Saturday morning, his wife said. He was 74.





Hopper, who was diagnosed with prostate cancer in October 2009, was surrounded by his children when he died, Victoria Hopper told CNN.





While funeral arrangements have not been decided, Hopper's wish was to be buried in Taos, New Mexico, his wife said. She said Taos was "his heart home."





Hopper and his wife were involved in a highly public and bitter divorce fight in the last months of his life.





The actor made his last public appearance on March 26, when his star was dedicated on Hollywood's Walk of Fame.





"I just want to thank you," Hopper said, as he smiled broadly."That's all I can do."





With his 6-year-old daughter, Galen, by his side, Hopper waved and bowed to hundreds of fans lining a barricade along Hollywood Boulevard.





Hopper's lawyer argued in the divorce case that his estranged wife's presence was hampering his fight with cancer, but the judge allowed her to continue living in the family's Venice compound with their 6-year-old daughter, Galen.





His lawyer said Hopper was too ill to attend a divorce hearing, but his older children, an 18-year-old son and two adult daughters, sat in a back row of the courtroom.





iReport: Hopper became honorary mayor in 2009





Hopper's acting career has spanned almost six decades. In the 1950s, he had roles in several TV shows and films, including "Rebel Without a Cause" (1955) and "Giant" (1956). He became a Hollywood sensation for "Easy Rider," the 1969 film he directed and co-wrote in which he played a dissolute, counter cultural biker. He was twice nominated for Oscars.

***

(CNN) -- World No. 2 Caroline Wozniacki hopes to be fit for this year's second grand slam tournament, the French Open, despite suffering an ankle injury in an American event.





The Dane had to retire hurt during her semifinal match against Russian seventh seed Vera Zvonareva in Charleston, South Carolina, on Saturday while trailing 5-2 in the first set.





The top seed slipped on the green clay in the sixth game and rolled her ankle, meaning Zvonareva went through to Sunday's final where she will face Australian Samantha Stosur.





Wozniacki, who won the WTA Tour tournament in Ponte Vedra Beach last weekend, told reporters that she hoped to be able to play at Roland Garros when play begins on May 24.





"I certainly hope so. As it looks right now, it's not too bad," said the 19-year-old, who will have a scan on the injury.





"I was surprised that I could stand on my leg, which was very positive, actually. "But as soon as I was moving to the sides, it was impossible, so I couldn't play."





Fourth seed Stosur reached the final of the Family Circle Cup with a 6-3 7-6 (7-2) victory against No. 8 Daniela Hantuchova of Slovakia.





Meanwhile, top seed Francesca Schiavone won the Barcelona Ladies' Open after thrashing fellow Italian Roberta Vinci 6-1 6-1 in just under an hour in Saturday's final.

***

MEXICO CITY, Mexico (CNN)  -- Eight people were killed and 101 were wounded in two explosions during a celebration of Mexico's independence day Monday night, a Mexican official said Tuesday.



Wounded people get help after blasts Monday night during an independence day event in Morelia, Mexico.



Two people remained in grave condition, said Roman Armando Luna Escalante, secretary of health in Michoacan state. Eleven of the wounded were children, Luna Escalante said. None of them are gravely injured.



The explosions occurred around 11 p.m. near the governor's residence in Morelia, the capital of Michoacan. The second blast happened shortly afterward a few blocks away.



Officials would not say if they have any suspects or if any group has claimed responsibility.



Some experts pointed to drug cartels or insurgents.



"It could be a warning to the federal government, which has put a lot of money and manpower to deal with drugs, which are very powerful there," said Peter Hakim, president of the Inter-American Dialogue, a Washington-based think tank on Western Hemisphere affairs. "It could be leftist guerrilla groups that occasionally throw a bomb.



"The problem is that this is part of a real wave of violence that is consuming Mexico."



Last week the bodies of 24 people, bound and shot execution-style, were found in Atlapulco, a town just south of Mexico City.



Those killings Friday came roughly two weeks after tens of thousands of Mexicans marched on the nation's capital, calling for greater government action against the wave of violent crime.



Non-governmental groups estimate there have been more than 1,500 killings in Mexico this year linked to organized crime.



In late August, Mexican President Felipe Calderon met with the country's 32 governors to develop a plan to battle the rise in violent crime.



Calderon, who was born in Morelia, condemned the attacks and said federal officials will redouble efforts to help state authorities investigate.



More than 1,500 soldiers and federal police were maintaining order Tuesday, which marks the 198th anniversary of what Mexicans regard as their independence day.



Festivities typically start the night before because on September 16, 1810, shortly before dawn, a priest in a village in the state of Guanajuato rang a church bell and called on Mexicans to fight for independence from Spain.



The celebration in Morelia on Monday night was one of hundreds nationwide to celebrate that call for independence, which Mexico formally achieved in 1821.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Republicans reacted with surprise and recrimination Sunday to blistering criticism of the Iraq war from former coalition commander retired Lt. Gen. Ricardo Sanchez.

Lawmakers lashed back at retired Gen. Ricardo Sanchez on Sunday after he criticized the war effort.

On Friday, Sanchez, who was coalition commander in 2003 and 2004, called the Iraq war "a nightmare with no end in sight." He said the Bush administration, the State Department and Congress all share blame.

Speaking with military reporters in Virginia, Sanchez also said such dereliction of duty by a military officer would mean immediate dismissal or court martial, but the politicians have not been held accountable.

"I'm astounded, really," South Carolina Republican Sen. Lindsey Graham on CNN's "Late Edition" with Wolf Blitzer on Sunday.

Graham, who recently returned from Baghdad, said he and GOP presidential candidate Sen. John McCain had visited Sanchez several times in 2003 and 2004.

"Every time we talked to Gen. Sanchez, we got pushback -- we have enough troops; Guard and reserves aren't being strained," Graham said.

He added that Sanchez's own record in Iraq is blemished: Abu Ghraib "got out of control under his watch. The war in general got out of control under his watch."

But Graham said that "finally," with the commitment of nearly 30,000 additional U.S. troops since January, "We are getting it right."

Sanchez told reporters that American political leaders have cost American lives on the battlefield with their "lust for power."

Sanchez said it had been his duty to obey orders and not object publicly while on active duty, but that he has an obligation to speak out now that he has retired.

"While the politicians espouse a rhetoric designed to preserve their reputations and their political power, our soldiers die," he said.

That brought a tart response from McCain, the ranking Republican on the Senate Armed Services Committee.

"I wish that he had given us the benefit of that knowledge at the time," McCain told CBS's "Face the Nation." He said Sanchez should have spoken out at the time -- or resigned -- but "unfortunately, that doesn't happen very often."

One of the reasons few speak out, he said, is evidenced by what happened to former Army Chief of Staff Gen. Eric Shinseki, McCain said. Shinseki was sidelined after telling Congress that hundreds of thousands of troops would be needed to occupy Iraq.

Sen. Mitch McConnell, a Republican from Kentucky, told ABC's "This Week" that Sanchez is simply wrong. "My definition of winning is a stable country and an ally in the war on terror," he said. "I think we're making significant progress toward that end."

But, he added, "I think the central government in Iraq has been an embarrassment. They've not been able to produce any of the kind of political compromises that we had hoped for."

Graham said he hopes the government of Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki will "step up to the plate and do something meaningful by the end of the year."

If that does not happen, he said, "it will be incumbent upon us, as a nation, to devise a new political strategy to find a way forward or create a stable Iraq."

That brought a blistering response from Zbigniew Brzezinski, national security adviser under President Carter.

"What is this? This is a colony," he said. "That's the heart and essence of the difficulties we encounter."

Even those Iraqis who were happy to see Saddam Hussein toppled from power more than four years ago are not happy with the continuing U.S. presence, Brzezinski said.

Though some countries are willing to go along with the United States, "No one in the world really supports our policy in Iraq," he said.

In his Friday speech, Sanchez added that the "surge" of U.S. troops into Iraq represents "a desperate attempt by the administration that has not accepted the political and

***

(CNN) -- Paul Goydos pulled ahead of overnight co-leader Justin Leonard to move into a three-stroke lead at the halfway point of the Valero Texas Open.



Goydos posted six birdies to hold a three-stroke lead after 36 holes of the Texas Open.



The American had begun the day tied on seven-under-par with former Open champion Leonard, a Texas native, who started early at the par-70, 6,896-yard Resort Course at La Cantera and followed his first-round 63 with a two-under 68 to move to nine-under.



Goydos set off in pursuit later in the day and got off to a bad start with a bogey on his first hole at the par-four 10th.



But it was to be the only blemish on his card as the 2008 Players Championship runner-up knocked off six birdies for a five-under 65 to get to 12- under-par.



"Another good day," Goydos told reporters afterwards. "Really only had one mediocre shot all day, and that was on the first hole. I made bogey, and after that I played reasonably well."



Mathias Gronberg led a Swedish charge in San Antonio, opening the day on four-under and going one better with a second-round 65 to take a share of the clubhouse lead with Leonard on nine-under.



American Ted Purdy improved by three strokes with a 67 while his compatriots John Mallinger, with a 64, and Scott Sterling, who posted a 63, made it a five-way tie overnight for second place.

***

(CNN) -- A pair of earthquakes with magnitudes of at least 5.0 struck within 90 minutes of each other near Christchurch, New Zealand, on Monday, the U.S. Geological Survey reported, reviving vivid memories of a deadly quake that killed more than 180 people in February.





"Everyone is on edge here anyway," said Rhys Taylor, who said he could hear sirens and see helicopters flying over Christchurch. "Obviously, power's out -- sort of all over the city at the moment -- and phone lines are down."





Police evacuated sections of the city's central business district after reports of a possible gas leak, police said. Several bridges in the city were closed as a precaution.





"It was quite an exciting ride," Christchurch Police Acting Inspector Murray Hurst told CNN after the first quake, adding that there was some damage caused by the quake and a few injuries that were not life-threatening.





The first quake -- a magnitude 5.2 -- was centered 9 kilometers (5 miles) east-southeast of Christchurch at a depth of 11 kilometers (6.8 miles), according to USGS. The quake took place at 1 p.m. Monday.





A second quake -- a more powerful 6.0 tremor -- struck at 2:20 p.m., roughly 13 kilometers (8 miles) north-northeast of the city at a depth of 9 kilometers (5.6 miles).





And at least one smaller quake followed. A magnitude 4.6 quake struck at 2:40 p.m. about 11 kilometers (6 miles) east of Christchurch and at a depth of 12.5 kilometers (7.8 miles), according to the USGS.





The quakes came nearly four months after a 6.3-magnitude temblor struck the same area, killing more than 180 people.





CNN's Jack Maddox and Anisha Bhandari contributed to this report.

***

(CNN)  -- A motorized parachute crashed into a crowd at a Labor Day festival in Hooper, Utah, injuring at least six people, including children, authorities said.



Spectators scatter as a motorized parachute plummets Monday in Hooper, Utah.



The parachute was operated by a man and his son who were on the aircraft, but neither was injured when it dropped to the ground amid spectators.



Scores of people had gathered Monday for what was to have been a candy drop from the motorized parachute, according to Lt. Lonnie Eskelson of the Weber County, Utah, Sheriff's Department. Video from the incident showed the small craft in the air, approaching the crowd, when it quickly lost altitude and came down as spectators ran for safety.



Spectator Damon Martin said the crowd was waiting for the scheduled candy drop when the wind picked up.  Watch vehicle slam into crowd »



The motorized parachute "gets just over the field, they start dropping the candy and all of a sudden he starts to descend real quick. He guns it to get it back up and goes straight down into the crowd," said Martin, who shot video of the incident.



The crowd parted "like the Red Sea, but they just couldn't move fast enough," he said.



Six people were taken to area hospitals, including two sisters, 4 and 5 years old, authorities said.



The 5-year-old was being treated Monday night at Primary Children's Medical Center in Salt Lake City, Utah, for a leg fracture, Eskelson said, while her sister was treated and released. A 3-year-old also was being treated at the center Monday night.



The other injured spectators were treated and released, Eskelson said.



CNN's Amanda O'Donnell contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- A voluntary recall has been issued for more than 40 over-the-counter drugs for children, including Tylenol and Motrin, because they don't meet quality standards.





"This recall is not being undertaken on the basis of adverse medical events," McNeil Consumer Healthcare said in a statement Friday. "However, as a precautionary measure, parents and caregivers should not administer these products to their children."





FDA commissioner Margaret Hamburg gave a similar recommendation in a statement Saturday, saying, "we want to be certain that consumers discontinue using these products," though she called the chance for serious health problems "remote."





"Some products in the recall may have a higher concentration of active ingredient than specified while others may have inactive ingredients that don't meet testing requirements, the company said.





The company said it issued the recall after consulting with the Food and Drug Administration. The affected brands include: Tylenol Infants' Drops, Children's Tylenol Suspensions, Children's Tylenol Plus Suspensions, Motrin Infant Drops, Children's Motrin Suspensions, Children's Zyrtec Liquids in Bottles and Children's Benadryl Allergy Liquids in Bottles.





The drugs were made in the United States and distributed to Canada, the Dominican Republic, Dubai, Fiji, Guam, Guatemala, Jamaica, Puerto Rico, Panama, Trinidad & Tobago and Kuwait.





"There are a number of other products on the market, including generic versions of the recalled products, which are intended for use in infants and children and are not affected by the recall," the FDA said Saturday in issuing guidance to parents.





More details are available by calling 1-888-222-6036 or visiting McNeil's website.

***

Baghdad, Iraq (CNN) -- Iraq has ordered former employees of the private military contractor once known as Blackwater to leave the country, its interior minister announced Wednesday.





Contractors who once worked for Blackwater, now known as Xe, have seven days to leave Iraq, Interior Minister Jawad al-Bolani told the state television network al-Iraqiya. The move follows a January declaration by Iraq's government that former Blackwater employees were no longer welcome in the country.





Blackwater became the target of widespread Iraqi outrage after its contractors were involved in the September 2007 shooting in Baghdad's Nisoor Square that left 17 civilians dead. That outrage was renewed in December, when a U.S. judge dismissed manslaughter charges against five guards involved in the shootings on constitutional grounds.





The company's last contracts in Iraq have been transferred to other companies. But Iraqi authorities say about 250 former Blackwater employees remain behind, some working for other security firms.





"I don't think the Iraqi government is willing to have any Blackwater member, even if they are working in other companies," government spokesman Ali al-Dabbagh told CNN in January. "We don't like to see them here working in any company."





Blackwater had about 1,000 contractors working in Iraq at the height of its involvement, guarding diplomatic convoys and supply vehicles around the country after the U.S. invasion in 2003. At least 10 of its employees were killed, including four whose burned and mutilated bodies were dragged through the streets of Fallujah after an ambush in 2004.





CNN's Jomana Karadsheh and Suzanne Simons contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- A salty soup of seawater, microscopic pieces of plastic and marine debris. Those are the ingredients in the North Pacific Gyre, an ocean vortex estimated by Greenpeace to be the size of Texas, contaminated with the floating detritus of our modern lives.



The sheer size of the ocean area affected has been enough to catch public attention, but a number of concerned groups are aiming to capture more than that. Project Kaisei plans to find a way to scoop up the plastic waste and devise a way to turn it into a future fuel source.



It's a huge task, but led by innovator and environmentalist Doug Woodring, Project Kaisei has already embarked on a mission to the gyre. An August voyage onboard the New Horizon and Kaisei sailing ships was in partnership with Scripps Research Institute.



The crews returned with samples of the water from various locations in the gyre and the most immediate discovery was the pervasiveness of plastic material found at regular points over 3,500 miles. The most heavily polluted areas of surface water in the gyre contained six times more plastic than plankton biomass.



Derelict, or "ghost" nets, plastic crates and even toys were found by the crew. Some items like plastic bottles had become impromptu homes to varieties of marine mollusc.



As well as posing hazards to the oceans through toxic contamination and to sealife through ingestion or being trapped in nets, unnatural transport systems could allow invasive species to be introduced to different areas and upset delicate ecosystems.



The project now counts scientists, innovators, sailors and environmentalists among its ranks, galvanized around a desire to clean up the Pacific's plastic vortex. A further voyage next year hopes to gather more data and move closer to a practical solution to the ever increasing problem.

***

(CNN) -- Some 5,000 residents in eastern Pennsylvania were allowed to return to their homes Saturday afternoon, some 12 hours after they were evacuated when a tractor-trailer carrying 33,000 pounds of toxic hydrofluoric acid overturned after the driver tried to avoid a deer, authorities said.



Traffic is backed up Saturday after a truck spilled hydrofluoric acid in eastern Pennsylvania.



State police identified the driver as Raymond Leblanc, 54, of Harrow, Ontario, Canada. Leblanc, who initially was trapped in the truck, was taken to a hospital where he was treated and released. Police said a passenger in the truck was unhurt.



No other injuries were reported.



The truck flipped over on its side and slid along northbound State Road 33, which was closed in both directions from Belfast to Saylorsburg, Pennsylvania, from the time of the early-morning accident until about 6 p.m. Saturday.



Most of the acid in the tank was in the form of pressurized gas, but there also was some water, said Northampton County spokesman John Conklin.



State and federal hazardous materials experts stopped the leak by noon. The wreck occurred at 3:30 a.m. near Wind Gap.



Conklin said many evacuees -- those living within a mile of the accident site in Plainfield Township -- went to a shelter set up at nearby Pen Argyl High School in Pen Argyl, Pennsylvania.



A dispatcher with the Northhampton County Division of Emergency Management said residents were allowed to begin returning to their homes about 3:45 p.m. Saturday.



Hydrogen fluoride is a hazardous chemical compound used mainly for industrial purposes such as etching glass, and is extremely corrosive. It also is an ingredient in high-octane gasoline, refrigerants, aluminum and light bulbs.



Contact with concentrated solutions can cause severe burns, according to medical authorities. Inhaling the gas causes respiratory irritation, severe eye damage and pulmonary edema.

***

(CNN) -- Police in Allendale, South Carolina, are investigating whether a funeral home fit a 6-foot, 5-inch man into his coffin by severing his legs.

The wife of James Hines reportedly said the funeral home told her that her husband's coffin was long enough.

A former Cave Funeral Services employee has alleged since James Hines' death from skin cancer in 2004 that Hines was too tall for his coffin and that the funeral home took extreme measures to make him fit, Allendale County Coroner Hayzen Black told CNN.

Officials exhumed Hines' body Tuesday, Black said, and a fair amount of "undesirable evidence" was found, although he could not comment further.

The coroner's office handed the case over to law enforcement officials for a criminal investigation, he said.

Allendale Police Detective Donnie Hutto told CNN affiliate WJBF-TV that he could not comment on the condition of the body.

A Cave Funeral Services employee had no comment when asked about the matter.

But Ruth Hines, widow of the dead man, told WJBF that the allegations and exhumation of Hines' body are difficult for her.

"I'm just going through quite a bit," she said. "It's like starting all over again, and it's left me with hurt and numbness."

"According to the measurements on the casket, and the funeral director, we asked him, 'Was this suitable for his length?' and he said, 'Yes that will be perfect,'" Ruth Hines said.

Hines told WJBF that her family has used Cave Funeral Services for a number of years, and she isn't sure what the family will do in the future if the allegations are true.

***

PARIS, France -- World number three Novak Djokovic crashed out of the Paris Masters after being trounced in his opening match by veteran Frenchman Fabrice Santoro on Wednesday.

Fabrice Santoro returns the ball during his shock second-round victory against Novak Djokovic.

The 34-year-old Santoro, who beat world No. 5 Andy Roddick at the Lyon Grand Prix last week, again rose to the occasion in front of his home fans as he stormed to a 6-3 6-2 second-round victory against the Serb.

It was the first time the two players had met, with Djokovic making his first outing since losing to David Nalbandian in the semifinals of the Madrid Masters two weeks ago.

Djokovic, like the American Roddick, has already qualified for the season-ending Masters Cup and will now have extra time to prepare for the event in Shanghai starting next month.

The 20-year-old said he was struggling following dental surgery to remove two wisdom teeth.

"I couldn't give my 100 percent, not even 30 percent of my possibilities," Djokobvic said.

"He deserved to win. I'm still on medications. I didn't practise for a whole week, I only started practising two days ago. Physically, I'm not feeling at all good."

The result is a boost for rising British star Andy Murray, who earlier kept alive his hopes of an unexpected place at the Masters Cup by winning his first match in Paris and was expected to face Djokovic.

The 20-year-old, who has missed three months this season due to a wrist injury, beat Jarkko Nieminen of Finland 7-6 (7-5) 6-3 to progress into the third round.

The 15th seed is seeking to overtake Tommy Haas, who holds the eighth and final place ahead of the showpiece event in Shanghai.

Murray, who trails the German by just three points, has not beaten Djokovic in three meetings so far but he has never played his unseeded next opponent Santoro.

Ninth seed Haas, who has struggled with illness and injury this year, will play Djokovic's compatriot Janko Tipsarevic in the second round.

Murray, who won his second title this year at the St Petersburg Open last Sunday, made a confident start against Nieminen and showed little sign of the stiff back he suffered after a minor car crash on Monday.

He held his serve to love against a player who was beaten in the final of the Swiss Indoors event by Roger Federer last weekend, but then struggled for his best form as the first set went to a tiebreak.

The Scot was broken just one point after having a winner overturned following an on-court appeal, but he leveled immediately and then broke Nieminen again to win a third successive game before serving out for victory.

Defending champin and fourth seed Nikolay Davydenko, one of six players to have already qualified for Shanghai, beat Argentina's Juan Del Potro 7-6 (7-3) 6-1 in his opening match on Wednesday.

The Russian, fined for "lack of effort" after his defeat by Croatian qualifier Marian Cilic in St Petersburg, will next face Marcos Baghdatis of Cyprus in round three after Baghdatis shocked 13th seed Ivan Ljubicic.

Ivo Karlovic broke Roger Federer's serve for the first time in his life, but the top seed and world number one progressed in a late match on Wednesday.

Croatian Karlovic, the tallest man in tennis at 2.08 metres, went down 6-4 4-6 6-3 as Federer played for the first time at the Bercy event since 2003.

Federer had gone 67 service games over four previous matches without a loss before Karlovic ended his duck to claim their second set.

But the Swiss top seed got straight back in harness, breaking to start the final set and rolling ahead against a man he had just beaten days earlier in the Basel semifinals.

World numbet two Rafael Nadal also reached the third round after thrashing Italy's Filippo Volandri 6-3 6-1.

The Spaniard will next play Stanislas Wawrinka of Switzerland, who won by the same scoreline

***

San Francisco, California (CNN) -- Officials have agreed to pay $1.5 million to the daughter of a man fatally shot in the back by a transit police officer on New Year's Day 2009 in Oakland, California.





A bystander's cell-phone video of the shooting on a transit platform was widely circulated on the Internet and on news shows.





The Bay Area Rapid Transit train system late Wednesday announced the settlement over the killing of Oscar Grant, 22.





"It's been a little over a year since we experienced the tragic death of Oscar Grant," BART Board President James Fang said. "No matter what anyone's opinion of the case may be, the sad fact remains this incident has left Tatiana without a father. The $1.5 million settlement will provide financial support for her."  Grant's daughter, Tatiana, is 5.





The video showed then-Officer Johannes Mehserle, 27, pulling his gun and shooting Grant in the back as another officer kneeled on Grant.





Mehserle might have intended to draw and fire his Taser rather than his gun, according to a court filing by his attorney.





The shooting sparked large protests in Oakland and led to Mehserle's arrest on a murder charge. The case against him is pending.





Initially, attorney John Burris asked for $50 million in a wrongful-death lawsuit filed on behalf of Grant's daughter. Burris was not immediately available for comment on the settlement.





The transit system's police department has made several changes since the shooting. The department has increased training hours for officers, is requiring them to report all "use-of-force incidents," and is tapping the public's help in searching for a new police chief, the transit system said in a statement.





"This settlement is critical in our efforts to move forward," said Carole Ward Allen, a BART board member. "We're working hard to make the police department the best it can be for our officers, our customers and our community."

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- More than 150 people have abandoned a sinking cruise liner that collided with an iceberg in Antarctic waters, a Chilean navy captain told CNN.



The ship sent out a distress call at around 10 p.m. ET Thursday.



Passenger ship Explorer reported problems near the South Shetland Islands, south of Argentina. The area is in a sector of Antarctica claimed by the United Kingdom.



Capt. Carlos Munita of the Chilean navy said they received a distress call from the Explorer, saying the vessel had hit an iceberg around 10 p.m. ET Thursday.



He added a Norwegian rescue ship had arrived at the scene.



Tour companies describe the Explorer as a passenger ship which runs tours between South America and Antarctica.



Some 154 people are reported to be on board ship, which carries a Liberian flag, including 100 passengers. However the nationalities of those on board is not yet known.



Passengers and crew have been evacuated onto lifeboats, but the captain and the first officer are reported to have stayed on board.



"The great majority of people, including all the passengers, have been safely taken off the Explorer and are now being recovered by the first of the vessels to arrive on scene in response to the distress call," Dave Jardine-Smith, head of the Maritime and Coastguard Agency's (MCA) search and rescue team in England said.



"The passengers and crew from the Explorer have not been in lifeboats very long," Jardine-Smith said. "They should be, hopefully, in good condition. We are told that there are no injuries."



Earlier, Mark Clark, a spokesman for the MCA told the Press Association five ships were on their way to help the sinking vessel.



"She hit something and is taking on a serious amount of water, that is all we know."



The temperature in the area is said to be at around minus 5C, with a sea temperature at around minus 1C, forecasters told the Press Association.



Stephen Davenport, senior forecaster with MeteoGroup, said:"It wouldn't take long for hypothermia to set in at that kind of temperature in the sea.



"They do get very bad storms down that way, and gale force winds especially, because there is no land in the way," he told PA.



Lt. Matt Alex from the US Coast Guard Atlantic Area command center said the boat is owned by Gap Adventures, based in Toronto, Canada. E-mail to a friend

***

HONG KONG, China (CNN) -- An imperial "dragon" throne owned by a Chinese emperor set the world auction record for Chinese furniture Thursday, selling for about US $11 million.



Nicolas Chow of Sotheby's, pictured, said mainland Chinese buyers were "ready to pay the premium."



There was frenzied bidding among mainland, Hong Kong and Taiwan collectors at the Sotheby's auction in Hong Kong.



Thirty-six bids came in 10 minutes, with tension building as a new telephone bidder jumped into the competition.



"These mainland (China) buyers, mainland collectors are ready to pay the premium it takes to secure an object of this quality," said Nicolas Chow, international head of Chinese ceramics and art at Sotheby's.



The winning bid of US $11,068,193 (HK $85,780,000) was by a private Shanghai businessman. It was nearly triple the estimate of US $3.9 million (HK $30 million), Sotheby's said.  Watch why the throne is so prized »



"This is the place from which the emperor conducted his stately affairs and received foreign envoys and basically, this is a seat of power," Chow said. "No one else should have sat down in this place."



The throne belonged to Emperor Qianlong, who ruled from 1736-1795.



The 4.6 foot-long (140 centimeters) piece is considered rare and prized because of the zitan wood from which it was carved. It also features carved panels, curved legs and an elaborate "Five Dragon" carving on the front and back. The number five represents the "five blessings" of old age, wealth, health, virtue and peaceful death, according to Sotheby's.



Other pieces that sold Thursday included a celadon ground butterfly vase. The Qianlong period piece sold for US $2.74 million (HK $21.3 million).



CNN's Pauline Chiou contributed to this report.

***

BOGOTA, Colombia (CNN)  -- Colombian police foiled a plot by Marxist guerrillas to assassinate the nation's defense minister, according to President Alvaro Uribe.



Colombian President Alvaro Uribe says authorities foiled an assassination plot against the country's defense chief.



Ten guerrillas dressed as police planned to infiltrate the family farm of Defense Minister Juan Manuel Santos over Easter week and kill the official and his family, Uribe said Thursday on national television.



The guerrillas, who belong to the FARC, the Spanish acronym for Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, were captured, Uribe said.



Uribe thanked and congratulated federal authorities, saying, "This investigation had been proceeding for several months, and fortunately the National Police has dealt this well-placed blow."



Police Director Oscar Naranjo said eight of the guerrillas were captured at a property near Santos' farm in the municipality of Anapoima, 54 miles (87 kilometers) from Bogota, the capital. Officials did not reveal where the other two guerillas were captured.



The FARC, the largest and oldest guerrilla group in Colombia, has been waging war against the government since the 1960s.



Security analysts have said the FARC has about 9,000 to 12,000 armed guerillas and several thousand supporters, mostly in rural areas.



The guerrilla group operates mostly in Colombia but has carried out extortion, kidnappings and other activities in Venezuela, Panama and Ecuador, analysts said.



The guerrilla group is known to pull off audacious operations, sometimes dressed as police, soldiers or other government officials.



On April 11, 2002, a 20-member commando group dressed in police and military uniforms faked a bomb alert at the parliament building in Cali, Colombia's third-largest city. They tricked 12 congressmen into getting on a bus by telling them the military provided it for their safety. They then drove off, taking the congressmen into captivity.



Eleven of those congressmen died in June 2007 during a shootout between military and the FARC. The sole surviving congressman, who was released in February, said the FARC shot the hostages when the soldiers approached.

***

BEIRUT, Lebanon (CNN)  -- Lebanese voters were heading to the polls on Sunday with their main choices to lead the next government a Hezbollah-backed alliance or a U.S.-backed coalition.



Hezbollah party workers in the southern town of Nabatiyah hope for an election victory.



Analysts say the race will be tight, with the Hezbollah-dominated "March 8 alliance" possibly winning a majority of seats in parliament. The polls opened at 1200 GMT and will close 12 hours later.



Turnout is expected to be high among the country's 3 million registered voters. About 50,000 troops were on the streets, but the run-up to the balloting had been free of violence.



The vote comes at a critical time for Lebanon as it sits amid a power struggle between a weakened pro-Western government and a stronger pro-Syrian Hezbollah political bloc that has gained political momentum in recent years.



The United States considers Hezbollah -- which is supported by both Syria and Iran -- to be a terrorist organization.



The group grew in popularity after its militant wing claimed victory over Israel after a 34-day military conflict in 2006. Since then, it has been more widely perceived by its supporters to be the "defenders" of Lebanon.



Though U.S. President Barack Obama didn't mention the Lebanese general election in his address on Thursday, he did call for religious tolerance in the Muslim world, noting sectarian clashes between Sunnis and Shiites and the struggles faced by religious minorities.



"The richness of religious diversity must be upheld -- whether it is for Maronites in Lebanon or the Copts in Egypt," he said, referring to Christian groups in those countries. "And if we are being honest, fault lines must be closed among Muslims as well, as the divisions between Sunni and Shia have led to tragic violence, particularly in Iraq."



In Lebanon's unique power-sharing government, the presidency is reserved for Maronite Christians, the speaker of parliament is always a Shia Muslim, and the prime minister is a Sunni Muslim. The law was created to balance power among Lebanon's three main religious groups.



Analysts say the Hezbollah-dominated "March 8 alliance" may win a parliamentary majority with the support of Christian opposition leader Gen. Michel Aoun -- the only prominent Christian politician to back the bloc.



"They keep trying to scare the Christian voters with their stories about Hezbollah's weapons, so to all of those who complain about Hezbollah, can they tell us how they will disarm the party," Aoun told supporters Friday. "Hezbollah's weapons will no longer be a problem when the causes behind its existence disappear, including the borders' issues."



A close look at Lebanon's political landscape reveals that the country's Christian voters are split on how they will cast their ballots. Some Christian voters want their representatives to step out of the shadows of Hezbollah and Saad Hariri, who leads the Sunni-dominated "March 14 coalition."



Christian voters are divided between supporting Aoun and other Christian leaders who want Hezbollah to disarm.



"In these elections, Christians look more divided than ever while others seem more unified than ever," said Shibley Telhami, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution.



For the Obama administration, the elections could be indicative of the president's odds of pushing stability in the region.



Former U.S. President and Nobel Peace Prize Winner Jimmy Carter said the United States should work with whichever coalition wins.



Carter was in Beirut as part of more than 200 international observers monitoring the election. He also oversaw balloting in Gaza during the elections in the Palestinian territory in January 2006.



The Palestinian militant group Hamas won that race "fairly and squarely" by a huge margin, Carter said. The United States and Israel later refused to recognize the legitimacy of the Hamas win.



"And it's resulted in a split in the Palestinians and a very difficult situation there," Carter added. "I think they (the United States) learned a hard lesson that they should accept the results of an election."



Two senior Obama administration officials -- Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and Vice

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Identifying the world's finest airports is easy. Hong Kong International Airport, Singapore's Changi and Seoul's Incheon have topped the ranks of airport awards for the last decade.

Sitting comfortably? Not at Delhi's Indira Gandhi International Airport, ranked by some as one of the worst.

These 21st-century airports boast the best shopping, classiest restaurants, as well as features such as indoor pools, orchid gardens, and free wireless Internet. See world's best airports

The world's worst airports, however, are harder to pin down. It's a crowded field to choose from and the choice depends on what you class as bad. See our pick of the world's worst airports Â»

If it's for danger, then Baghdad International Airport, in the middle of a war zone, should rank pretty high.

Lukla airstrip -- gateway to the Mount Everest region in Nepal -- is also a strong contender.

Landing involves a hair-raising plummet onto an uphill airstrip cut into the side of a mountain. On takeoff, the airstrip comes to an abrupt end at the edge of a mountain cliff.  What do you think is the world's worst airport? Sound off below

Watch CNN's Ayesha Durgahee examine what it takes to become Airport of the year in Hong Kong. Â»

In 2007, TripAdvisor asked travelers to rank airports according to how easy they are to navigate, the cleanliness of the lavatories and parking facilities.

Based on these factors, the 2,500 respondents classed London Heathrow and Chicago O'Hare as the world's most hated.

Yet neither of these major hubs appeared in Foreign Policy magazine's review of the five worst airports, published in 2007.

The list here included the likes of Mineralnye Vody airport in Russia for its feral cats and daggers on sale in the departure lounge.

Charles de Gaulle also gains little affection from those that pass through its interminable terminals. As Foreign Policy says, "visitors to Paris should expect more than the grimy terminals, rude staff, confusing layout, and overpriced food."

Where was your worst airport experience in 2008? Which airport do you think is the most dangerous, uncomfortable or aggravating? Sound Off below

We're also looking for photos and video of your worst airport experiences. Send them to the Business Traveller page on CNN iReport

Here's your chance to grumble.

***

(CNN) -- Snowstorms and icy conditions on Sunday delayed flights across the northern United States, caused havoc on roads and left thousands without electricity.



A worker shovels snow as the storm hits Chicago, Illinois.



At least one death has been attributed to storms that hit all over the country in the past week. A 44-year-old Massachusetts man died Friday when a tree limb weighed down by snow fell on him, authorities said.



Forecasters say there's more cold weather to come.



Authorities urged motorists in north-central and northeast Iowa to stay off roads because of poor visibility caused by blowing snow. Authorities prohibited tow trucks from operating on U.S. Highway 20, near the border with Minnesota, because of concerns the tow trucks would get stuck.



Forecasters said wind chills of 20 below and 30 below zero were possible in much of the rest of the Midwest, prompting wind chill advisories and warnings for the region into Monday morning.



Blizzard warnings also were expected to be in effect into Monday for parts of Maine and western parts of Michigan's lower peninsula.



In much of Maine, between 10 and 18 inches of snow was expected to fall Sunday and Monday, the weather service said. Whiteout conditions were expected at night, with wind gusts of up to 45 mph, the weather service said.



The Minnesota Department of Transportation ordered snowplow drivers off the road until Sunday morning in 13 southwest counties, because of poor visibility, blowing snow and wind gusts up to 40 mph, an agency spokeswoman said Saturday.



The western U.S. has also been hit with the cold blast. Parts of Washington saw 2 to 3 feet of snow last week. On Friday, two buses carrying 80 people collided on a road in Seattle and crashed through a metal railing, where they hung over a freeway for several hours before two trucks rescued them.



Many roads in Walla Walla, Washington, had yet to be plowed by Saturday, and the only practical way to drive on them was to have chains on tires, iReporter Aaron Cloward said.  Watch how driving has been difficult in Walla Walla »



Cloward, a native of Salt Lake City, Utah, said he had "never seen roads this bad or snow this bad." He also said he's been unable to free his car.



"Everything is sold out -- snow shovels, ice melt, salt, chains ... so I don't know how to get out," he said.



The storm system is expected to move eastward, where people are already dealing with air traffic delays and power outages brought on by snowfall earlier this week.



"This is essentially the reincarnation of the same storm that brought the heavy snow to parts of California, southern Nevada and northern Arizona," Steve Corfidi, lead forecaster with the weather service's Storm Prediction Center in Norman, Oklahoma, told CNNRadio.

***

(CNN) -- Joran van der Sloot is meeting with investigators Thursday in the Netherlands in response to the recently released videotape in the Natalee Holloway case, his U.S.-based attorney said.

Joran van der Sloot awaits transfer from the Netherlands to Aruba in November. He later was released.

The exact location of that meeting was not  disclosed, but van der Sloot's attorney, Joe Tacopina, said his client has "agreed to answer any questions."

In the video that aired Sunday on Dutch television, van der Sloot, a suspect in the 2005 disappearance of Holloway, told a man he was with the Alabama teen on an Aruban beach when she apparently died and that a friend of his with a boat disposed of Holloway's body.

Van der Sloot later said the statements were lies, and on Monday, Tacopina said the video contains "no admission of a crime."

The lawyer said facts in the case contradict two assertions van der Sloot made in the video, including that the boat-owner friend mentioned wasn't in Aruba in May 2005.  Watch how video has brought new interest in case Â»

Meanwhile, prosecutors are still awaiting a decision from a three-judge appellate panel on the nearby Caribbean island of Curacao as to whether van der Sloot can be arrested in reaction to the video.

The chief prosecutor in Aruba, Hans Mos, was denied an initial attempt to arrest van der Sloot by the investigating judge last Sunday.

The judge determined that numerous pretrial detentions of van der Sloot in the past have created a "high bar" that current circumstances do not meet.

The prosecutor appealed the judge's decision on Tuesday, and the appellate panel will have eight days to respond.

Holloway disappeared while visiting Aruba with about 100 classmates celebrating their graduation from Mountain Brook High School in suburban Birmingham, Alabama, and was last seen leaving a nightclub with van der Sloot and brothers Deepak and Satish Kalpoe.

Mos dropped charges against the three men in December, saying he couldn't be sure of a conviction.  E-mail to a friend

CNN Tracy Sabo contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- A Lonely Planet author says he plagiarized or made up portions of the popular travel guidebooks and dealt drugs to supplement poor pay, an Australian newspaper reported Sunday.



Lonely Planet publishes more than 500 titles and employs 300 authors, according to its Web site.



Thomas Kohnstamm, who has written a book on his misadventures, also said he didn't travel to Colombia to write the guidebook on the country because "they didn't pay me enough," The Daily Telegraph reported.



"I wrote the book in San Francisco [California]," he is quoted as saying in the Telegraph. "I got the information from a chick I was dating -- an intern in the Colombian Consulate."



The 32-year-old Seattle, Washington, native also claims he accepted free travel, which is a violation of the company's policy.



Kohnstamm has worked on more than a dozen books for Lonely Planet, including its titles on Brazil, Colombia, the Caribbean, Venezuela, Chile and South America.



An e-mail from Lonely Planet said Kohnstamm's book were being reviewed, the newspaper reported.



"If we find that the content has been compromised, we'll take urgent steps to fix it. Once we've got things right for travelers as quickly as we can, we'll look at what we do and how we do it to ensure as best we can that this type of thing never happens again," the e-mail said, according to the newspaper.



The book's publisher, Piers Pickard, told the paper that an "urgent" review of Kohnstamm's books did not reveal any inaccuracies.



The Lonely Planet series publishes 500 titles, updated every two to four years, and employs 300 authors, according to the company's Web site. It sells more than 6 million guides a year, the newspaper reported.



Kohnstamm's book, "Do Travel Writers Go to Hell?: A Swashbuckling Tale of High Adventures, Questionable Ethics and Professional Hedonism," is set for release next week.



On his MySpace page, Kohnstamm says the book "is about the decision to abandon Manhattan to try to make it as a travel writer and the good, the bad and the really surreal that I experienced on the road." E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- Icelandic Prime Minister Johanna Sigurdardottir of the center-left Social Democratic Alliance has claimed victory in general elections triggered by the collapse of the Nordic nation's economy.





Sigurdardottir celebrates victory on Saturday night.





Sigurdardottir's party, which has headed an interim government since February 1, was on course to win around 30 percent of the vote or 20 parliamentary seats, according to state broadcaster RUV.





The Left-Green Movement, the Social Democratic Alliance's coalition ally, was expected to win 14 seats, giving the coalition a controlling 34-seat block in the 63-member Icelandic parliament, the Althing.





"I believe this will be our big victory," Sigurdardottir told supporters, according to Reuters.com. "I am touched, proud and humble at this moment when we are experiencing this great, historic victory of the social democratic movement."





Sigurdardottir's electoral success marks a change of direction for Iceland, a nation 300,000 people, which has traditionally leaned to the right on political matters.





Sigurdardottir, the world's first openly gay leader and Iceland's first female premier, has pledged to take the Atlantic island into the European Union and to join the euro common currency as a viable way to rescue Iceland's suffering economy.





But that ambition could bring Sigurdardottir into conflict with the Left-Green Movement which favors a currency union with Norway as an alternative to EU membership.





Iceland has been in political turmoil since October, when its currency, stock market and leading banks crashed amid the global financial crisis.





The country's Nordic neighbors sent billions of dollars to prop up the economy, as did the International Monetary Fund in its first intervention to support a Western European democracy in decades.





But weekly demonstrations -- some verging on riots -- finally forced Prime Minister Geir Haarde and his Independence Party-led center-right coalition to resign en masse on January 26. The Independence Party was projected to win 16 seats in Saturday's vote, according to RUV.

***

BARCELONA, Spain (CNN) -- Cell phone makers Tuesday pledged to end one of modern life's chief frustrations --- and introduce a universal charger for handsets by 2012.

An estimated 1.2 billion cell phones were sold in 2008, at least half of which were replacement handsets.

The GSMA (Groupe Speciale Mobile Association), which represents more than 750 of the world's cell phone operators, made the announcement at its annual Mobile World Congress in Barcelona Tuesday.

Under the scheme, phone makers have pledged that a majority of new handset models will include the universal charger by January 1 2012. The planned device will use a micro USB plug.

Aside from bringing relief to drawers stuffed full of redundant chargers, the GSMA stressed that the new device would reduce raw materials.

"The mobile industry has a pivotal role to play in tackling environmental issues and this programme is an important step that could lead to huge savings in resources, not to mention convenience for consumers," said Rob Conway, CEO and member of the board of the GSMA in a statement.

Last year an estimated 1.2 billion cell phones were sold, according to University of Southern Queensland data reported by the GSMA, of which handsets accounted for between 50 and 80 per cent. That equates to between 51,000 and 82,000 tonnes of chargers.

The GSMA hopes the initiative will slash the greenhouse gases that result from the manufacture and transport of chargers by 13.6 and 21.8 million tonnes each year.

"There is enormous potential in mobile to help people live and work in an eco-friendly way and with the backing of some or the biggest names in the industry, this initiative will lead the way," Conway added.

The GSMA says that companies which have signed up to the plan include 3 Group, AT&T, KTF, LG, mobilkom austria, Motorola, Nokia, Orange, Qualcomm, Samsung, Sony Ericsson, Telecom Italia, Telefónica, Telenor, Telstra, T-Mobile and Vodafone.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- London commuters crammed onto buses, scrambled for taxis, cycled or simply walked on Wednesday as a strike by Tube workers shut down most of the subway network.



Commuters queue for packed buses in London on Wednesday morning.



The strike began Tuesday at 7 p.m. (2 p.m. ET) but the first full effects were felt during Wednesday's morning commute. The strike was set to last for 48 hours with a normal service resuming Friday morning, according to Transport for London (TfL), which runs the city's transportation network.



The RMT trade union called the strike after talks with management over pay, job cuts, and disciplinary issues broke down.



"RMT doesn't resort to industrial action lightly," General Secretary Bob Crow said in a statement. "The fact is that Tube workers have been driven into walking out today."



Transport Commissioner Peter Hardy said the talks had been making progress on all issues and he urged the RMT to return to the table.



"The RMT leadership says we were close to a deal," Hardy said in a statement. "If that is the case, then they should call off the strike, return to talks ... and resolve this issue without any more disruption to Londoners."



TfL was running extra buses and free shuttle services across the River Thames during the strike. Electronic travel cards used for the TfL network were temporarily being allowed on all train lines in greater London, it said.



While most services on the Tube were shut because of the strike, one line -- the Northern line -- was running normally and five others were running on a reduced schedule, TfL said.



"It's been really good," a girl on Oxford Street told CNN about her commute. "The Northern line is running perfectly."



Still, some bus services were packed with commuters who normally ride the underground trains or who failed to find a taxi.



"I think we'd all like to strike for more money, but unfortunately we can't," said one woman at Oxford Circus, where the Tube is closed.



Others hit the pavement and walked.



"It's OK -- quite refreshing," said a man on Regent Street. He said he had just walked from Liverpool Street Station, a train station as well as a Tube stop that is more than 2.5 miles away.



The RMT represents about half of the 20,000 employees on the Tube, a TfL spokeswoman said. Other unions including Unite and TSSA represent the rest, she said, and were not on strike.

***

(InStyle.com) -- How many closets does it take to make a "Desperate Housewife" happy? Just one, if it's anything like Parker's. We got a guided tour--and learned a lot more about the fashion-savvy star than her taste in shoes.



"I love my new name. In Texas people are formal, so now it's 'Mrs. Parker.' I feel old! But I love it."



Best dress



A "gorgeous 1950s-style cocktail dress by Gustavo Cadile is my absolute favorite. It's fun, but classic too," says Parker.



Treasured keepsake



A clutch that belonged to her aunt: "She was the glue of our family. It's so beautiful and so impractical -- nothing fits in it."  Watch what else is in her closet »



First Christmas gift from Tony Parker



A necklace designed by Monique Lhuillier. "It's his Spurs number. I love it."



Loves, but doesn't know what to do with



A "quirky lip-shaped purse by Judith Leiber. I can't figure out how to wear it!"



Fashion faux pas



"One time, my mom and aunt Didi were helping me clean out my closet. Aunt Didi had taken off her jacket. I grabbed it and was like, 'What is this? Who would give me this ugly thing?' And she was like, 'That's mine!' "



Go-to outfit



"A thermal top, a scarf, and I'm not just saying this because she's my friend, but I love my Victoria Beckham DVB jeans. She sent me three pairs--they're perfect."



First splurge



"I'd always wanted Uggs, but I always had the impostors--the Muggs, the Thuggs, the everything but. I still wear [them]."



Owns in multiples



"Christian Louboutin espadrille wedges. They're so high! I have them in every color. I've sprained my ankle walking on the cobblestones in Paris wearing them. They're a beautiful pain."



Cool freebie



"Richard Tyler mules. I did a photo shoot and they said I could keep them. I simply could not believe someone would give me a $300 pair of shoes. I was fascinated!"



Most expensive item



"My hot-pink crocodile Hermès Birkin bag. Robert Verdi, my stylist, told me, 'Wear it with everything--even to bed. This is going to be handed down in your will.' " E-mail to a friend



Get a FREE TRIAL issue of InStyle - CLICK HERE!

***

(CNN) -- Holders Barcelona made hard work of beating Czech minnows Viktoria Plzen 2-0 in their Champions League Group H clash Wednesday but need just one win to reach the knockout stages.





The Catalan giants were near their fluent best in the Nou Camp but wasted a string of chances after midfielder Andres Iniesta put them ahead early after being set up by Lionel Messi.





Argentine goal machine Messi hit the woodwork twice before David Villa made the game safe with a second eight minutes from time.





It left Barcelona unbeaten in the group, but they trail AC Milan on head-to-head record as the Italians beat BATE Borisov 2-0 in the San Siro.





Both the big guns have seven points with their return clash in the San Siro on November 23 set to decide who goes through as winners of the group.





Goals from Zlatan Ibrahimovic and Kevin Prince Boateng ensured an easy night's work for the Rossoneri, but their coach Massimiliano Allegri is already looking ahead to playing Barcelona again after holding them to a draw in the Nou Camp.





"It was an important win tonight to help with qualification, we still need points but our aim is to be playing Barcelona for first place, that would be an important result for the subsequent draw," he told SkySport of Italy.





In Group G, Cypriots APOEL Nicosia held Portugal giants Porto to a 1-1 draw and top a tight section with five points.





Brazilian star Hulk put the home side ahead as he lashed home an early free kick, but six minutes later the visitors were level.





Hulk's fellow Brazilian Ailton found space and produced a 25 meter shot that Helton in the Porto goal could not cover.





Zenit St Petersburg are second in the group, a point behind, after coming from behind twice to draw 2-2 at Ukraine's Shakhtar Donetsk.





Brazilians Willian and Luiz Adriano scored for Shakhtar, while Roman Shirokov and Viktor Faizulin leveled for the Russians.

***

(CNN) -- A woman and three children were killed in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, when a suspected robber fleeing in a car jumped a curb and struck them, police said Thursday.



Four people were killed after a car fleeing police struck a home in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, on Wednesday.



"He literally cut a tree in half," Police Commissioner Charles H. Ramsey said, "then hit the 1-year-old, [who] was in a stroller. The other individuals were on the front porch of their own home. He struck with such force that it knocked the concrete steps loose."



Latoya Smith, 22, died Thursday from injuries in the crash, which occurred shortly after 7:30 p.m. Wednesday in the Fentonville area of north Philadelphia, police Capt. James Clark said.



Smith's daughter, Remedy Smith -- who would have turned 1 on Friday -- died at the scene, as did Alicia Griffin, 6, and Gina Rosario, 7, Clark said.



Video of the scene showed a crumpled silver Pontiac on the sidewalk, pushed up against the front steps of a house and wedged against a tree.  Watch police commissioner describe carnage »



Donta Cradock, 18, the alleged driver of the gray Pontiac, faces charges for theft of a motorcycle, the crime that allegedly triggered his flight, police said.



Other charges are pending approval from the district attorney's office, police said.



"We're hopeful that it will be four counts of murder," Clark said.



Cradock and an alleged accomplice, Ivan Rodriguez, 20, stole a motorcycle at gunpoint around 7:30 p.m., he said.



Rodriguez fled the scene on the motorcycle, while Cradock drove away in the Pontiac, Clark said.



An unidentified person told a traffic police officer in the area about the alleged robbery and pointed out the Pontiac, he said.



The police officer followed the car and tried to stop it at a traffic light, Clark said.



"At that point the Pontiac fled at a high rate of speed," he said.



The officer followed the vehicle, but lost sight of it, Clark said. The officer was not close enough to chase the car, police said, but eventually came across what Clark called a "horrific accident."



Cradock was thrown from the Pontiac and is in the hospital, Clark said. He said a gun was recovered on the suspect.



Rodriguez was arrested at his home, Clark said, and faces a theft charge.



Both men have "very extensive criminal histories," Ramsey said.



Bench warrants were out on them at the time of their arrest, Clark said.



It was not immediately clear if the two had retained attorneys.



CNN's Mark Norman contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- The world has a new alliance to save vanishing frogs, toads and salamanders.



A frog swims in a pond in Munich, Germany, in June.



A coalition of organizations established the Amphibian Survival Alliance this month to conserve species threatened by deadly fungus, habitat loss, pollution, pesticides and climate change. The scientists said amphibians are the world's most threatened group of animals.



Though they thrived on Earth for more than 360 million years, one in three of the 6,000 recognized amphibian species are now at risk of extinction and as many as 122 species have gone extinct since 1980, according to the International Union for the Conservation of Nature's amphibian specialist group.



"The world's amphibians are facing an uphill battle for survival," said James Collins of Arizona State University, co-chairman of the group.



He said the new alliance, formed at the Amphibian Mini Summit at the Zoological Society of London, will focus efforts on the biggest threat to amphibians: infectious disease and habitat destruction. The group includes amphibian specialists working in the wild as well as those in zoos, aquariums and botanical gardens worldwide.



"Amphibians have so much to offer humans," said amphibian specialist Simon Stuart. "Many have an arsenal of compounds stored in their skin that have the potential to address a multitude of human diseases."



But as amphibians die out, so do opportunities to develop new medicines, he said. The southern gastric brooding frog, for instance, could have led to the development of a treatment for human peptic ulcers had it not gone extinct, Stuart said.



"We simply cannot afford to let this current amphibian extinction crisis go unchecked," he said.



Andrew Blaustein, who began documenting amphibian declines two decades ago, said the loss of species was part of an overall biodiversity crisis.



"Amphibians seem to have been hit the hardest of all vertebrate species," said Blaustein, a professor of zoology at Oregon State University. "The long-term ecological repercussions of their decline could be profound, and we have to do something about it."

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Defense Secretary Robert Gates has asked Pentagon staff to draw up plans for shutting the U.S. prison camp at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, a Pentagon spokesman said.



A detainee is seen through a fence in July at the U.S. prison camp at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.



The camp holds about 250 suspected terrorists, down from a peak of roughly 750 men from 40 countries.



It houses several top al Qaeda figures, including Khalid Sheikh Mohammed -- the confessed architect of the September 11, 2001, attacks.



Gates "has asked his team for a proposal on how to shut it down, what would be required specifically to close it and move the detainees from that facility, while at the same time, of course, ensuring that we protect the American people [from] some very dangerous characters," Pentagon press secretary Geoff Morrell said Thursday.



Morrell described it as a contingency plan in case the new administration wants to take it up early in the new year.



President-elect Barack Obama has pledged to close the camp at Guantanamo but hasn't set a specific timetable. Gates will continue as defense secretary when Obama takes office.



"I would like to see it closed," Gates told Charlie Rose in a PBS interview. "And I think it will be a high priority for the new administration."



Officials close to the Obama team said in November that the incoming administration is pondering options, including trying some of the Guantanamo Bay inmates in federal courts, setting up a special national security court to deal with cases involving the most sensitive intelligence information, and releasing some inmates.



In an October 31 interview with CNN, Obama said only that he would close the facility "as quickly as we can do prudently."



"I am not going to give a time certain because I think what we have to do is evaluate all those who are still being held in Gitmo," he said. "We have to put in place appropriate plans to make sure they are tried, convicted and punished to the full extent of the law, and that's going to require, I think, a review of the existing cases, which I have not had the opportunity to do."



In May, Gates told a Senate committee that efforts to shut down the facility were "stuck" over what to do with the inmates.

***

(CNN)  -- Juventus have sacked coach Ciro Ferrara after a string of poor results and have installed Alberto Zaccheroni in the hot seat until the end of the season.



Ferrara's position has been threatened after a dismal run which has seen them slip out of contention in the Serie A title race as well as being eliminated from the Champions League at the group stages.



Thursday's 2-1 Coppa Italia defeat to Italian champions Inter Milan proved the final straw and the club released a statement to confirm his departure and Zaccheroni's arrival.



"Zaccheroni will take over the team immediately and will guide this afternoon's training session in Vinovo before being officially unveiled to the media," it read.



Ferrara joined Juve late last season and steered the Turin powerhouses to second place in Serie A behind Inter.



But his first full campaign in charge proved challenging after a promising start to the season.



The Bianconeri have lost five of their last six games in Serie A and have slumped to sixth in the standings, four points behind Napoli, who hold the last Champions League qualifying spot.



Zaccheroni will hope to get them on track with his first game against Lazio on Sunday.



The 56-year-old has coached at a number of leading Serie A clubs and helped AC Milan to the 1999 Italian title, but it is his first job since being sacked by Torino in February 2007.



Ferrara, a former Italy international and Juventus defender, was given the reins despite his lack of experience, succeeding current Roma coach Claudio Ranieri, who was fired.



Zaccheroni's appointment ends, for now, media speculation that Liverpool manager Rafael Benitez would take charge at Juve, but the short-term nature of his contract until June raises questions about the permanence of his stay.



Benitez acknowledged the speculation in his weekly press conference on Friday.



"I am focused on preparing my team for the game against Bolton. I know they (Juventus) were interested, that is part of the game now in football, but I am not ready to talk too much because I don't want to lose my focus.



"When you are a manager and you have clubs asking (for you), you have to be proud because they are a top side in Europe, but I am really happy here and want to do my job as best I can."

***

(CNN)  -- The widow of an Internal Revenue Service employee killed when a disgruntled taxpayer flew his plane into a seven-story building in Austin, Texas, last week is suing the pilot's wife, according to court documents.





Valerie Hunter, the wife of Vernon Hunter, is accusing Sheryl Stack, wife of Andrew Joseph "Joe" Stack III, of negligence, alleging she knew or should have known that her husband was a threat to others and, thus, could have prevented the attack, according to the lawsuit filed Monday in Travis County District Court.





"Stack was threatened enough by Joseph Stack that she took her daughter and stayed at a hotel the night before the plane crash. [She] owed a duty to exercise reasonable care to avoid a foreseeable risk of injury to others including [Vernon Hunter]," the suit says.





The lawsuit also seeks to bar the release of Vernon Hunter's autopsy report, saying that, if made public, it would cause Hunter's family to suffer "severe and irreparable emotional distress."





Hunter was killed February 18 when, authorities say, Stack flew his Piper Cherokee PA-28 into a northwest Austin building that housed nearly 200 IRS employees.





Authorities say Stack set fire to his $230,000 home in Austin before embarking on his fatal flight.





Police have said Sheryl Stack spent the previous night in an Austin-area hotel but did not say why. Police said they had received no calls of domestic violence from the house. The only calls to police were made a couple of years ago and concerned barking dogs, officials said said.





A 3,000-word message on a Web site registered to Stack railed against the government, particularly the IRS.





"I saw it written once that the definition of insanity is repeating the same process over and over and expecting the outcome to suddenly be different," the online message said. "I am finally ready to stop this insanity. Well, Mr. Big Brother IRS man, let's try something different; take my pound of flesh and sleep well."





Sheryl Stack issued a statement after the attack expressing "sincere sympathy to the victims and their families."

***

ASUNCION, Paraguay (CNN)  -- A second woman stepped forward Monday to say that Paraguayan President Fernando Lugo fathered a child out of wedlock when he was a Roman Catholic bishop.



Paraguayan President Fernando Lugo says Monday he will comply with justice on the latest paternity allegation.



Benigna Leguizamon said Lugo fathered her son in 2002 in the city of San Pedro. She served notice that Lugo has 24 hours to acknowledge paternity or she will take legal action.



"I am waiting in good will," she said in an interview on CNN affiliate Telefuturo TV. "But if they don't do something, oh, my God."



Lugo, 57, acknowledged last week that he is the father of a 2-year-old child conceived in the months before he stepped down as bishop.



He said last week he was making the admission "with the most absolute honesty, transparency and feeling of obligation."



Without acknowledging paternity, he expressed similar sentiments Monday about the latest allegation.



"We're going to act always in pursuit of the truth ... in this private matter," he said in a nationally televised announcement on Telefuturo.



Last week's announcement came after a woman filed suit in a southern Paraguay city seeking a paternity test.



"It's true that there was a relationship with Viviana Carrillo," Lugo told reporters, naming the mother. "I assume all the responsibilities that could derive from such an act, recognizing the paternity of the child."



Leguizamon, 27, said Monday that last week's announcement had encouraged her to come forth.



"When I saw the case with Viviana, I was strengthened to make my accusation," Leguizamon said.



She said she made the accusation to help her 6-year-old son, who is starting school. She will ask for a DNA test, she said.



In last week's case, Judge Evelyn Peralta said she was treating it routinely.



"It is a case like any other, which involves the president and nothing more," she said. "It will be processed at it should be."



Some Cabinet members interpreted Lugo's acknowledgment of paternity as an indication of the change he has promised to bring about to achieve greater transparency in the public sector.



"This is the Paraguay that we want," said Liz Torres, minister of children's issues. "This is the Paraguay of serious change in which there is no double standard or secrets. It seems to be an example, a very big lesson."



But some opposition party members said it appeared that Lugo practically had been forced to acknowledge what happened and that he had not done so willingly.



Sen. Julio Cesar Velasquez of the opposition Colorado Party called on the Vatican to excommunicate Lugo.



Lugo was made a lay Catholic last year, around the time he assumed the presidency.

***

(CNN) -- Andrew Wyeth, the American painter perhaps best known for his painting of a young woman in a field, "Christina's World," has died, according to an official with the Brandywine River Museum in Pennsylvania.

Andrew Wyeth received the National Medal of Arts from President Bush in November 2007.

Wyeth, 91, died in his sleep Thursday night at his home near Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, according to Lora Englehart, public relations coordinator for the museum.

The acclaimed artist painted landscapes and figure subjects and worked mostly in tempera and watercolor.

He was widely celebrated inside and outside of the art world.

Wyeth received the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 1963, and President Nixon sponsored an exhibition of Wyeth's paintings at the White House.

In 2007, President Bush awarded Wyeth the National Medal of Arts in recognition of his lifetime achievement and contribution to American arts and culture.

Two years earlier, Wyeth and his wife, Betsy, presented to the White House his painting "Jupiter," which is displayed in the residence's family sitting room.

Bush issued a statement Friday saying that he and first lady Laura Bush "deeply mourn" the death of Wyatt.

"Mr. Wyeth captured America in his paintings of his native Pennsylvania and Maine," Bush said. "On behalf of the American people, Laura and I offer our sincere condolences to Betsy and the Wyeth family."

Wyeth, who lived in Chadds Ford, Pennsylvania, and Maine, "has been enormously popular and critically acclaimed since his first one-man show in 1937," according to a biography in InfoPlease.

His main subjects were the places and people of Chadds Ford and Cushing, Maine.

"Christina's World," painted in 1948, shows a disabled Maine neighbor who drags herself through a field toward her house in the distance. The painting, displayed at the Museum of Modern Art in New York, has been regarded as Wyeth's most popular.

"His 'Helga' pictures, a large group of intimate portraits of a neighbor, painted over many years, were first shown publicly in 1986," the InfoPlease biography says. Those were painted in Pennsylvania.

Wyeth, the youngest child of painter N.C. Wyeth, formally studied art with his father as a teen, "drawing in charcoal and painting in oils, the media of choice for N.C. Wyeth. It was during the family's annual summer vacations in Port Clyde, Maine, that Andrew was able to experiment with other media to find his own artistic voice," according to a biography in the Farnsworth Art Museum in Maine.

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- The former hedge fund manager who faked his own suicide to avoid prison time for fraud will spend an extra two years in jail for failing to surrender himself, according to the U.S attorney's office.





Sam Israel tried to get out of serving a 20 year sentenced by faking his suicide. It added two years.





Federal Judge Kenneth Karas sentenced Sam Israel III in White Plains, New York, on Wednesday, giving him two more years in addition to his previous sentence.





Federal guidelines call for a 12- to 18-month sentence, but Karas noted that Israel's crime "took a fair amount of planning," and he criticized the former hedge fund manager for "thumbing his nose at the system."





The additional sentence will begin after Israel serves his first 20 years for fraud.





Israel admitted to authorities in March that he had faked his own suicide to escape his jail sentence.





He was supposed to report to a Massachusetts prison in June of 2008 to serve a 20-year sentence for defrauding investors of Bayou Management out of approximately $450 million.





But he did not show up at the facility. Days later, his sport-utility vehicle was found abandoned on a bridge in upstate New York, with the words "Suicide is Painless" -- title of the theme song for the television show "M.A.S.H." -- written in dust on the the hood.





Authorities determined the suicide setup was a ruse and launched a major manhunt to find Israel.





He turned himself in to law enforcement July 2, 2008.

***

Tottenham Hotspur humiliated Wigan 9-1 with England striker Jermain Defoe scoring five to move into the Champions League spots in the English Premier League.



The incredible rout sees them draw level on points with North London rivals Arsenal and into fourth place ahead of Aston Villa, who they visit next weekend.



Defoe's five equaled a Premier League record and, along with Manchester United's 9-0 thrashing of Ipswich Town in the 1994/95 season, it is the most goals scored by a Premier League side in a single game.



The highest tally recorded by a team in English football league history is 13.



Fellow England striker Peter Crouch scored the only goal in the first half before the floodgates opened, Defoe grabbing his first two before Wigan's Paul Scharner replied with what looked a handball.



Defoe completed his hat-trick only a minute later on the 58th before Aaron Lennon made it 5-1, with Defoe then adding his fourth.



A final blitz from Tottenham gave Defoe his fifth, with David Bentley's deflected effort off Chris Kirkland and Niko Kranjcar completing the rout with double figures looking on the cards when the referee ended the misery for the visitors.



Tottenham manager Harry Redknapp said Defoe, who was returning after a suspension, was a "fantastic talent" and paid tribute to his side's eight-goal salvo after the break.



"We came out in the second half fantastic, pressed them worked them and took the opportunities," he told Sky Sports News.



In other English Premier League action on Sunday, Blackburn Rovers beat Bolton Wanderers 2-0 away to climb up to 11th in the table.



Without manager Sam Allardyce who is to undergo a heart operation, Blackburn went in front through a David Dunn curled effort before a mix-up with his goalkeeper Jussi Jaaskelainen saw Bolton's Sam Ricketts head into his own net.



In the late kickoff, Portmouth stayed bottom after losing 1-0 at Stoke, who grabbed a 74th minute winner through Ricardo Fuller after great work by winger Matthew Etherington.



Pompey, who lost England goalkeeper David James to injury in the warm up, missed an eighth-minute penalty through Kevin-Prince Boateng and had chances to secure at least a point at the Britannia Stadium.

***

(CNN)  -- Real Madrid coach Jose Mourinho is hopeful that star striker Cristiano Ronaldo will return for Wednesday's Champions League clash with Lyon.





The Portugal captain will not feature in Saturday's La Liga game at home to Hercules, having sustained a thigh injury during Real's 7-0 defeat of Malaga on March 3.





"I am pretty sure he will play, but I do not like players who are not at 100%," Mourinho told reporters at a press conference on Friday.





"If Cristiano had to play tomorrow he wouldn't because he is not fully fit, but I am sure after training on Saturday, Sunday, Monday and Tuesday he will play next Wednesday."





Real are looking to qualify for the quarterfinals of the European competition for the first time since 2004, having drawn 1-1 with the French side in the first leg of the last-16 tie on February 22.





However, despite recording a 3-1 win over Racing Santander last weekend -- and having an unblemished home record this season and Mourinho with any club for the past nine years -- Real remain 11 points behind defending champions Barcelona in the Spanish league.





Mourinho hit out at his arch-rivals, saying that he did not think that the two clubs were receiving the same treatment in terms of their match schedules.





"It's not fair for everyone. One team plays the Champions League on a Tuesday and La Liga on Sunday, and another play on a Wednesday and Saturday," he said.





"Real Madrid is not being given the same chances to compete. I am not stupid. We all know that the moment the lead increases the championship is lost."





Nevertheless, Mourinho said his side would not be taking anything for granted against 18th-placed Hercules, and hoped for a positive result before the home clash with Lyon -- who knocked Real out at the same stage last season before reaching the semifinals.





"Whoever's season is at stake isn't worried. It's not an easy match for us. Their players have a lot of personality and they will expect to earn a positive result," the Portuguese coach said





"We want to remain perfect at the Bernabeu. A solid match will boost our confidence before playing against Lyon."

***

(CNN) -- For video game fans, many of the gadgets and accessories designed to support today's games are as unique and imaginative as the games themselves.





From inflatable Wii racing karts to iPad joysticks and plastic assault rifles tailor-made for living room juntas, there's no shortage of weird, wild and occasionally even useful peripherals for handheld and set-top systems alike.





Among the hundreds of available gaming gizmos and add-ons are a  coffin-shaped guitar instrument case and  blinged-out chrome plating for consoles. They're great to look at, but they won't enhance your gameplay much.





Here are five recent accessories designed to improve your gaming experience:





G155 ($299.99, http://www.projectgaems.com/) -- A portable game room to go, this carrying case unpacks to reveal a built-in 15.5-inch LED HD screen, stereo speakers and dual 3.5mm headphone jacks that let you annihilate friends or save the universe anywhere you travel.





Pop an Xbox 360 or PlayStation 3 Slim in, hook up the HDMI cable, and assuming you don't mind a little heavy lifting, voila. You can spend family vacations with your head happily buried in "WWE All Stars" or "Killzone 3."





Arcade FightStick Tournament Edition ($159.99, www.madcatz.com) -- Pricey, but infinitely cheaper than springing for an arcade machine, this PS3 and Xbox 360 joystick controller and eight-button pad delivers authentic coin-operated control and precision.





Designed for use with popular fighting games such as "Marvel vs. Capcom 3," it lets you plug in its 13-foot USB connector cable to enjoy customizable button mappings, turbo functionality and that classic quarter-munching feel.





Charge Base for 3DS ($29.99, www.nyko.com) -- Given the Nintendo 3DS handheld 3-D gaming system's anemic 3- to 4- hour battery life, this useful combo charging dock and capacity-boosting rechargeable battery comes in especially handy by offering double the juice.





It's not the most convenient accessory to carry around. But if you're planning on marathon play sessions, it can keep you happily splattering aliens or downing submarines twice as long as usual.





PlayStation Move SharpShooter ($39.99) -- This plastic attachment lets you turn your PlayStation Move motion controller into a full-fledged rifle, theoretically providing greater accuracy and atmosphere in shooter games like the suddenly timely "SOCOM 4: U.S. Navy SEALs."





Go ahead -- screw up your face and do your best "Terminator" impression. There's no denying the temptation to want to place your fingers on its pump-action grip.





Harley Davidson: Road Trip with Accessory Bar ($29.99, www.eagl3.com) -- Of all the goofy gewgaws (e.g. plastic sword, shield, fishing rod, machine gun and jet-ski inserts) offered for Wii and PlayStation 3, we're partial to these motorcycle handlebars from InterWorks Unlimited, Inc.





Crank up "Born to Be Wild," twist the Wii remote to rev up, and you too can join the ranks of balding middle managers who spend their Sundays hitting the road on their virtual hog -- while reclining in a well-worn La-Z-Boy.

***

BERLIN, Germany (CNN) -- German investigators raided the Frankfurt offices of KFW bank Wednesday in an investigation into a payment of more than $400 million made in error to failed U.S. investment bank Lehman Brothers.





Investigators from Germany's Federal Criminal Office and the state prosecutor's office conducted the raid and searches at Kreditanstalt fuer Wiederaufbau (Credit Agency for Reconstruction), or KFW, spokesman Wolfram Schweickhardt said.





The government-owned KFW bank group transferred €319 million ($412 million) to Lehman Brothers on September 15, after the U.S. bank filed for bankruptcy, the state prosecutor's office in Frankfurt said in a statement.





Authorities are investigating KFW board members and bosses on suspicion of embezzlement, the prosecutor's office said.





They want to know whether KFW officials were criminally negligent by failing to prevent the money transfer despite knowing about Lehman's liquidity problems and the impending international banking crisis.





"We are fully cooperating with the authorities and will provide them any documents they wish to see," Schweickhardt said.





Schweickhardt said the money was transferred to Lehman on the morning of Monday, September 15, as part of a long-standing two-part transaction that had been in motion since July. The transaction was among about 1,000 automated transactions set up for that morning -- a normal volume for the agency, he said.





Although "people had discussed over the weekend the fact that Lehman Brothers was in trouble, no one thought to check the actual transfers in the system," Schweickhardt said.





The mistake was spotted only a couple of hours later and the agency's chief executive was informed, he said. The following Thursday, the company suspended three directors; they were fired on September 29, he said.





The firing of the three directors was widely reported in Germany, with the tabloid Bild showing a picture of them with the headline, "Germany's dumbest bankers." News headlines have since referred to KFW as "Germany's dumbest bank."





CNN's Frederik Pleitgen contributed to this report.

***

Tokyo (CNN) -- Norio Ohga, the former president and chairman of Sony Corporation who helped to develop the compact disc, died Saturday of multiple organ failure, the company said. He was 81.





Ohga worked for what is now Sony as a consultant and adviser while still a music student in Tokyo, before joining the company full time in 1959.





He rose to the ranks of chairman and president and is credited with driving the company's growth in movies, video games and music.





Ohga saw the potential of the compact disc early and spearheaded Sony's efforts in that area, the company said.





His training as a musician led him to push for a 12-centimeter format, providing enough storage to allow listeners to hear all of Ludwig van Beethoven's Ninth Symphony without interruption, according to Sony. Those specifications are still in use today.





The company sold the world's first CD in 1982 and within five years, CD sales overtook LP record sales in Japan.





Ohga is also credited with launching Sony's game business and was head of Sony when it bought Columbia Pictures in 1989.





He was a senior adviser to Sony at the time of his death.





"By redefining Sony as a company encompassing both hardware and software, Ohga-san succeeded where other Japanese companies failed. It is no exaggeration to attribute Sony's evolution beyond audio and video products into music, movies and games, and subsequent transformation into a global entertainment leader to Ohga-san's foresight and vision," Sony Chief Executive Howard Stringer said in a statement.





"I offer my deepest condolences on his passing and pray that he may rest in peace."

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- Nearly a year after being beaten into a coma, Bryan Steinhauer said Wednesday he does not hate the Serbian basketball player witnesses said brutally assaulted him.



Bryan Steinhauer, who was beaten into a coma, is making significant progress in his rehabilitation.



"I am not full of hate; hatred kills progress," he said.



Appearing alongside his parents and doctors at New York's Mount Sinai Hospital, Steinhauer struggled to speak but his message was clear.



"Please don't feel sorry for me," he said. "Tragedy leads to wisdom, and this experience has taught me so much about life."  Watch Steinhauer talk about his recovery »



The 22-year-old from Brooklyn was about to graduate and had a job lined up at accounting giant KPMG when he got into an argument last May that nearly cost him his life.



According to police, witnesses said Steinhauer and college basketball player Miladin Kovacevic had exchanged harsh words at an upstate New York bar near Binghamton University after Steinhauer danced with the girlfriend of one of Kovacevic's friends.



The witnesses said the fight went outside the bar, where several men attacked Steinhauer, with Kovacevic beating him about the head, according to police. Kovacevic is 6-foot-9 and 260 pounds while Steinhauer was 130 pounds.



Kovacevic was arrested but jumped bail and fled to Serbia with the help of Serbian consular officials in New York.



The case strained relations between the United States and Serbia.Hillary Clinton intervened, first as U.S. senator from New York and later as secretary of state, as did Sen. Charles Schumer, D-New York, to make sure Kovacevic was prosecuted.



Serbia has no extradition treaty with the United States, but Serbian officials arrested Kovacevic last October and are working on prosecuting him with the assistance of the district attorney of Broome County, where the beating took place.



In addition, the Serbian government recently paid the Steinhauer family $900,000 in recognition of the misconduct of Serbian government officials and the financial burdens placed upon the Steinhauer family as a result of the beating.



Steinhauer awoke from his coma last August, three months after the beating that left him with skull fractures, a severe brain injury and no memory of the attack. He weighed less than 100 pounds, could not speak or walk, and was fed through a tube, doctors said Wednesday.



"He had hemorrhages and contusions affecting almost every lobe of his brain," said Dr. Brian Greenwald.



Working with specialists and boosted by the support of his family, Steinhauer surprised even his doctors in his quick recovery, they said. He now has outpatient rehabilitation four times a week, goes to a gym, and receives acupuncture treatments. While he can eat on his own now and is making significant progress, Steinhauer continues to undergo intensive therapy.



Steinhauer says he doesn't think about Kovacevic because he's not concerned about other people.



"I've had a second birth and raising at Mount Sinai," he said. "Live long and prosper."

***

TAMPA, Florida (CNN) -- After witnessing the rapid devastation of a Cayman Island coral reef where he had been diving since childhood, Todd Barber was moved from horror to action.



He gave up a six-figure salary as a marketing consultant and dedicated his life to restoring the world's ocean reef ecosystems.



"I had been following this reef since I had been 14; it was where my first dive was," recalls Barber. "When that one little tiny reef was lost, that sparked something in me. If we lost one and it took that tens of thousands of years to get here, how fast is this happening?"



Barber had caught a small glimpse of a larger global issue -- the destruction of the world's coral reefs -- and it scared him. According to the Nature Conservancy, if the present rate of destruction continues, 70 percent of the world's coral reefs will be destroyed by the year 2050. Not only are they home to 25 percent of all marine fish species, but the organization states that 500 million people rely on coral reefs for their food and livelihoods.



So Barber and his father, a marine biologist and fellow diver, sat down to devise a solution to "put the reef back." What started as a basic idea to shape concrete around a beach ball led to three years of research, testing and prototyping with the help of friends and college professors.  Watch as Barber explains his passion for saving reefs »



"Our goal was to mimic nature, not dictate nature," says Barber. "And that meant that I couldn't come up with an idea; I had to design something that would fit exactly what the reef required."



The result was what Barber calls a "Reef Ball." Made of concrete engineered to last more than 500 years, Reef Balls are circular structures with a hollow center that serve as a base habitat upon which a natural reef can grow. Portable, inexpensive and environmentally friendly, according to Barber, Reef Balls can be built anywhere and are used to mimic and rehabilitate all forms of oceanic reefs, such as mangrove, oyster and coral reefs. They can also help control erosion and stabilize shorelines.  Watch as an organization in Tampa tries to restore habitats for oysters »



To manufacture and place Reef Balls in marine habitats around the world, Barber established The Reef Ball Foundation in 1993. Today, the non-profit organization works with environmental agencies, universities, community groups and corporations and empowers others to build and restore their local marine ecosystems.



"[Reefs] have an incredible bearing on human life," says Barber. "Without conserving these resources, they're going to be all gone before we even know what we've lost."



According to Barber, marine conservation isn't just about Reef Balls, but they're one important tool.



"It's about saving natural reefs. It's about changing our behaviors," says Barber. "It's better to save the reef that you have than to build a new one."



Since its inception, the Reef Ball Foundation has placed Reef Balls in more than 59 countries.



"For me, personally, the satisfaction comes from diving on a Reef Ball and seeing that the environment has been rehabilitated; that the reef is actually there," says Barber. "And that our grandkids will be able to see the same thing." E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- David Beckham is planning showdown talks with L.A. Galaxy teammate Landon Donovan, who questioned the English football star's commitment to the MLS team earlier this month.



Landon Donovan, left, is unhappy with David Beckham's contribution at LA Galaxy.



Beckham said the U.S. national captain was "unprofessional" for publicly voicing his opinions, which were reported worldwide from the soon-to-be-published book "The Beckham Experiment" by Sports Illustrated writer Grant Wahl.



"In every football player's eyes throughout the world, it would be unprofessional to speak out about a team-mate, especially in the press and not to your face," Beckham said before watching the Galaxy's 1-0 win over Chivas USA on Saturday night. What do you think? Was Donovan right?



"In 17 years, I have played with the biggest teams in the world and the biggest players, and not once have I been criticized for my professionalism.



"It's important to get this cleared up, and I will be speaking to Landon either this evening or over the next couple of days. Me and Landon will talk, but that will be a private conversation."



Donovan, who led the United States to the Confederations Cup final last month, said in the book that Beckham had been a negative influence since his high-profile move to the Major League Soccer outfit two years ago.



He said Beckham, who brokered a loan move to AC Milan last season, had shown little interest in the Galaxy since coach Ruud Gullit resigned in August last year.



Donovan, who leads the Galaxy in Beckham's absence, also cast doubt on the 34-year-old midfielder's leadership abilities.



But last week he admitted that he should have brought up his grievances with Beckham earlier.



"I don't apologize for what I said," Donovan told MLSnet.com on Thursday.



"I just apologize for the way I did. I should have told him to his face. I've long told David since he's been gone and I've been gone that I want to sit down and talk with him about everything.



"It's fresh in everyone's minds now, and it appears like everything has gone on in a short period of time, but this has been a long time coming. The timing of it makes it a little awkward and seemingly uncomfortable, but we'll be fine. We'll get through it.



"I like David as a person and I think he's a very good player. The frustrating part was at some point something happened and he seemingly turned off at the end of the year.



"Nobody knows what it was, and my fault is I should have asked him and approached him and I didn't. Instead I vented to a reporter, and I regret it."

***

(CNN) -- Six of the seven college students killed in a massive house fire Sunday morning in Ocean Isle Beach, North Carolina, attended the University of South Carolina, a university official said Sunday.

"This is a very sad day for the University of South Carolina family," Dennis A. Pruitt, the vice president for student affairs, told reporters.

The seventh fatality is believed to be a Clemson University student, he said.

The six survivors -- who were treated and released from Brunswick Community Hospital -- are also USC students, he said.

Pruitt said the bodies were being sent to Chapel Hill, North Carolina, for identification.  Watch home video showing the house in flames »

"It is difficult to ascertain exactly who was in the house and who was not," Pruitt said, explaining that several area houses were filled with college students visiting for the weekend.

Newspaper deliveryman Tim Burns was aghast when he first saw the inferno early Sunday morning. He tried to approach the door but the flames were too intense, he told the Associated Press.

"When I was going up to the entryway, you could hear the windows above me explode," Burns said. "When I knew the flames had taken over, I don't think I've ever felt as helpless in my life."

The USC students were affiliated with the Delta Delta Delta sorority and the Sigma Alpha Epsilon fraternity, Pruitt said, although he stressed that the weekend was not an official Greek function.

"It just so happens, as on many university campuses, that certain sororities and certain fraternities hang around together," he said.

One person described as "unaccounted for" was later confirmed dead, Ocean Isle Beach Mayor Debbie Smith told CNN.

"We suffered a terrible tragedy at Ocean Isle this morning," Smith said in a news conference. "Nothing like this has ever happened at Ocean Isle Beach, and we hope it never will again."

She said officials had not yet contacted all the victims' families, and that they were not yet releasing their names. The mayor said one of the 13 people in the house was related to the house's owner.

Smith said the house was fully "engulfed" in flames around 7 a.m. when the fire department arrived on the scene, about five minutes after the fire department was notified.

She said the house had working smoke detectors, AP reported.

Officials are investigating the cause of the fire, Smith said.

"We ran down the street to get away," Nick Cain told the AP. The University of North Carolina student was staying at a house about 100 feet away.

Some of his friends had met several people staying at the house that burned down.

"The ash and the smoke were coming down on us. We were just trying to get away," Cain told the AP.

Ocean Isle Beach is a popular resort destination along the southern coast of North Carolina. The 7-mile-long island's year-round population is about 425, while the summer season population is about 25,000, according to the town's Web site.  E-mail to a friend

***

Moscow (CNN) -- Ireland's expulsion of a Russian diplomat over spying allegations is "clearly an unfriendly step that will not go unanswered," Russia's deputy foreign minister said Wednesday, according to a report.





Vladimir Titov's remarks were reported by the state-run RIA-Novosti news agency. The ministry press office told CNN it was not aware of the comment and could not elaborate.





Ireland on Tuesday rebuked Russia for "completely unacceptable" behavior and expelled a diplomat after an investigation found that the Russian intelligence services had forged Irish passports, the government said.





An investigation by the Garda Siochana police force found the Russian intelligence services made "false documents based on the acquisition of details of six genuine passports belonging to Irish citizens," and effectively stole the identities of six Irish people, the Department of Foreign Affairs said in a statement.





The probe -- launched after last year's discovery of a Russian espionage operation in the United States -- found "an entirely persuasive picture" of such activities, the statement said.





The department's secretary general met with the Russian ambassador and informed him that it is "not the behavior the government would expect from a country with which we have friendly relations," the statement said.





"The ambassador was also told that the accreditation of a named member of his staff with diplomatic status is to be terminated. ... The individual in question has been asked to leave this jurisdiction by a specified date."





The statement added, "It is hoped that it will be possible to move on from this disturbing incident and to develop further the relationship between Ireland and the Russian Federation which is fundamentally strong and which has significant potential."





CNN's Maxim Tkachenko contributed to this report.

***

MIAMI, Florida (CNN) -- Four suspects indicted on murder and burglary charges in the slaying of Washington Redskins star Sean Taylor begin their journey through the courts on Wednesday.



A grand jury identified Eric Rivera Jr. as the shooter in the death of NFL star Sean Taylor.



Court documents say the youngest is alleged to have fired the fatal shot.



He is identified as Eric Rivera Jr., 17. He appeared briefly on Wednesday morning before a judge in Miami, Florida.



Rivera has been indicted as an adult and Judge John Thornton found probable cause to support charges of first degree felony murder and burglary with assault or battery with a firearm.



Three other suspects -- Venjah K. Hunte, 20, Jason Scott Mitchell, 19, and Charles Kendrick Lee Wardlow, 18 -- appeared Tuesday in court via videoconference.



They wore thick green vests, which defense attorneys said were suicide safety smocks. They were ordered held without bail at the Pre-Trial Detention Center in Miami, Florida, where Corrections Officer Janelle Hall said they are under suicide watch.



All four suspects are expected to make initial appearances later this morning before Circuit Judge Dennis Murphy.    Watch CNN's Rick Sanchez speak to attorneys for two of the suspects »



Rivera was armed during the alleged burglary, and "during the course of the commission of the offense ... discharged a firearm and as a result of the discharge, death or great bodily harm was inflicted upon Sean Maurice Taylor, a human being," the indictment says.



The four men were arrested Friday, officials said.



Taylor, 24, died a day after he was shot during an apparent burglary at his home. Miami-Dade police investigators said they believe the burglars thought the house was empty.



Thousands of mourners attended Taylor's funeral Monday at Florida International University's arena.  See photos from the funeral »



Police said Taylor and his girlfriend, Jackie Garcia, were awakened by noise coming from the living room early November 26. Taylor got up and locked the bedroom door, but the door was kicked in and two shots were fired, police said. One struck Taylor in the leg.



Garcia and the couple's 18-month-old daughter were not hurt.



Authorities have said Garcia told police she was hiding under the bedding during the attack, did not see what happened and could not provide a suspect description.



A break-in had been reported at Taylor's residence eight days earlier. A police report from that incident said someone forced a window open and left a kitchen knife on a bed. Several drawers and a bedroom safe were searched during the break-in, according to the report.



Taylor spent four years with the Redskins, earning his first Pro Bowl selection in 2006. He suffered a sprained right knee in a November 11 loss to the Philadelphia Eagles and had not played since.



The 2004 first-round draft pick played at the University of Miami, where he was an All-American in 2003. He was regarded as one of the hardest-hitting players in the NFL. E-mail to a friend



CNN's John Couwels, Kim Segal, and Patrick Oppmann contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- The bad economy and downturn in the housing market aren't the only painful things for Realtor Anne Stephens. Her knees, hips and ankles hurt from arthritis.

Anne Stephens, 61, was in her late 30s when she was diagnosed with osteoarthritis.

"I can't sit too long. I can't stand too long, and I can't walk too long," said Stephens, 61, from Conyers, Georgia.

Stephens is among the 27 million Americans who suffer from the most common form of arthritis called osteoarthritis.

"I think people tend to think of this as more of a nuisance," said Dr. John Klippel, president and CEO of the Arthritis Foundation. "They think of it as only aches and pains and not the serious problem that it actually is -- the leading cause of disability in this country."

Klippel said part of the misconception has to do with all the myths surrounding the disease.

Common myth 1: Arthritis is a disease of the elderly

While older people do develop arthritis, children and teenagers can get certain forms of the condition, Klippel said.

The Arthritis Foundation reports two-thirds of people with doctor-diagnosed arthritis are under age 65.  Watch more on arthritis fact and fiction Â»

Stephens was in her late 30s when she developed osteoarthritis after injuring her knees running and playing volleyball.

She felt a sharp pain and recalled, "It was downhill after that."

Researchers don't know the exact cause of arthritis, but they do know what puts people at risk.

Klippel said that while the disease is associated with aging, other risk factors include heredity, joint injury, obesity and lack of fitness.

Common myth 2: Cracking your knuckles causes arthritis

Despite what your grandmother told you, experts say cracking your knuckles is not a risk factor for arthritis.

"It's annoying -- it's certainly not good for the joints, but on the other hand, it doesn't cause arthritis," Klippel said.

Common myth 3: Predicting the weather

"Boy, there's a good myth," Klippel said with a chuckle. "I can't tell you how many patients I would take care of who would say they were better than the weatherman at predicting changes in humidity."

He said researchers have studied the claims, but concluded there is no scientific evidence to suggest arthritis flare-ups occur during bad weather.

Klippel also doesn't buy the argument that arthritis patients are better off if they live in a warmer climate.

"If you live in a warmer climate, you're simply more active for more months of the year and that's probably why people feel better," Klippel said. "It probably has very little to do with the weather itself."

Common myth 4: Exercise aggravates arthritis

Staying active actually is one of the most important ways to prevent and ease the pain of arthritis, Klippel said. It also helps with weight control.

"For people with arthritis, it hurts to exercise," he said. "But over time, the post-exercise pain actually diminishes if you push through it."

He recommended choosing joint-friendly exercises such as walking, biking or swimming.

In addition to putting ice on an aching joint, Klippel suggested taking nonsteroidal, anti-inflammatory medication before or after exercising to help relieve the pain.

"People need to stay active and move their joints to keep the muscles strong and to keep the joints flexible," Klippel said.

Common myth 5: Nothing helps

Klippel worries about arthritis patients who don't seek medical help because they don't think anything can be done about the pain.

He said a proper diagnosis can lead to a host of possible treatments, including the latest prescription medicines for pain and rehabilitating aching joints through physical therapy.

Klippel urges people not to wait until the pain is unbearable before seeing a doctor.

"If aches and pains persist for more than four weeks, that's a time to pay attention," he said.

Anne

***

Madrid, Spain (CNN) -- A Spanish court convicted 11 Islamic militants Monday of membership in a terrorist group, but acquitted them of a "specific" conspiracy to carry out an attack on Barcelona's metro subway system, as prosecutors alleged.



The court instead said there was a more general decision by the group, linked to al Qaeda, to use explosives against Barcelona's metro, but that a specific date and place had not been determined, nor had a sufficient amount of explosives been assembled, according to a copy of the sentence viewed by CNN.



The judges ruled the alleged Barcelona plot had "not advanced sufficiently" to constitute a crime of conspiracy under Spanish law.



The alleged plot in January 2008 had raised alarm bells in Europe because Spanish authorities said there were to be a series of attacks, starting with suicide bombings on the Barcelona metro, and then other attacks in Spain, Germany, France, Portugal and Great Britain, if successive demands from a Pakistani Taliban leader and al Qaeda were not met.



The trial against 10 Pakistani men and an Indian national was held last month. All proclaimed their innocence and many refused to answer prosecutors questions.



The three-judge panel at the National Court ruled on Monday that all 11 belonged to a terrorist group. Two of the 11 also were convicted of possession of explosives, but nine others were acquitted on that charge. The 11 face prison terms of eight to 14 years.



But Jose Maria Fuster-Fabra, a private prosecutor representing victims in the case, told CNN the sentence sets a precedent in Spain because the 11 defendants were convicted for terrorist group membership almost solely on the basis of a key police informant, known as F1 to protect his identity.



F1 testified he was selected by the group's leader to be a suicide bomber, and that he quickly made a secretive call from a bathroom at a Barcelona mosque to warn a friend in France about an impending terrorist attack. Hours later, police swooped to make arrests in January 2008 in Barcelona.



The protected witness denied on the stand that he worked for French or any other secret service.



Defense lawyer Jacobo Teijelo, on the team representing all 11 defendants, said the sentence lacked judicial merit and he vowed to appeal to Spain's Supreme Court.



About 30 members of Barcelona's large Pakistani community watched the trial almost daily in a bulletproof basement courtroom at the high-security National Court in central Madrid. A community leader told CNN the defendants were innocent and that the Pakistani community in Barcelona was hardworking and law-abiding.



More than 300 suspected Islamic extremists have been arrested in Spain since the Madrid commuter train bombings that killed 191 people and wounded more than 1,800 on March 11, 2004, Spain's interior minister has said.

***

Kabul, Afghanistan (CNN) -- Nine people killed in a military action targeting militants in eastern Afghanistan apparently were members of an insurgent network, a U.S. military official told CNN on Tuesday.





"The operation was against a network of folks, who had been tracked for a while, involved in producing IEDs as well as some criminal activity," said the official, who asked not to be named.





"As a result of the action, the best info that we have is that nine of those militants in that network were killed. That's based on weapons and IED components at the scene," and it appears the nine were males, the official said.





IED is the acronym for improvised explosive device, which is a roadside bomb.





U.S.-led forces in Afghanistan said Monday they were investigating reports that 10 Afghan civilians, including eight students, were killed Saturday in a coalition operation in the Narang district of Kunar province.





Said Fazelayallah, governor of Kunar province, told CNN Monday that 10 civilians, in fact, were killed. Coalition forces said they killed their targets, he said, but a delegation sent by the governor to investigate reported the civilian casualties.





Civilian casualties in the Afghan war have stoked outrage among the citizenry and Afghan authorities. U.S. and other international forces have been working to stop such fatalities, and they have accused Taliban militants of putting civilians in harm's way.





The United Nations in Afghanistan said on Tuesday that from January to October of this year, 1,404 deaths have been caused by insurgents; 465 have been caused by pro-government forces, such as NATO's International Security Assistance Force; and other causes have led to 165 civilian deaths.





In this Kunar province incident, Fazelayallah said the operation was launched without the knowledge of government officials in the province.





The U.S. military source said it was "a joint operation with Afghan and U.S. forces."





The numbers of civilian casualties have fallen off in recent months, since Lt. Gen. Stanley McChrystal took over as U.S. commander in Afghanistan.





The military's goal is to protect population centers to enable the government to improve security and governance, McChrystal told CNN's Christiane Amanpour earlier this month. Civilian casualties, he said, make it less likely that the Afghans will support the coalition.





"It is better to miss a target than to cause civilian casualties," he said. "We can always target enemy leaders later. We can't make up for the fact that we killed civilians."





CNN's Atia Abawi contributed to this report.

***

Berlin, Germany (CNN)  -- A bomb scare that affected about 100 flights at Munich Airport in Germany on Wednesday may have been a false alarm, German police told CNN.





Police launched a huge manhunt Wednesday after a passenger appeared to flee from security officers when his laptop computer bag tested positive for explosives, they said.





Police originally said authorities wanted to take the man in for further testing after his bag set off suspicions, but he ran. They said a bomb squad was testing the bag to see if it really contained explosives.





But authorities later said the man may simply have been in a hurry, grabbed his things and left the airport.





They do not have the laptop case, they said.





They are still trying to find the man, they said, but are no longer describing the search as a huge manhunt.





Police earlier said they were reviewing airport security videos to try to figure out where the man went. It was not clear if that was what caused them to change their evaluation of the situation.





Police did not know which flight the man was booked on.





Part of the airport was shut down after the suspect fled, but was later reopened.





All planes in the area of Terminal 2, where the incident took place, were evacuated and all luggage was removed, police said. The passengers had to leave the secure area and be rescreened, an airport representative told CNN, adding that the airport was otherwise operating normally.





About 100 flights were affected by the security measures. Some were canceled and others were delayed, the airport said, adding that activity has slowly begun to return to normal.





The airport Web site was still showing some delays to flights leaving Terminal 2 several hours after the incident.





The incident took place as a United States Senate committee debated the foiled Christmas Day attack aboard a plane bound from Amsterdam in the Netherlands to Detroit, Michigan.





The committee chairman, Sen. Joseph Lieberman, I-Connecticut, said it is "infuriating" that the December 25 suspect, Nigerian Umar Farouk AbdulMutallab, was able to board the plane in the Netherlands with a U.S. visa.





Janet Napolitano, secretary of homeland security, said AbdulMutallab "was not on the no-fly list, which would've flagged him to be prevented from boarding, nor was he on the selectee list, which would've flagged him for secondary screening."





"Furthermore, the physical screening performed by foreign authorities at airports in Nigeria and the Netherlands did not detect explosives on his body," Napolitano said. "As this incident underscores, aviation security is increasingly an international responsibility."





She said top Homeland Security Department officials are embarking on a multicontinent tour to meet with international counterparts about airline and airport security. She said she would leave Wednesday evening for Spain and a meeting with European Union officials.





CNN's Frederik Pleitgen contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Torrential rains and flooding since June have affected 600,000 people in 16 West African nations, the United Nations reported Tuesday.



People walk in the flooded streets of Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso, last week.



The worst hit have been Burkina Faso, Senegal, Ghana and Niger, said Yvon Edoumou, a spokesman for the U.N. Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, or OCHA, in the Senegalese capital, Dakar. So far, 159 people have died, he said. Sierra Leone has also been hard hit, according to the U.N.



Edoumou said removing water from flooded areas is a top priority, but powerful pumps are in short supply.



"Some people refused to leave their homes so they are living in floodwaters," he said.



The United Nations has not yet received reports of waterborne diseases, but Edoumou said a real threat exists of diarrhea or, worse, cholera.



The U.N. World Food Programme said Tuesday it has begun distributing food to tens of thousands of homeless flood victims.



WFP has set a goal of feeding 177,500 people, mainly in Ouagadougou, the capital of Burkina Faso, where 150,000 people have been affected and key infrastructure -- including a central hospital, schools, bridges and roads -- has been damaged.



The flooding in Burkina Faso is the worst in 90 years, WFP said.



Many of those in Ouagadougou most needing help were already receiving aid from WFP, but those rations were lost in the floodwaters, the U.N. reported.



"It is always the poor and vulnerable who suffer the most from floods like these as their few remaining assets are swept away, leaving them hungry and destitute," WFP Executive Director Josette Sheeran said.



Roads and buildings have been ruined from Mauritania to Niger, the U.N. reported. In Agadez, Niger, a town about 458 miles (738 km) north of the capital, Niamey, close to 988 acres (400 hectares) of vegetable crops and hundreds of livestock were washed away.



Herve Ludovic de Lys, head of OCHA in West Africa, said natural disasters have a lasting effect that unravels years of progress against poverty.



"The situation is very worrying," he said in an OCHA statement issued Tuesday.



The rainy season in West Africa begins in June and continues through late September. In 2007, 300 people died and 800,000 were affected by the storms.



This year, fears abound that more heavy rain will fall in already waterlogged areas.



Despite the misery, Edoumou said the rains are a mixed blessing for countries dependent on agriculture. The harvest this year will be more bountiful, he said.

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- Tess Sosa and her daughter have had a hard time forgetting US Airways Flight 1549's emergency landing in New York City's Hudson River in January.



Tess Sosa holds her infant son, Damian, as her daughter Sophia, 4, plays on the couch.



Sosa and Sophia, 4, have needed therapy, and the Sosas have had to pay out of their own pockets because US Airways' insurer says only three counseling sessions are covered. The family has private insurance and large deductible.



The airline and insurer say compensation to the passengers has already exceeded US Airway's obligation, adding they gave $5,000 to passengers after the incident. But Sosa said she thinks the airline is still falling short



"They have gone to incredible measures to get all of our belongings back, dry them out," she said. "However, I think in doing so, there was this huge oversight in 'Let's take care of these passengers.'"  Watch Sosa explain her expectations »



Relief over her family's survival can't undo the trauma she endured after the January 15 landing, during which she had to scramble over seats with her infant son, Damian, in tow.



Water rushed into the plane as she turned and saw her husband, Martin, sitting at the back of the plane with their then-3-year-old daughter, Sophia. She recalled her husband "in shock with my daughter being held up high, the water coming in, and hoping they'd see me."



Another passenger "bear hugged" her and Damian and escorted them to the exit.



Today, Sosa still remembers how she felt that day: "the possibility, the imminent death, just waiting to see if the plane was going to plunge any further in the river."



Following the emergency ditching of Flight 1549, Capt. Chesley "Sully" Sullenberger was quickly crowned a hero for ably landing the Airbus A320 after birds disabled its engines. He made the cover of several magazines, including People, which featured him holding Damian Sosa.  See other notable air accidents »



U.S. Airways hired a firm to restore and return thousands of personal items to passengers -- items ranging from boarding tickets to suitcases.



The airline's insurer, American International Underwriters Holdings, a unit of AIG, says US Airways went above and beyond its obligations because the airline is not liable in the crash and the insurers' responsibility "is to pay valid claims on behalf of US Airways as a result of its legal liability."



Commenting for AIU, Robert Hartwig, president of the Insurance Information Institute, said he concurred that the airline and insurer had fulfilled their obligations.



"We have a flock of birds flying into jet engines for a perfectly well-functioning aircraft and a crew that exhibited extraordinary professionalism in this particular incident. This is very important to recognize, but again, the liability does not exist," he said.



This is little consolation to the Sosas, whose private insurance has a $3,000 deductible. Sosa said the family still needs help dealing with the trauma, especially Sophia.



The family just received another $1,000 bill for therapy sessions.



"I expect my family to be taken care of in the very best way possible, and I don't feel like that's happening when you're balking at my claims to a therapist and you are setting limits on that," she said.

***

SAN FRANCISCO, California (CNN)  -- Thousands of protesters demonstrated against China's human rights record and its crackdown in Tibet after the Olympic flame arrived in San Francisco Tuesday.



Pro-Tibetan demonstrators shout outside the Chinese consulate in San Francisco Tuesday.



Chanting and waving flags, the protesters ended their march at the Chinese consulate, where they sat in a dense group, holding flags and banners, as police watched from nearby.



"Stop killing," one sign read, while another said, "No human rights, no Olympics."



The protests came after passionate demonstrations in London and Paris in which protesters tried to snuff the torch's flame and dozens were arrested.



Meanwhile, the Olympic flame was being kept in an undisclosed location in advance of Wednesday's planed 6-mile relay in San Francisco.  Watch how the city is preparing »



The run is the only U.S. appearance for the flame, wrapping up the first week of a 23-city global tour.



Beijing organizers have said the monthlong international relay will not be stopped despite the protests, but some International Olympic Committee members have suggested an early end should be considered.



The IOC's executive board will discuss the torch relay "in general" Thursday or Friday, but there is no proposal on the agenda to end the global tour early, IOC spokeswoman Giselle Davies said.  Watch the flame get the red-carpet treatment »



The official Beijing Olympics Web site, controlled by the Chinese organizers, gives little indication of any torch relay disruption. It characterizes the demonstrators as "a small number" of Tibetan separatists.



Beijing blames the Dalai Lama and his followers for violence that erupted in March amid protests for Tibetan independence.



China has drawn international criticism for its crackdown on the demonstrations, which began peacefully on the 49th anniversary of a failed Tibetan uprising.



China's Foreign Ministry Tuesday reacted forcefully to the torch relay protests.



"We express our strong condemnation to the deliberate disruption of the Olympic torch relay by Tibetan separatist forces regardless of the Olympic spirit and the law of Britain and France," China spokeswoman Jiang Yu said.



"Their despicable activities tarnish the lofty Olympic spirit and challenge all the people loving the Olympic Games around the world."



The flame will return to China in May to begin a relay through the host nation, ending in Beijing with the August 8 opening of the Olympic Games.



One of the San Francisco torchbearers has dropped out of Wednesday's relay because of fears of protests, a torch relay spokesman said.



David Perry, spokesman for the San Francisco Olympic Torch Relay, said he did not want to release the name of the person.



"I understand anyone that might feel that they don't want to expose themselves to something more than protest," Perry said.



On Monday, three protesters scaled San Francisco's Golden Gate Bridge and raised a large banner.



Those who climbed the cables from which the bridge's deck is suspended were members of Students for a Free Tibet, said group spokesman Tenzin Dasang, 22. They unfurled a banner that read: "One World. One Dream. Free Tibet."



The three climbers, along with four people on the ground, were charged with felony conspiracy and misdemeanor nuisance charges, said California Highway Patrol Officer Mary Ziegenbein. The climbers also were charged with misdemeanor trespassing.



The Golden Gate Bridge protest came on the same day that thousands of protesters forced an abrupt halt to the flame's passage through Paris after 10 miles of the 17-mile planned route. Some stops were skipped and the flame was transferred from the torch back to the lamp to be carried on a bus several times to avoid protesters.



Protesters pierced the thick security bubble surrounding the torchbearers, at times getting their hands on the torch itself.



The Paris demonstrations were similar to those Sunday in London, where at least 36 people were arrested, according to London Metropolitan Police. Protesters cited China's actions in Tibet, its policies on the Darfur region of Sudan and the lack of civil rights and freedoms for the Chinese people.



But other demonstrators, bearing Chinese flags, turned

***

DENVER, Colorado (CNN) -- A former hospital employee may have exposed hundreds, or even thousands, of surgical patients to hepatitis C after taking their fentanyl injections and replacing them with used syringes filled with saline solution, authorities say.



A hospital worker has admitted to secretly injecting herself and using unclean syringes for patients.



Kristen Diane Parker, who worked at Rose Medical Center in Denver, has admitted to secretly injecting herself in a bathroom and using unclean syringes as replacements for patients, investigators said.



She had hepatitis C, which she believes she contracted through using heroin and sharing dirty needles while she lived in New Jersey in 2008, authorities said.



She was a surgical technician at Rose from October 2008 to April 2009.



Nine patients who had surgery there during that time have tested positive for hepatitis C. Investigators are looking into whether they contracted the virus from Parker.



According to an affidavit filed by an investigator with the Food and Drug Administration, Rose Medical Center knew Parker tested positive for hepatitis C. She was counseled on how to limit her exposure to patients.



Parker quit after she was found to be in an operating room where she was not allowed to be. She subsequently tested positive for fentanyl. Hospital officials then contacted the DEA.



Parker is in federal custody facing three drug-related charges. If she is found to have done serious harm to a patient, she could face up to 20 years in prison. If a patient dies because of her actions, she could face life in prison.



In a statement to police, Parker said, "I can't take back what I did, but I will have to live with it for the rest of my life, and so does everyone else."



Her attorney could not be reached Friday.



Rose Medical Center is contacting 4,700 patients who had surgery at Rose during the time Parker was employed there. However, hospital officials do not believe that many patients were exposed.



"We are taking a very conservative and cautious approach by contacting everyone who had surgery during this broad time period," a statement on the hospital's Web site said, adding, "It is likely that most of the patients who receive letters will not have been exposed to hepatitis C."



An additional 1,200 patients may have been infected between May 4, 2009, and July 1, 2009, when Parker worked at Audubon Ambulatory Surgical Center in Colorado Springs. Audubon is also contacting patients.



According to the Centers for Disease Control, hepatitis C is a contagious liver disease that can lead to cirrhosis or liver cancer.

***

(CNN) -- Gabon's President Omar Bongo, Africa's longest-serving ruler, died Monday morning, the country's prime minister said, settling conflicting reports from government and media accounts.



Gabon's President Omar Bongo, who died Monday, was Africa's longest-serving ruler.



Calm was reported after the announcement, but Gabon's Ministry of Defense nonetheless announced it was closing all of the country's land, air and sea ports, according to a ministry statement.



The statement, which was broadcast on state television and radio, said that in "the best interest of the nation, the Ministry of Defense calls on the population to increase their vigilance and patriotism during this difficult and painful time the country is facing."



In a statement, Prime Minister Jean Eyeghe Ndong said Bongo suffered cardiac arrest at a hospital in Barcelona, Spain.



"He dedicated his political life to his country and the Gabonese people, always cultivating the unity and cohesion of the Gabonese toward a true peace," Ndong said.



The government declared a 30-day national period of mourning.



Bongo, 73, had been receiving treatment for intestinal cancer at the Quiron clinic in Barcelona, Spain, according to the Gabonews agency.



Earlier in the day, the prime minister strongly refuted initial French news reports of Bongo's death. He had vowed to lodge a protest with the French authorities about "repeated leaks in the French press."



Shortly afterward, hospital officials reported Bongo's passing to Gabonese officials.



Bongo took power in 1967, seven years after the West African country's independence from France.



He imposed one-party rule a year after succeeding the country's first president, who died in office.



He allowed multiparty elections after a new constitution in 1991, but his party has retained control of the government since then.



President Obama said Bongo "played a key role in developing and shaping the strong bilateral relationship that exists between Gabon and the United States today."



"President Bongo consistently emphasized the importance of seeking compromise and striving for peace, and made protecting Gabon's natural treasures a priority," Obama said in a statement Monday. "His work in conservation in his country and his commitment to conflict resolution across the continent are an important part of his legacy and will be remembered with respect."



CNN's Per Nyberg and Al Goodman contributed to this report.

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- A grand jury Tuesday indicted three New York police officers on charges related to the alleged sodomy of a man on a Brooklyn subway platform in October.

Michael Mineo says New York Police officers sodomized him inside a Brooklyn subway station.

The indictments came after two other officers told the grand jury they saw Officer Richard Kern assault 24-year-old Michael Mineo with a police baton in October, authorities said.

"I think that both officers who stepped forward acted in a responsible, if not a heroic, way," Brooklyn District Attorney Charles Hynes said Tuesday. "I think both of them deserve a great deal of praise for doing that."

Kern, 25, faces charges including aggravated sexual abuse, a felony that could put him in prison for up to 25 years if convicted.

Officers Andrew Morales and Alex Cruz, both 26, face charges including hindering prosecution. Both are accused of trying to cover up the incident by falsifying records.

All three pleaded not guilty Tuesday at their arraignment before Brooklyn Supreme Court Judge John Walsh.

Authorities say Kern and Morales approached Mineo, a Brooklyn tattoo artist, on October 15 after seeing him walking down a street smoking what they believed to be marijuana.

As the uniformed officers approached Mineo, he fled. The officers chased him into a Brooklyn subway station, where they apprehended him on the platform, authorities said.

Cruz and a transit policeman, Kevin Maloney, joined the other officers and helped to subdue Mineo, who was then handcuffed with his hands behind his back, according to authorities.

Mineo claims Kern used his retractable police baton to sexually assault him on the subway platform. Witnesses said they heard Mineo's cries.

Mineo's lawyers said he showed officers he was bleeding, but they provided no medical attention and didn't call a supervisor as Mineo requested.

Kern gave Mineo a summons for disorderly conduct, and Mineo was released, authorities said. Mineo sought treatment at an area hospital, and hospital staff notified police that they treated a patient who claimed to be a victim of police brutality.

Hynes said that based on forensic information gathered by a medical examiner and the police lab, there was enough evidence to move the case to a grand jury.

The grand jury started hearing testimony October 28. Maloney and another officer testified that they had seen Kern assault Mineo with his baton.

After Tuesday's arraignment, Kern was released on $15,000 bail; the other two officers were released on their own recognizance.

Cruz's defense attorney called the case "paper thin."

Kern's attorney said Mineo's accusations were motivated by money, saying Mineo is planning to file a civil suit.

Mineo's attorneys would not explain why their client ran from police. The attorneys said they plan to file a civil suit, but they did not give information on the damages they plan to seek.

Mineo said he still suffers the effects of the attack.

"I relive this every day," Mineo said Tuesday. "Nobody should have to go through something like this."

***

(CNN) -- President-elect Barack Obama visited military personnel and their families enjoying Christmas dinner at a Marine Corps base in Hawaii Thursday during his holiday vacation.



President-elect Obama shakes hands with troops having Christmas dinner at a military base in Hawaii.



Obama went to Marine Corps Base Hawaii Kaneohe Bay on Oahu where he mingled with Marines and sailors. Obama and the troops also had a traditional dinner including turkey, roast beef, ham and trimmings.



Obama, dressed casually in a blue polo shirt and dark khaki trousers, chatted casually, shook hands and posed for photos with men and women in the dining hall, which had been decorated with Christmas trees and Santa figurines.



Shortly before Obama entered the room, a Marine shouted to the crowd scattered across 25 tables, "You need to take you seats, the president-elect is going to be coming."



Obama, who spent about an hour at the Marine base, worked his way around the room, table by table.



"Just wanted to say, 'Hi, hey guys,'" Obama said at one point while reporters were allowed in the room.



"Hey guys, Merry Christmas," he said to another group.



Obama also highlighted the service of the country's military men and women now overseas in a holiday message to be broadcast on radio this Saturday.



"As we celebrate this joyous time of year, our thoughts turn to the brave men and women who serve our country far from home," he said in the message, which was posted online Wednesday.



"Their extraordinary and selfless sacrifice is an inspiration to us all, and part of the unbroken line of heroism that has made our freedom and prosperity possible for over two centuries."   Watch Obama's holiday message »



More than 140,000 soldiers are currently serving in Iraq, as well as roughly 30,000 in Afghanistan.



In the broadcast message, Obama also called on Americans to "renew a sense of common purpose and shared citizenship."



"These are also tough times for many Americans struggling in our sluggish economy," he said.



"Now, more than ever, we must rededicate ourselves to the notion that we share a common destiny as Americans -- that I am my brother's keeper, I am my sister's keeper. ... We must all do our part to serve one another; to seek new ideas and new innovation; and to start a new chapter for our great country."



Obama said that notion "will guide my administration in the New Year. If the American people come together and put their shoulder to the wheel of history, then I know that we can put our people back to work ... and reach the promise of a brighter day."

***

(CNN) -- Football players are pushing for the sport's world governing body FIFA to bring in technology to decide whether the ball has crossed the goalline.





In a poll by international players' union FIFpro, 90 percent of respondents said they wanted to see goalline technology introduced.





FIFpro has submitted the findings to the International Football Association Board, FIFA's lawmaking body, which is meeting on Saturday, March 6, to discuss possible changes to the laws of the game.





Tijs Tummers, secretary of FIFpro's technical committee, said players have had enough of games being blighted by incorrect decisions over goals.





"The ultimate aim of football is scoring goals, and there's no greater injustice than when you have scored and it's not allowed because they say it did not cross the line," Tummers told CNN.





"Every weekend you see a situation like this in one of the top European leagues.





"There are no buts. It's very simple. The only argument against is that you say we want to keep a human feel but in the opinion of FIFpro and the players that is nonsense."





German sportswear giant Adidas has been working on a form of technology involving a microchip in the ball, while other options include a version of the Hawk-Eye system of computerized cameras currently used in tennis.





FIFA President Sepp Blatter has called for a system which is accurate but doesn't disrupt the flow of the game.





FIFA has tested goalline technology in junior tournaments but has recently moved away from further trials in favor of a simpler system involving two extra assistant referees stationed at each end.





The scheme, favored by UEFA President Michel Platini, has been tested in the Europa League this season but has proved unpopular with coaches and players.





FIFpro polled the 48 captains who have played in the Europa League this season, with 70 percent of the 31 who responded saying they saw no improvement in decision-making.





The row between extra referees and technology is on the agenda for the IFAB meeting, with any changes to be implemented next season, after the World Cup.





Other issues under review include whether players who concede penalties through professional fouls should also be sent off, and whether players should continue to be allowed to feint their run-ups when taking penalties.

***

(CNN) -- Accusing local media in the Orlando, Florida, area of a "barrage" of coverage, Casey Anthony's lead defense attorney asked Monday to have her death-penalty case moved from Orlando to Miami, Florida.



Casey Anthony is accused of killing her 2-year-old daughter Caylee.



"The overwhelming majority of the media's coverage of this case has been negative for the defendant," says a defense motion filed in Orange County Circuit Court. Anthony, 23, is scheduled to go on trial on a first-degree murder charge in the death of her 2-year-old daughter Caylee.



"The effects of the inflammatory and negative aspect of the media coverage in this case is best witnessed in the violent and harassing protests which have dogged the defendant and her family for many months now," the motion says.



Signed by Anthony's lead lawyer, Jose Baez, the motion says moving the trial far enough away from local media will "not end the coverage," which Baez said has produced thousands of articles and TV news reports, but will "have a chilling effect" on coverage.



Peter Odom, a defense attorney appearing Monday on HLN's Nancy Grace to provide analysis of the case, said, "All the defense has to show is that there's been extensive media coverage. That's a cinch."



"Secondly, that it will be impossible for them to find a fair jury pool," he added, referring to the Orlando area.



Baez cited a number of reasons in his request to the judge to move the case to south Florida, where he says it has been covered far less and there is a "large and diverse jury pool."



Local media in the Orlando area, he argued, have affected Anthony's chances of getting a fair trial not only in Orange County but in much of Central Florida. If the judge rejects his request to move the trial to Miami, Baez said Broward County, about a 45-minute drive north of Miami, is a second choice.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Ohio congressman David Hobson is the latest Republican to announce his exit from the House of Representatives, telling constituents Sunday he would step down in 2008 after nine terms.



Rep. David Hobson, shown in February, was the lone Republican on Rep. Nancy Pelosi's Mideast trip this year.



Hobson, 71, is a senior member of the House Appropriations subcommittee that oversees the Pentagon. He has represented his district, which includes parts of the Dayton and Columbus areas, since 1991.



His fellow Ohio Republican, House Minority Leader John Boehner, praised his "effective leadership and dry wit" in a statement issued Sunday evening.



"During the remainder of his term, I am certain that Dave will continue to represent his constituents with the same energy and dedication that have been the trademarks of his tenure in the U.S. House," Boehner said.



"I look forward to continuing our close work over these next 14 months, and when the 111th Congress begins, I'll be eager to work beside a new Republican from Ohio's 7th District."



Hobson is the 12th GOP House member to announce retirement ahead of the 2008 elections, when the Republican Party will be seeking to reclaim the congressional majorities it lost to Democrats in 2006.



Another Republican representative, New Mexico's Heather Wilson, has said she will run for the Senate seat being given up by Sen. Pete Domenici -- one of five Republicans retiring from the Senate in 2008 rather than seeking a new term.



"Ohio's 7th Congressional District is a strong Republican seat that will continue to elect candidates that fight to keep taxes low, the economy strong and the nation secure," said Rep. Tom Cole, the chairman of the National Republican Congressional Committee.



"We will be working with local activists and party leaders to send a candidate that fights for those same values back to Congress in 2008." E-mail to a friend



CNN's Jessica Yellin and Deirdre Walsh contributed to this report.

***

BAGHDAD, Iraq (CNN) -- The Iraqi government said Friday it has arrested members of a cell believed responsible for Wednesday's truck bombings in which more than 100 people were killed.



Workers clear the site outside the ministries of Finance and Foreign Affairs in Baghdad.



Maj. Gen. Qassim Atta, spokesman for Baghdad Operations Command, appeared on Iraqi state television Friday night to announce the arrests, which he said were made within two hours of the bombings in the capital city. Those arrested include people believed to have planned and executed the attacks, Atta said. It was not immediately clear how many people were arrested.



Initial investigations show a link between the cell and the ousted Baath regime of Saddam Hussein, Atta said. Authorities are also seeking people thought to have provided cell members with logistical support and identification, he said.



Iraq Security Forces recovered a truck Friday with five tons of C-4 explosives in the Abu Ghraib area, on the western outskirts of Baghdad, Atta said Friday night.



More than 500 people were wounded Wednesday in the six explosions in Baghdad.



In one attack, a truck bomb exploded outside the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The blast blew through the front of the building, sending some vehicles flying and leaving others in mangled twists of metal in the area, which is just outside the restricted International Zone, also known as the Green Zone. Another truck bomb went off outside the Ministry of Finance building.



Authorities said Thursday that 11 high-ranking security officials from the Iraqi army and police were detained for investigation.



The Iraqi government in the past has made claims of arrests that did not hold up. In April, it said it had captured Abu Omar al-Baghdadi, the head of al Qaeda in Iraq's umbrella group, the Islamic State of Iraq. The Islamic State of Iraq denied it, and the capture was never confirmed by the U.S. military.



The explosions made Wednesday the country's deadliest day since the United States pulled its combat troops from Iraqi cities and towns nearly two months ago and left security in the hands of the Iraqis. The U.S. military remains in a training and advisory capacity in those areas and continues to conduct combat operations outside cities and towns.



Iraqi Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki ordered increased security measures, including more checkpoints and more stringent vehicle searches across the capital, government officials said on Thursday.



The Iraqi government has been trying to restore what it described as normalcy to the streets of the capital in recent weeks. Al-Maliki ordered his government to take down within 40 days the concrete blast walls that line Baghdad's streets and protected neighborhoods at the height of the war. Many Iraqis have criticized the move as premature.

***

(CNN) -- "Shh ... shh get back," the man with the walkie-talkie said. "We're filming."

Contadora, one of Panama's Pearl Islands, draws visitors with beautiful beaches and excellent snorkeling.

We had stumbled onto the set of a "Survivor"-like television show. But I'm getting ahead of myself. First let me tell you how we stumbled onto the Pearl Islands in Panama, and then I'll tell you how we came upon the Orange Tribe on the island of Mogo Mogo.

Every year, my husband and I take my niece on a summer vacation. This year, we decided to go to Panama. Besides the canal, Panama has a lot to offer: There are mountains, beaches, colonial cities and rain forests. After we found a $158 round trip flight from Miami, Florida, the decision was made. My only fear was the weather; it was rainy season in Central America.

After weeks of research, I was torn. We had enough time to visit one set of islands, and there were two island chains that I was having a hard time choosing between. The San Blas Islands are off the northeast coast of Panama in the Caribbean. They're also known as Kuna Yala and are home to the Kuna Indians. It would be a chance to see the Kunas up close, living as they have for centuries in grass huts along the water's edge.

The other option was the Pearl Islands. The ArchipiÃ©lago de las Perlas, less well-known than the San Blas, is off the southern Pacific coast of Panama. After an agonizing week of self-debate, I decided that our summer vacation would include a trip to the Pearl Islands. The flight was only 20 minutes from Panama City, but more importantly, I was told it didn't rain as much on the Pacific side.

The sales pitch to my niece: "We are going to where the 2003 edition of 'Survivor' and 'Survivor: All-Stars' were filmed." I was referring to the popular American reality TV show, and I didn't realize that dozens of other countries had their own versions. I admit my destination choice was not as educational as a few days with the Kuna Indians, but I thought it would be better than being rained in with a bored teenager.

After a short flight from Panama City in a puddle jumper, we were on the island of Contadora, one of hundreds that make up the Pearl Islands and one of three that can be reached by commercial flight. It's a tiny island with a handful of places to stay and even fewer places to get a meal. Golf carts, the primary mode of transportation, can be rented upon arrival.

All of Contadora's entertainment is provided by the sea. It's a beach bum's paradise. If you are a beach bum and a reality TV fan, you can sit on the sand and watch props being built for the contestants' challenges. It's probably the best set shop in the world, or at least the one with the nicest view.

But the Pearl Islands offer more than just an exotic TV set. For $30 an hour, you can go snorkeling and island hopping in a small but comfortable wooden fishing boat. We found NiÃ±o, our boat captain and guide, on Playa Larga, the beach in front of the Contadora Beach Resort. We did some of the best snorkeling I've ever done anywhere in the world.

After a morning of fantastic snorkeling, I asked NiÃ±o where "Survivor" was filmed.

"Close by. I will take you there," he said.

NiÃ±o took us to Mogo Mogo, one of many uninhabited islands just off the shore of Contadora. As the island's white sandy beaches came into sight, we noticed a clearing where people were putting finishing touches on what looked like a game for contestants. Our boat captain told us it was for "DesafÃ­o" ("Challenge"), a Colombian version of the popular reality show.

The word on Contadora was that

***

(CNN) -- Inter Milan came from behind to win for the second time in a week to keep their Italian title hopes alive with a 3-1 victory over relegation-threatened Atalanta on Saturday.





Jose Mourinho's team followed up the stunning midweek victory over European champions Barcelona to move two points clear of second-placed Roma, who host Sampdoria on Sunday.





But key Dutch midfielder Wesley Sneijder is in doubt for the second leg of the Champions League semifinal in Spain on Wednesday after coming off at halftime with a thigh injury.





Atalanta, third from bottom with three matches to play, took a shock fifth-minute lead through Simone Tiribocchi but Inter hit back with three unanswered goals as they did against Barca.





Argentina striker Diego Milito scored his 20th Serie A goal of the season to level with a lob in the 24th minute, then Kenyan midfielder McDonald Mariga scored his first for the defending champions with a shot that deflected in off teammate Sulley Muntari.





Cristian Chivu, playing at left-back in a revamped defense due to absent Brazilian right-back Maicon's dental problems, sealed victory with 13 minutes to play with a super long-range shot to extend the Nerazzurri's unbeaten home run to 40 league games.





The Romanian was delighted after scoring his first goal for Inter following his move from Roma in 2007.





"We're pleased with the victory. It wasn't easy because we were behind, but we knew how to react," he told the club's Web site.





"It was an important goal for me and the team: for me because it hasn't been an easy period for me, and for the team because we have to keep winning until the end. Roma's game tomorrow? I won't watch it. The last time I watched Roma, they won.





"From tomorrow we will start thinking about Barcelona. It's a historic moment for us. We have to give our all."





Third-placed AC Milan crashed to a 3-1 defeat at European hopefuls Palermo in Saturday's late match, and now trail their city rivals by nine points with three matches to play.





Palermo moved above Sampdoria into fourth spot after going 2-0 up in the first 18 minutes with goals from defender Cesare Bovo and Uruguayan striker Abel Hernandez.





Dutch midfielder Clarence Seedorf pulled one back for the visitors 10 minutes after halftime, but striker Fabrizio Miccoli restored the Sicilians' two-goal cushion on 66.

***

(CNN) -- Danielle Dayton and Patrick Murray received the call Saturday afternoon: Their 4-pound son, Brayden Murray, was shipping out.



Patrick Murray and Danielle Dayton say their tiny son's evacuation went smoothly.



As coastal hospitals prepared for Gustav, tiny babies in the Newborn Intensive Care Units were among the first to be evacuated.



"The NICU babies are our first priority when it comes to evacuation," said Keith Darcey, a spokesman for East Jefferson General Hospital in Metairie, Louisiana, where Brayden was a patient before being evacuated to Woman's Hospital in Baton Rouge, Lousiana.



Woman's Hospital started receiving phone calls Wednesday from coastal-area hospitals inquiring whether there was room in their NICU, spokeswoman Jodi Conachen said. By Sunday evening, the hospital was taking care of 32 evacuated babies.



"The hospitals started preparing early this time," she said. "They learned their lesson from Katrina."



The babies have done well since arriving in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, said Darcy Gann, director of the NICU at Woman's Hospital. "They act like they were barely affected by the transfer."



The babies arrived by ambulance without their parents. Dayton and Murray drove to Baton Rouge to join their son after dropping off their 7-year-old daughter, Breanne, to stay with relatives far from the storm. While the couple took care of their children, they had a friend board up their business in Metairie.



"You have to deal with it the best you can. You can't panic, because it doesn't do anyone any good," Murray said. "You do what's best for the baby."



Although Murray said Brayden's evacuation went smoothly, one hospital administrator said the patient evacuation process had been "incredibly frustrating."  Watch part of the NICU evacuation »



"There was at least a six- to eight-hour delay in evacuating the babies," said Dr. Kevin Jordan, chief medical officer of Touro Infirmary in New Orleans, which sent seven NICU babies to Woman's Hospital. "It was very, very, very disorganized."



Jordan blamed the state office of Homeland Security and Emergency Preparedness. He said Touro is still waiting to evacuate four critically ill adult patients on ventilators. "It's been incredibly frustrating," he said.



The secretary of the Louisiana Department of Health and Hospitals said each hospital is responsible for evacuating its own patients, adding that Touro asked for assistance Sunday morning, days after other hospitals had asked for help.



"It's never a perfect process," he said. "It's never easy to evacuate thousands of people in 48 hours."



Touro, which usually has between 215 and 245 patients, has evacuated all but around 65 to 70, he added.



"The sickest of the sick patients we're keeping and sheltering in place," Jordan said. "We're concerned that evacuating them could do significant harm."



Other hospitals took a different approach. East Jefferson evacuated only its three NICU babies, keeping its 210 adult patients in the hospital.



"We survived Katrina quite well and learned a lot from the experience," Darcey said, adding that since Katrina, the exterior of the hospital has been fortified.



"But you don't want to take any chances with the little babies," he added. "Their temperatures have to be very carefully regulated, and if the air conditioning goes out, that could have a detrimental effect on their health."

***

(CNN) -- The Renault Formula One team have commenced legal proceedings against former driver Nelson Piquet Junior over allegations made by the Brazilian that he was asked by the team to deliberately crash his car in last year's Singapore Grand Prix.



Renault boss Flavio Briatore has issued a statement confirming legal proceddings against Nelson Piquet Jr.



It has been claimed that Renault boss, Flavio Briatore, in order to maximize the chances of Fernando Alonso winning the 2008 race, planned the crash of teammate Piquet Jr.



Renault have hit back against the allegations concerning the event made by Piquet Jr in an official statement on their Web site.



"Managing Director Flavio Briatore personally wish[es] to state criminal proceedings against Nelson Piquet Junior and Nelson Piquet Senior [have commenced] in France concerning the making of false allegations," the statement read.



The statement added the three-times former world champion and his son had also attempted to "blackmail the team" into allowing Piquet Jr to continue to drive until the end of the 2009 season.



Renault, who dismissed Piquet Jr as their driver in August, confirmed they have referred the matter to the British police.



The French car constructor face being thrown out of Formula One if the allegations are proved by an investigation being conducted by the governing body of world motorsport, the FIA.



The team will go before the FIA's World Motor Sport Council in Paris on September 21 to hear the findings of the probe.



Double world champion Alonso won the race -- the first for Renault in two years -- despite starting from 15th on the grid.



Intriguingly, Renault ran a light fuel load on Alonso's car -- thereby increasing the driver's speed.



Just two laps after Alonso came in early to take on more fuel, Piquet's crash forced the deployment of the safety car and the subsequent pit stop of nearly all other drivers, an action that promoted Alonso to fifth from where he went onto to secure victory.



Piquet attributed the crash to a simple error at the time.



Formula One supremo Bernie Ecclestone recently warned "there is going to be a lot of trouble" if the allegations are found to be true.



The FIA proved with the spygate saga only circumstantial evidence is required for them to impose strict penalties. On that occasion they fined McLaren $80 million for breaching the same article that is now now faced by Renault.

***

(CNN) -- Five suspected pirates went on trial Tuesday in the Netherlands in what is thought to be the first trial in Europe of pirate suspects.





The trial of the five Somali men opened in Rotterdam District Court and is expected to last five days, said Wim de Bruin, a spokesman for Netherlands National Prosecutor's Office.





The five were captured by the Dutch Navy in January 2009 in the Gulf of Aden, off Somalia, after a cargo ship with Dutch Antilles flag was attacked, de Bruin said.





"The ship of the pirates was destroyed by the Danish Navy, and the pirates were captured and handed to the Dutch authority. They're being tried for sea robbery, and if convicted the maximum sentence will be 9 to 12 years," he said.





The men are Ahmed Yusuf Farah, 25, Jama Mohamed Samatar, 45, Abdirisaq Abdulahi Hirsi, 33, Sayid Ali Garaar, 39, and Osman Musse Farah, 32, he said.





A different suspected Somali pirate is awaiting sentencing in the United States, where he pleaded guilty earlier this month to hijacking and kidnapping.





Prosecutors say Abduwali Abdukhadir Muse led an attack on a U.S.-flagged vessel, the Maersk Alabama, off the coast of Africa last year.





He pleaded guilty May 19 in a New York federal court to felony counts of hijacking maritime vessels, kidnapping and hostage taking, for his role in the hijacking of the Maersk Alabama in the Indian Ocean on April 8, 2009.





Muse faces a maximum sentence of almost 34 years behind bars when he is sentenced October 19.





The suspects being tried in the Netherlands spent four weeks aboard the Danish navy ship after their capture before being taken to the Netherlands, the spokesman said.





They were held in pre-trial custody while the court interviewed witnesses from the Danish Navy and seamen on the Dutch Antilles cargo ship that was under attack, he said.





Five Dutch defense lawyers are representing the suspects, he said. He did not know what plea, if any, the suspects had entered.





Germany will soon try 10 suspected pirates who were captured in the Gulf of Aden earlier this year.





They were arrested after their attempt to board a German cargo vessel, but the Danish Navy ended the hijacking and handed them over to the Dutch authorities, de Bruin said.





They have since been held in the Netherlands, and Germany requested their extradition about two months ago.





CNN's Eileen Hsieh contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Botswana has been hailed as one of Africa's success stories and a beacon for democracy on the continent. It's home to Africa's longest continuous multi-party democracy and has remained politically stable since gaining independence in 1966.



President Ian Khama took office in April 2008 promising steady progress.



At its helm is President Ian Khama, the country's former vice president and son of Botswana's founding president.



The diamond trade and disciplined government have helped to transform Botswana from one of the world's poorest nations to a middle-income country. But there are still large problem facing the country, including the world's second high level of HIV infections, according to the World Bank, and a slowing of the countries economic growth.



The 56-year-old Khama took over office in April 2008, succeeding Festus Mogae who had been in power for 10 years, promising no radical departure from his predecessor's policies.



Khama was born in southern England and trained at the UK's Sandhurst Military Academy before returning to Botswana and later becoming the commander of the Botswana Defence Force.



He left the military in 1998 to take up the position of vice president. As the son of Botswana's most popular former president, political analysts inside the country have expected Khama to unite the factions in the ruling Botswana Democratic Party (BDP) and continue steady economic and political progress.



While Khama has only been in power for 11 months, there has been some criticism that his style is too authoritarian.



Citing Afrobarometer, an independent research group, Botswana's newspaper Sunday Standard recently wrote that there was a growing public perception that Khama has issued more directives compared to his predecessors.



One area in which he has taken a definite line is on his policy towards neighboring Zimbabwe, publicly opposing the government of President Robert Mugabe and declaring it illegitimate.



A general election is set for October 2009, with the BDP expected to win. No other political party has held power in Botswana and some commentators fear the emergence of a political dynasty that would affect Botswana's democracy.

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- A massive anti-Mafia sweep that stretched from New York to Sicily has not only cut off the head of the Gambino crime family but lopped off "the shoulders and chest" too, prosecutors said Thursday.



John "Jackie the Nose" D'Amico, shown in 1992, is one of 62 people indicted.



Sixty-two members of the Gambino, Genovese and Bonanno families face 80 charges, ranging from money laundering to illegal gambling and murder.



"These charges strike at the very core of the Gambino family," said Benton Campbell, United States attorney for the Eastern District of New York.



The Gambino family profited from extortion within the New York construction industry and its labor unions, according to the charges.  Watch the perp walk »



Several companies allegedly paid a "mob tax" in return for "protection" and "permission to operate," said Gordon Heddell, inspector general of the U.S. Department of Labor.



Other charges involve an alleged illegal gambling ring, said Richard Brown, Queens County district attorney.



Nicholas Corozzo -- a reputed captain in the Gambino family -- was involved in a sports gambling enterprise that relied in part on toll-free telephones, Brown alleged.



Meanwhile, four members of the Gambino family are charged with eight crimes involving murder, according to the indictment.



Those charges include the felony murder of Jose Delgado Rivera, who was shot and killed in an armored truck during a robbery in 1990.



"Today we are able to bring closure to crimes from the past that have never been forgotten," Campbell said. He said the crimes span back over three decades.  Watch feds say they've 'cut off the head' of crime family »



Key to the Gambino arrests Thursday was a member of the Attorney General's Organized Crime Task Force who infiltrated the Gambino family and recorded hundred of hours of conversations, said John Milgrim, a spokesman for the attorney general.



Forty-five of those charged are already in custody, police said. Arrests were made in New York City; Long Island, New York; and New Jersey.



"It is as unrelenting as weeds that continue to sprout in the cracks of society," New York Attorney General Andrew Cuomo said of organized crime. "We will not rest until organized crime is a distant memory."



In addition to the arrests in the New York area, police in Italy detained 77 people in connection with organized crime.



Those arrests netted important members of a powerful clan in Sicily linked to Mafia boss Salvatore Lo Piccolo, who was believed to be the successor of the boss of bosses, Bernardo Provenzano.  Watch the prosecutor explain why authorities acted now »



Police say that in his attempt to rise to power, Le Piccolo tried to mend fences with New York-based Mafia families after those ties were broken during the bloody Mafia wars of the 1980s. Those families included the Gambinos of New York and the Inzerillos of Italy.



Provenzano was arrested two years ago in Corleone.



"It is evident that the intent of the Mafia in Palermo was to re-establish a dialogue through the Inzerillo family in the U.S," Francesco Messineo of the Italian Police said.



"A dialogue that was never interrupted because the relationship between the American and the Italian Mafia is historic, based on long tradition. But there was certainly an attempt to re-establish that connection."



Investigators believe mob clans wanted to collaborate on illegal commercial ventures such as money laundering and drug trafficking.



Italian officials said the arrests were aimed at preventing these illegal activities, but they warned that other Mafia clans in Sicily oppose the return of the Inzerillo family to the island, and therefore were concerned about a new Mafia war. E-mail to a friend



CNN's Deborah Feyerick and Alessio Vinci contributed to this report.

***

(AOL Autos) -- Consumer Reports recently announced its annual used cars ratings, and we weren't surprised to see one of the major categories was "Best in Fuel Economy."





With gasoline and oil prices on a seemingly endless upward spiral, that's a key factor these days when choosing a used car -- or even a new one.





The cars that made this list were, according to Consumer Reports, "the affordable and reliable vehicles [that] returned some of the best results in our real-world fuel-economy tests."





What follows is a list of the vehicles that magazine rated "Best in Fuel Economy" in the under $10,000 price range, with a short description of each vehicle. The mileage figures stated are the ones calculated by Consumer Reports in their own on-the-road tests.





2000 Honda Insight  Overall MPG: 51





When the Insight hit showrooms in 1999 for the 2000 model year, it was hailed as one of the cleanest and most fuel-efficient vehicles in the world. It was the first gasoline-electric hybrid to be sold in the U.S., and won several design, engineering and technology awards.





The Insight employs Honda's Integrated Motor Assist (IMA) system, combining an extremely lightweight 1.0-liter, three-cylinder gasoline automobile engine with an ultra-thin electric motor. Early models came with a 5-speed manual transmission, but a continuously variable transmission (CVT) was offered starting in '01.





2001 - 2002 Toyota Prius  Overall MPG: 41





This was one of the earliest generations of the fuel-sipping Prius, and it certainly has become a green living icon since then. Drawing its power from a combination of a 1.5-liter four-cylinder engine and an electric motor, these earlier editions generated only 70 hp, but muscle isn't the point in a hybrid car. It's pod-like design had a certain retro-futuristic appeal, and was roomier than one might think.





2000 - 2005 Toyota Echo  Overall MPG: 38





The Echo was rolled out in 2000 as a no-frills compact econo-box, for those who wanted Toyota quality but were on a budget that precluded them from snagging a Corolla.





The interior is plain, but the engine is reliable and efficient, and the taut suspension delivers a ride comparable to larger models. This version of the Echo comes with a 1.5-liter four-cylinder 108-hp 16-Valve EFI engine.





1998 - 2002 Chevrolet Prizm  Overall MPG: 32





The Prizm of this era bore some resemblance to the Corolla, since both were built on the same assembly line in a joint GM/Toyota plant. A front-wheel-drive subcompact sedan, the Prizm was initially rolled out under the Geo nameplate, but later became a Chevy model.





Available as a base model and LSi, the Prizm is powered by single twin-cam four-cylinder engines that produced 120 hp in 1998 and 1999, but the addition of VVT in 2000 boosted the ponies to 125.





1998 Mazda Protégé LX  Overall MPG: 32





Mazda redesigned the Protégé in 1995, upgrading it considerably with a more rigid chassis and much-improved ride quality -- not to mention increased interior space.





This edition also offers a silkier ride, crisp handling and solid performance for a small car. This model year has a 92-hp 1.5-liter four-cylinder engine, and comes in three trim levels.





1998 - 2000 Toyota Corolla CE/LE  Overall MPG: 32/31





The Corolla has been a stalwart for more than 40 years, for its quality, dependability and, maybe most importantly, for its fuel economy. The 1998-1999 editions are powered by a 1.8 L, 120-hp, four-cylinder 16-Valve EFI, with aluminum alloy block and head.





By 2000, they'd tweaked the engine to deliver 125 ponies. A front-wheel drive job, the Corollas of this period come in three trim levels, but Consumer Reports chose the midline CE and top-end LE.





1998 - 2001 Acura Integra LS  Overall MPG: 32





The Acura Integra sport coupe and sport sedan

***

(CNN) -- Tributes have been flooding in following the sudden death of Spanish Primera Liga side Espanyol's captain Daniel Jarque at the age of 26 on Saturday night.



Espanyol fans have begun a memorial for captain Daniel Jarque following his sudden death on Saturday.



Jarque passed away around 8pm local time when his heart stopped following a training session in Coverciano, Italy, where the squad are on a pre-season camp.



Reports suggest Jarque was on the phone to his fiancee -- who is eight months pregnant -- at the time and she alerted two of his team-mates, who raced to his hotel room.



Club doctors and Italian paramedics tried to revive Jarque, a product of the Espanyol youth system, but without success.



Most Spanish clubs immediately expressed their condolences and leading footballing personalities have now done the same.



Speaking on the official Real Madrid Web site, club captain Raul said: "As captain, and on behalf of the whole Real Madrid team, I want to express our sincere condolences.



"We will support the player's family and the Espanyol family in any way possible during this very difficult time for everybody.



"He was a great professional and sportsman and this has left us all very hurt. We offer our most sincere sympathies," added Raul.



Jarque's death comes two years after that of Sevilla and Spain defender Antonio Puerta, who suffered multiple organ failure in hospital, three days after a cardiac arrest during a league match against Getafe.



Madrid coach Manuel Pellegrini added: "It is news that you wish wasn't true. It's terrible, it already happened a couple of years ago to Sevilla and the truth is these things have an impact."



Joan Laporta, president of European champions Barcelona -- Espanyol's city rivals -- said on their official Web site: ""We are very shocked by this tragic event.



"We are all in mourning and I wish to express in the name of FC Barcelona our heartfelt condolences to Espanyol on the painful loss of their captain Dani Jarque, and also to his family".



Jarque joined Espanyol at the age of 12, making his debut in 2002, and was handed the captaincy this summer.



Fans have been flocking to Espanyol's stadium since the news broke and have been in mourning outside gate 21 -- Jarque's squad number.



Former Espanyol coach Ramon Moya, who handed Jarque his debut against Rayo Vallecano, was deeply shocked. "I feel like I have lost a son," he told reporters.



"Jarque was a footballer, but he was also my friend. This situation is very difficult for a person. It was as if he was family. I knew him for many years. I gave him his debut and I shared many moments with him. It's very difficult to explain how I feel at the moment."



Another former coach, Ernesto Valverde, insisted Jarque had never had any medical problems previously. "After hearing the news I still haven't taken it in," said the current Villarreal coach.



"He was a player who was super strong, super healthy and very important in the dressing room. We got goosebumps when we heard the news. He was a very strong person but life is like that and it gives you terrible surprises. "



Espanyol, who had been due to play Bologna in a friendly match on Sunday, suspended their pre-season tour of Italy and have flown back to Barcelona.

***

Titanyan, Haiti (CNN) -- Daniel Rouzier clutched a mahogany rosary and a pair of latex gloves in his left hand, his face covered in a sterile mask.





He watched intently as two front-end loaders clawed into piles of dirt and dumped it into freshly dug trenches. Arms, legs, entire bodies flailed and flew before reaching their final resting place.





The stench of human flesh, decomposing for 17 days, carried with the wind.





Rouzier took it upon himself to bury the estimated 2,500 bodies here. They were mothers, fathers, sons and daughters who were never given a proper burial after they perished in the earthquake that leveled the Haitian capital of Port-au-Prince on January 12.





At least 150,000 people died that day, the Haitian government estimates. Many of their bodies were dumped here, near the village of Titanyan, about 45 minutes northeast of the capital.





Rouzier, who owns a car dealership and helps run the Haitian charity, Food for the Poor, said he was watching a CNN report Friday about how many bodies were just left to rot, without proper interment.





"I was just appalled. This is a sacrilege," he said Saturday.





Haiti, he said, is a deeply spiritual country with great respect for the dead.





"This," he said pointing to the mounds of death, "is countercultural to Haiti -- the total lack of respect for the dead."





Marie Laurence Lasseque, Haiti's minister of information, denied to CNN's Anderson Cooper that the dead had been transported out of the city by truck and dumped out of view without burial.





She said the state-run trucking company CNE was "doing a good job" disposing bodies.





But after seeing footage of the bodies on CNN, Rouzier had to do something.





By 8 a.m. Friday, he was on the phone, ordering front-end loaders. He asked his welding shop to shape five metal crosses and called Bishop Pierre Andre Dumas to come perform last rites.





Dumas arrived Friday with American priest Richard Frechette, a doctor who cares for the poor in Haiti. The two sprinkled holy water and said prayers over the freshly dug graves and remaining piles of bodies.





Rouzier's crew buried about 1,500 people Friday. The next day, they returned for the remaining 1,000.





No one knows how many such mounds of bodies exist still in these valleys.





Some are near Titanyan, its grim past now linked with this macabre task. This is where the dirty work of politics stooped to its lowest as the bodies of thousands who died under the brutal Duvalier dictatorships were said to have been tossed.





Rouzier surveyed the land -- rocky dirt and gentle rolling hills that will forever be haunted by restless souls. At least, he was able to restore dignity to some of them, though no one will know who is buried here, under the five metal crosses.





"Maybe they are doing them better elsewhere. I don't know," Rouzier said.





He didn't want to blame anyone for what happened. It's easy to point fingers at a time of epic tragedy. He simply found relief Saturday in finding some sense of closure more than two weeks after the devastating earthquake.





"I'm very grateful to be able to do this," he said.





He asked visiting journalists to refrain from walking the mounds of dirt. To not step over the dead.





It was a tough two days for Rouzier.





But for 2,500 Haitians, it was grace.

***

(CNN)  -- Sudanese President Omar Hassan al-Bashir, facing an international arrest warrant, is paying the price for pandering to the West, al Qaeda's second-in-command said in an audio statement released Tuesday.





Ayman al-Zawahiri, seen here in 2007, said Tuesday the Sudanese president pandered to the West.





"I am not defending Omar al-Bashir or his regime, nor am I defending what it has done in Darfur and elsewhere," Ayman al-Zawahiri said in the statement released by al Qaeda's production company, as-Sahab Media.





But, he said, "the issue isn't one of Darfur and solving its problems; the issue is one of making excuses for more foreign interference in the Muslims' countries in the framework of the contemporary Zionist Crusade."





The warrant issued by the International Criminal Court earlier this month accuses al-Bashir of war crimes and crimes against humanity, charges he denies. In response, Sudan ordered 13 international aid groups to leave the country, groups that the United Nations says provide roughly half the assistance delivered in Darfur.





"The Bashir regime is reaping what it sowed," al-Zawahiri said. "For many long years, it continued to back down and backtrack in front of American Crusader pressure."





He further accused Sudan of expelling members of the mujahedeen who had sought refuge there, particularly Osama bin Laden, and declaring "in an audacious lie that they had left voluntarily, then attempting to beg payment for that from the Saudi regime and the Americans."





Al-Zawahiri asked, "Why hasn't the United Nations moved to protect the Palestinians in Gaza from Israeli barbarity and criminality, while it pretends to cry over the suffering of the people of Darfur? Why hasn't the United Nations and the international community intervened to lift the siege from Gaza, while it pretends to cry over the people of Darfur being deprived of relief and aid?"





"The Sudanese regime continued to pant for American approval, and it agreed to the division of the Sudan, paved the way for the imminent secession of the south, provided all the information it had on the emigrants and mujahedeen to the American government, and handed over some of them to the regimes of treason and criminality in their countries," al-Zawahiri said.





"But despite all that, the senior criminals weren't satisfied with it and continued to besiege it with demands and interference, even going so far as to demand the arrest of its leaders and prominent figures."





He said he wants to send a message to Muslims in Sudan, telling them they are being targeted so that Islam can be eliminated from the country. "And in order for Islam to be eliminated from the Sudan, a justification must be found for Western military intervention," he said.





The audio message is the fifth released this year by al-Zawahiri and the fourth in English, according to Virginia-based IntelCenter.





The center said on its Web site it focuses "on studying terrorist groups and other threat actors ... and disseminating that information in a timely manner to those who can act on it."

***

Washington (CNN) -- President Obama will welcome Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh for an official state visit Tuesday.





The two leaders will discuss a range of global, regional and bilateral issues, the White House said. Those discussions are likely to center on Afghanistan, climate change and nuclear energy cooperation. Singh has been quoted as saying that a Taliban victory in Afghanistan would be disastrous for Central and South Asia.





Singh's visit will be the first state visit hosted by the administration, the highest honor extended to a foreign dignitary. It will be Singh's second visit to Washington; he has also met with former President George W. Bush. Grammy- and Oscar-award-winning singer and actress Jennifer Hudson will entertain the black-tie crowd, several sources involved in the planning outside the administration said.





Hudson, raised in Chicago like first lady Michelle Obama, sang the National Anthem at the Democratic National Convention in August 2008 at the request of the Obama campaign, when Obama became the Democratic presidential nominee.





Singh arrived Sunday for his five-day visit. On Monday, he attended a luncheon hosted by the U.S.-India Business Council and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. He addressed the Council on Foreign Relations later in the day.





Obama will receive the prime minister at the White House on Tuesday, and Singh and his wife will be the guests at an official state dinner Tuesday night.





On Wednesday, Singh will meet with Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and Defense Secretary Robert Gates and will later attend a reception for the Indian community hosted by Indian Ambassador to the United States Meera Shankar.





Singh will leave Washington Thursday morning and fly to Port of Spain, Trinidad, to attend the Commonwealth Heads of Government summit.





Singh, 77, is a Cambridge- and Oxford-educated economist who was governor of the Reserve Bank of India from 1982 to 1985 and the nation's finance minister from 1991 to 1996. A member of the Congress Party, he is serving a second five-year term as prime minister. He was sworn in as prime minister in May 2004 and again this past May.





He and his wife of 51 years, Gursharan Kaur, have three daughters.

***

(CNN) -- Former top Pakistani military officers Sunday called for Pakistan's former strongman to be allowed back without facing arrest and condemned what they called the "bashing" of the country's armed forces.





More than 100 former officers, most of them generals and admirals, signed their names to a letter calling for Pervez Musharraf to be allowed to return to Pakistan "and contest elections according to democratic norms." The retired brass included the retired Gen. Muhammad Aziz Khan, once the head of Pakistan's joint chiefs of staff during part of Musharraf's rule, and Adm. Shahid Karimullah, who served as head of the navy under Musharraf.





"We feel that Gen. (R) Pervez Musharraf should be provided with a level playing field in the political arena and also provided protocol and security as befits any ex-president of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan," wrote the officers, who have formed a group they called "Pakistan First."





Musharraf, who seized power in a 1999 coup, has been living in London and Dubai since resigning in 2008. He had announced plans to return from exile in late January and run in upcoming elections -- but his party said he was reassessing those plans when Pakistan's elected government warned that if he returned, he faced arrest in connection with the 2007 assassination of former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto.





A U.N. report in 2010 accused Musharraf's government of failing to protect Bhutto, who had returned to Pakistan from her own exile to run for office. Musharraf has denied the allegations, arguing that Bhutto had police protection and took unnecessary risks, but a Pakistani court issued a warrant for his arrest.





Bhutto's widower, Asif Ali Zardari, is now Pakistan's president. If Musharraf were to return, he would be walking into the middle of a public squabble between Pakistan's civilian and uniformed leadership that was sparked by a memo that allegedly asked for U.S. help to rein in the military.





In Sunday's letter, the ex-generals said they opposed the "bashing" of Pakistan's army and its powerful Inter-Services Intelligence agency.





"We feel that erosion of these institutions can only lead to weakening of Pakistan's position as a sovereign and proud nation," they wrote. "This forum feels that while all state institutions must be allowed to function within the purview of their respective roles, the demands of national dignity and state security dictate that all organs of the state as well as the media persistently raise and maintain the prestige and morale of the nation and its armed forces, both at home and abroad."





Zardari faces his own legal problems. His prime minister, Yousuf Raza Gilani, appeared before Pakistan's supreme court Thursday in a battle over corruption cases facing the president and other officials, telling reporters the president has "full immunity" from prosecution under an amnesty granted by Musharraf before Zardari and Bhutto returned in 2007.





In 2009, the justices ruled that amnesty was unconstitutional and called on the government to reopen the cases. The government has not done so, and the court has cited Gilani for contempt.

***

DAVOS, Switzerland (CNN) -- The worldwide economic recession has exposed a "crisis of global governance" that can only be addressed by the radical reform of the United Nations, former U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan said Wednesday as the World Economic Forum got under way in Switzerland.



Kofi Annan says the United Nations needs to be reformed.



"The current architecture of managing global affairs is broken and needs to be fixed," Annan said on the opening morning of the five-day annual meeting of global political and business leaders. "We have major new players coming on the scene and they need to be integrated and given a voice."



Referring to the U.N. Security Council, which gives permanent places and vetoing powers to the U.S., the UK, Russia, China and France, Annan said: "We cannot continue to run the world based on countries that won a war 60 years ago. It's either destructive competition or cooperation. We live in an interdependent world and the only way to move forward is to cooperate."



Annan is one of six co-chairs at this year's WEF gathering, along with news tycoon Rupert Murdoch, HSBC Chairman Stephen Green, Werner Wenning of the German chemical group Bayer, Indian industrialist Anand G. Mahindra and Maria Ramos, Chief Executive of the South African transport group Transnet.



He also urged delegates to address three interconnected challenges: the global recession, energy and security, and climate change.



"It is important leaders work on ways of finding effective, far-reaching policies -- even if they are radical -- that will allow us to create sustainable economic growth and create jobs for those who are out of jobs," Annan said.



Newscorp. CEO Murdoch said delegates needed to be "absolutely honest about where the world is at this point," warning that the consequences of $50 trillion being wiped off personal fortunes had left people feeling "depressed and traumatized."



"We've been living in the Western world way above our means. We've been on a great binge and it's come to an end and we have to live though the correction," Murdoch said.



But he said the downturn offered a chance to set about tackling issues of energy sufficiency and pollution.



"We must treat this crisis, whether it lasts for a year or five years, as an opportunity to set goals for how we want to come out of it. This is a time to shape the policies to help to solve some of those problems."



HSBC boss Green said the banking industry needed to admit that it had not "covered itself in glory" in contributing to the collapse of the financial industry and called for continuing government intervention to "stop a nasty recession spiraling down into something else."



But he said the major banks could contribute to solving the crisis as well: "I do not believe for a moment that you can have a successful economy without successful and properly functioning international capital markets."



Wenning said he didn't expect any solutions to emerge from this year's meeting, but hoped delegates could achieve "a joint understanding of the reasons for the financial crisis" and called for a return to "the basics of sustainable behavior."



"If we are really able to address these mega-challenges of the future then we would be able to restore the trust in leadership -- and I believe the world needs leadership."



Political leaders will join the discussions later Wednesday with Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao and Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin both due to deliver agenda-setting addresses.

***

NAIROBI, Kenya (CNN) -- Pirates on a seized Saudi-owned oil supertanker are delaying release of the ship despite receiving a ransom because of a fatal drowning accident that killed four of their colleagues, a journalist who spoke with one of the pirates told CNN.



A small aircraft is observed by the U.S. Navy flying over the Sirius Star during a seeming ransom payment Friday.



The pirates had been expected to release the Sirius Star, which they've held since November 15, after a ransom payment was parachuted onto the ship.



The journalist told CNN that the pirate who spoke said four pirates drowned after a skiff carrying leaving the Sirius Star capsized due to rough seas. Sea charts showed that waves in the area were reaching 5 to 7 feet at the time.



There were five pirates in the skiff and one survived, the journalist said. The bodies of the other four were recovered, he said, adding that this will delay the exit of the pirates still remaining on board the ship and thus affect the ship's release after payment of the ransom.



The tanker was carrying two million barrels of crude oil worth about $100 million when pirates hijacked it off the coast of Somalia.



Pirates seized the Sirius Star more than 450 nautical miles off the African coast in one of their most audacious hijackings to date.



The pirates told another journalist that they received $3 million in ransom money, but lost part of it when the skiff capsized. The remaining ransom money is still aboard the ship with the rest of the pirates.



The U.S. Navy took photographs and observed as an apparent ransom payment was parachuted aboard the tanker. The pirates aboard the supertanker have equipment to check for counterfeit bills, authorities said.



"While the potential release of the Sirius Star is undoubtedly excellent news, we must not forget that nearly 300 other merchant mariners (on other ships) are still being held captive," said Commodore Tim Lowe, deputy Combined Maritime Forces commander.



Hijackings off East Africa are a cause of growing international concern, spurring a number of international navies to patrol the pirate-wracked Gulf of Aden.  See how pirate attacks peaked in 2008 »



Dozens of ships have been attacked in the gulf by pirates based in a largely lawless Somalia in recent months.  See a map of the region »



The area involved, off the coast of Somalia and Kenya as well as the Gulf of Aden, equals more than 1.1 million square miles. That is roughly four times the size of Texas, or the size of the Mediterranean and Red Seas combined.

***

(CNN) -- A man sought in the slayings of a woman and her four young children in Oklahoma was arrested Tuesday night after a car chase in Texas, authorities said.



Joshua Steven Durcho was arrested Tuesday after a car chase with police.



Joshua Steven Durcho was arrested in Waco, Texas, after a Texas Department of Public Safety trooper tried to stop the car Durcho was driving because the trooper suspected a drunk driver, according to Erin Mangrum of the Canadian County, Oklahoma, sheriff's office.



The trooper checked the vehicle tag on the car and it matched the tag being sought by Oklahoma police, Mangrum said.



Mangrum said Durcho's car sped off, but he later wrecked the vehicle, and Durcho was taken into custody.



Durcho suffered minor injuries in the accident, Mangrum said.



Officers found the bodies of Summer Rust, 25, and her children Monday in their apartment in El Reno, about 30 miles west of Oklahoma City. Rust's daughter Evynn was 3, son Teagin was 4, and daughters Autumn and Kirsten were both 7.



Durcho is believed to have taken the slain woman's car, the Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation said.



CNN affilate KOCO reported that Durcho had been spotted Monday night in Clinton, Oklahoma. His image was captured by surveillance cameras, the affiliate said, quoting police.



Authorities would not reveal how Rust and her children were killed, pending the outcome of autopsies. Rust's mother, Susan Rust of Carson City, Nevada, said her daughter had been shot, but she did not know how her grandchildren had been killed. Watch authorities name Durcho as the suspect »



Susan Rust said her daughter was loving and outgoing but tended to get involved with the wrong men.



Durcho was unemployed and had been living with Summer Rust and her children, the mother said. Police were asked to check up on the family because Rust and Durcho had had a fight, she said.



Summer Rust attended Redlands Community College in El Reno, where she majored in legal assistant training, according to school officials. Rust's mother said she was retraining after losing her job in casino security several months ago.



"Summer was very bright, very outgoing, had a positive attitude and was very determined to complete her education," Julie Lamb of the college told CNN Radio.



Lamb heads a student support program on campus. The school brought in grief counselors Tuesday to help students affected by the killings. Domestic violence groups also reached out to the students.



A friend posting online described Summer Rust as "fun-loving" and "a little crazy kind of person" who was also very smart.



"Her children were beautiful, funny and always cheerful and sometimes a little wild. They were a great bunch of kids and they loved each other very much. They were proud of their mom for going back to school," the friend said.



"She was going to make a better life for her family. I can't believe something like this could happen to her and the kids. ... I will miss her silliness and her smile. I will miss them all."

***

GAZA CITY, Gaza (CNN) -- A truce between Israel and Gaza's Hamas leaders will take effect Thursday and last for six months, Hamas officials said Tuesday.



Palestinian Hamas security men stand to attention at a training academy in Gaza City last week.



Israeli officials, however, stopped short of confirming that a cease-fire agreement has been reached.



"It's still early to announce an agreement of calm," Israeli Defense Minister Ehud Barak said in a statement. "When it starts, if it starts, it's hard to say how long it will last. The test will be how it's implemented."



Hamas senior official Mahmoud Zahar and Hamas negotiator Khalil al-Hayya announced the Egyptian-brokered agreement at a news conference in Gaza. They said it will begin at 6 a.m. Thursday (11 p.m. Wednesday ET).



On Sunday, Israel gradually will start to open its border crossing terminals, the Hamas officials said.



Asked about initial reports of a cease-fire, one Israeli official would not confirm whether an agreement had been finalized but said any truce would involve a sequential process.  Watch what truce may mean in Gaza »



The official said Israel would reopen some of its terminals along the Gaza border after calm had been established. He said Israel is still calling for the release of Cpl. Gilad Shalit as part of a broader cease-fire.



Gaza militants kidnapped Shalit in June 2006.



Egypt has been trying to broker a truce between Hamas and Israel for months. Militants in Hamas-controlled Gaza have pummeled Israel with thousands of rocket and mortar attacks, prompting Israeli military operations in the Palestinian territory.



Referring to the Egyptian mediation efforts, Barak said, "It's important to exhaust the possibility.



"The IDF [Israel Defense Forces] is prepared for any developments, but it is important to attempt to achieve a period of calm to bring back the peace and quiet for the [Israeli] people who live around Gaza in Sderot and Ashkelon and to try and renew negotiations for the release of Gilad Shalit."



Militants in Gaza have launched more than 2,300 mortars and rockets since the start of 2008, more than the 2,000 launched in all of last year, according to Israeli military figures.



While most of the attacks do not result in casualties, three Israelis have been killed in rocket and mortar strikes in recent weeks.



The Israeli military responds to the attacks by carrying out airstrikes and ground operations in Gaza that target militants, but many times lead to civilian casualties -- further inflaming the Palestinian leadership.



Israel also has restricted supplies of gasoline, diesel and electricity to Gaza, limited the amount of food and other goods entering the strip and made it virtually impossible for manufacturers and farmers in Gaza to export anything to the outside world.



Hamas seized control of Gaza last year after routing Palestinian security agencies under the control of Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas and his Fatah movement.



The ouster forced Abbas to dissolve the Fatah-Hamas unity government, but Fatah still controls the West Bank.



Representatives from the rival factions met recently in Senegal for talks aimed at restoring the political and territorial split.



Earlier this month, Abbas called for "national unity" talks with Hamas with the goal of producing new elections for the Palestinians, who elected a Hamas-led Palestinian Authority government in a U.S.-backed vote in 2006.



Meanwhile, Abbas' Western-backed government is working toward a peace agreement with Israel.



The Bush administration has said it wants the two sides to reach an agreement by the end of the year.



CNN's Shira Medding contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Kimi Raikkonen will return to Formula One in 2012, after Renault announced on Tuesday that the 2007 world champion has signed a two-year deal with the team.





The Finn won the drivers' championship with Ferrari in 2007 before leaving the sport in 2009, but he will return next season after spending time in the World Rally Championship and NASCAR.





"I'm delighted to be coming back to Formula 1 after a two-year break, and I'm grateful to Lotus Renault GP for offering me this opportunity," the 32-year-old told the team's official website.





"My time in the World Rally Championship has been a useful stage in my career as a driver, but I can't deny the fact that my hunger for F1 has recently become overwhelming.





Final F1 2011 season standings





"It was an easy choice to return with Lotus Renault GP as I have been impressed by the scope of the team's ambition. Now I'm looking forward to playing an important role in pushing the team to the very front of the grid."





Raikkonen entered F1 with Sauber in 2001 before going on to enjoy a successful five-season spell with McLaren between 2002 and 2006, winning nine grands prix and twice finishing runner-up in the world championship.





Speaking to CNN World Sport, Renault team principal Eric Boullier said he was delighted to have secured Raikkonen's services and insisted the Finn would soon be challenging the sport's top echelon of drivers.





"His motivation is huge and clearly the talent he has will maybe need a little bit of time to get back on track and to adapt to the new car and the new tires but I'm very confident he will get back," he said.





"I hope we push as much as we can, as much as we did at the beginning of the season. It is difficult to set up a competitive Formula One team, it takes time, but we learn every year from the experience.





"Kimi's experience is huge, he has been world champion, he has won many races, he has been working and driving for great constructors like Sauber and McLaren. It will be a huge boost for us and his determination will be a big boost for the team."





Ferrari's Alonso eyes 2012 charge





Boullier said Renault, who will compete under the Lotus name in 2012, were still yet to decide who would partner Raikkonen after they were represented by three drivers last season.





Russian Vitaly Petrov initially partnered Nick Heidfeld before Brazilian Bruno Senna replaced the German in August. Polish driver Robert Kubica raced for the team in 2010, but missed all of last season following a rally crash in Italy in February.





It had been hoped Kubica would return in time for the 2012 season, but the 26-year-old announced last week that his recovery from serious arm injuries was not yet complete.





Boullier said he did not yet know if Kubica would be fit to race: "It's a little bit early to answer this question," he added. "If we can bring him back into F1 we will try our best."





The 2011 season came to an end at last Sunday's Brazilian Grand Prix, with Red Bull's Sebastian Vettel finishing the race second behind teammate Mark Webber having already sealed a second consecutive championship.





The 2012 season will is see a total of six former world champions line-up on the grid, with Raikonnen and Vettel being joined by Mercedes' seven-time winner Michael Schumacher, Ferrari's two-time champion Fernando Alonso and McLaren's championship-winning duo of Jenson Button and Lewis Hamilton.

***

(CNN)  -- The Brazilian military said late Friday it is calling off the search for bodies of passengers and crew from the Air France plane that crashed into the Atlantic earlier this month.



Wreckage from Flight 447 spotted by search teams in the Atlantic last week.



It was unlikely that any more bodies would be found, the military said.



So far, search teams have found 51 of the 228 people who died when Air France Flight 447 plunged into the sea June 1, according to the military.



They have also found more than 600 parts and structural components of the plane, along with luggage, the military said.



The bodies were handed to Brazilian authorities for identification while the debris and luggage were given to French aviation investigators, the military said.



In the 26 days of the search operation, the Brazilian air force used 12 planes along with aircraft from France, the United States and Spain, the military said. The Brazilian navy used 11 ships.



Ships remain in the search area hundreds of miles northeast of Brazil in an effort to find the flight data recorders, the Brazilian military said.



Last week investigators said they were running out of time to find the recorders which could prove crucial to working out what caused the disaster.



Officials remain in the dark about what caused the airliner to plunge into the sea off the coast of Brazil. The wreckage is believed to be about 15,000 feet (4,500 meters) deep, amid underwater mountains and mixed in with tons of sea trash.



A French submarine and other vessels are searching for black boxes by attempting to trace their locator beacons, which send out acoustic pulses, or "pings," to searchers.



The U.S. Navy has contributed two high-tech acoustic devices -- known as towed pinger locators -- which have been attached to French tug boats and can search to a maximum depth of 20,000ft (6,100 meters).



The firm which makes the recorders, Honeywell Aerospace, has told CNN it has a 100 percent recovery record from air accidents.



Honeywell said it was hard to estimate how much battery life the locator beacon on the recorders had, as it depended on the conditions, but it is typically around 30 days.



One recorder taped radio transmissions and sounds in the cockpit, such as the pilot's voices and engine noises.



Sounds of interest could be engine noise, stall warnings, landing gear extension and retraction, and other clicks and pops. From these sounds engine revs per minute, system failures, speed and the time at which certain events occurred could often be determined, according to the U.S. National Transportation Safety Board.



CNN's Claudia Dominguez in Atlanta, Georgia, contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- World No. 3 Maria Sharapova has blasted the ruling body of women's tennis over its demands for top players ahead of this month's Italian Open in Rome.



Maria Sharpova is furious after being threatened with a $300,000 fine by the WTA.



The Australian Open champion is furious after being threatened with a $300,000 fine if she does not participate in a publicity event before the Tier 1 tournament.



"I want all my fans to know that the WTA Tour is forcing me and several of the other top players to do a four-hour commercial shoot for WTA Tour marketing materials," Sharapova told her Web site.



"They want me to do this shoot on Sunday, Monday or Tuesday of the Rome tournament after flying 12 hours from Los Angeles.



"I have set my own personal rules when it comes to doing shoots and I never do shoots before tournaments because they are mentally draining and I want to just focus on my tennis.



"Now the WTA is telling me if I don't do this shoot they will fine me over $300,000. As you can see the WTA Tour loves to fine players.



"To be honest, I would love to do this and help promote the tour as much as possible, but to force me to do this shoot the day before a Tier 1 tournament is just not right."



The 21-year-old will be returning to action in the event starting May 12 after skipping Russia's Fed Cup semifinal against the United States last weekend.



She was beaten by Serena Williams in the quarterfinals of the Family Circle Cup in Charleston in her last outing two weeks ago.



Sharapova also made a statement explaining her absence from the German Open in Berlin starting on May 5.



"The WTA Tour makes many players enter tournaments that they know the players will not be playing," she told her Web site. "I informed the WTA several months ago that if I played Charleston, I would have to pull out of Berlin.



"Now they are forcing me to give an injury for the reason why I am pulling out or they will give me an additional fine on top of the $125,000 fine already given me. I am a very giving person but I refuse to give any more of my money to the WTA Tour.



"So I want everyone to know that apart from getting sick the past few days, I am healthy and I am looking forward to playing Rome."



Meanwhile, top seed Vera Zvonareva has reached the final of the Czech Open in Prague, beating Slovenian fourth seed Katarina Srebotnik 6-2 6-4 on Saturday.



The Russian will next play either third seed Victoria Azarenka of Belarus or seventh-seeded Czech Klara Zakopalova as she seeks to clinch her first title this season on Sunday.



In Morocco, second seed Gisela Dulko of Argentina reached Sunday's final of the Grand Prix SAR La Princesse Lalla Meryem after beating French fourth seed Aravane Rezai 7-6 (8-6) 6-3 in Fez.



Top seed Anabel Medina Garrigues of Spain will face Greta Arn of Hungary in Saturday's other semifinal. E-mail to a friend

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- Global markets were reeling Monday after a historic day on Wall Street that saw two famous names become the latest victims of the credit crunch.



The leading U.S. investment bank Lehman Brothers filed for bankruptcy and brokerage Merrill Lynch was the subject of a $50 billion buyout by Bank of America.



The fate of other big name financial institutions remained in doubt and stock prices plunged in Asia, Europe and the United States.



In New York, the Dow Jones Industrial Average closed 504 points down, or about 4.4 percent.



The Nasdaq composite lost 3.6 percent, its worst single-session percentage decline since March 24, 2003. It left the tech-fueled average at its lowest point since March 17 of this year.



In Europe, FTSE index in London declined 3.92 percent while the Paris CAC 40 was down 3.78 percent. It was the worst day for the index since the 9/11 terror attacks in 2001.



Major Asian indexes were closed but India's Sensex fell 5.4 percent, Taiwan's benchmark dropped 4.1, Australia's key index dropped 2 percent and Singapore fell 2.9. Check markets



The turmoil at Merrill Lynch and Lehman is bound to mean job losses in the already hard-hit financial services industry, but so far neither company has indicated how many will be cut.



"This crisis is clearly deeper than anybody had imagined only a short time ago," Peter Stein, an associate editor at the Wall Street Journal in Asia, told CNN.



The chaos followed a roller-coaster weekend for a Wall Street already concussed by woes at other major financial firms and mortgage-financing titans Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.



Sound off: What do you think?



At one point the U.S. Federal Reserve was forced to step in, announcing plans to loosen lending restrictions to the banking industry in an effort to calm markets, while a consortium of 10 leading domestic and foreign banks agreed a $70 billion fund to lend to troubled financial firms.



U.S. President George W. Bush said Monday he is confident that the markets are resilient and can deal with the latest financial blows. "We are working to reduce disruptions and minimize the impact these financial market developments on the broader economy."  Watch what went wrong »



He added: "In the short run, adjustments in the financial markets can be painful for people worried about their investments and for employees of the firms."



U.S. Democratic presidential candidate Barack Obama said eight years of Bush "brought us the most serious financial crisis since the Great Depression."



His Republican rival said John McCain said he was happy the federal government decided not to use taxpayer dollars to bail out Lehman Brothers.



In an effort to calm market jitters, the European Central Bank on Monday said it has pumped $42.6 billion into money markets. The Bank of England in London also took steps, offering nearly $9 billion in a three-day auction.



In another development, American International Group, the world's largest insurer, was reportedly struggling to secure billions of dollars in capital after months of seeing its share values slide.



Police cordoned off Lehman's headquarters in New York on Sunday as staff, some in suits, others in casual clothes, left the building with cardboard boxes while tourists and onlookers gathered to watch the spectacle.



The 158-year-old bank, which has weathered previous financial upheavals and saw its offices destroyed in the September 11 World Trade Center attacks, filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy, which grants protection while it works out a plan to pay back creditors.



The collapse of Lehman came after shares declined 94 percent in the space of a year, prompting speculation over its fate. It took a turn for the worse Sunday when Bank of America and British bank Barclays, both viewed as potential "white knights," pulled out of deal talks, sources told CNNMoney.com.



Both Lehmans and Merrill have been caught with huge exposures to unsecured mortgages, the bad debts at the heart of the so-called credit crunch that has devalued the U.S. housing market and sent financial shockwaves worldwide. Analysis: Different rules for different names »



Lehman

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- In the midst of the ongoing culture wars, can it be a good idea to put out a comedy about two Stone Age men who wander into the Bible?



In "Year One," Jack Black stars as an inquisitive Stone Age man, with Michael Cera as his sidekick.



Harold Ramis thinks so.



"Year One," which he directed, concerns two men -- played by Jack Black and Michael Cera -- who leave their home and, in their travels, meet biblical characters such as Cain, Abel, Abraham and Isaac. Among the locales: ancient Sodom, which "didn't seem worse than Las Vegas to me," Ramis told CNN.



"Year One" comes out Friday.



Ramis, whose writing and directing credits include "Groundhog Day" and "Analyze This," said it was time for a new biblical epic -- of sorts.



"No one had done this film for our generation," he told CNN. It's like, you know, when 'Animal House' [which Ramis co-wrote] came out, there were college films. Every generation had college films, but our generation didn't have one yet, and I don't know that our generation - this young, new generation of kids has a, you know, a sandal epic yet, and this is the one. This is for them."



Ramis rounded up a cast of comedians familiar to any watcher of Judd Apatow-produced movies -- no surprise, since Apatow is a producer of "Year One." Christopher Mintz-Plasse ("Superbad"), Horatio Sanz ("Saturday Night Live," "Step Brothers") and Bill Hader ("Tropic Thunder") all have parts.



"A lot of them were new to me," said Ramis. "[But] Jack knew them, Michael knew them, they were connected -- all connected through Judd Apatow, through 'Saturday Night Live' ... the comedy world is a club."



Black joked that everyone's a member of a secret society, requiring retinal scans, that meets "inside the O of the Hollywood sign -- the first O," he noted..



"All the projects are laid out on a table," he said. "And we talk generally about how we're gonna take over the planet, take over the comedy and keep a vise grip on it."



Black said he revels in the chance to find the humor in the Bible.



"That was the fun of this thing," he said. "It's like, we are going to have some fun with the Bible; you don't see it very often. It hasn't really been done since Monty Python days. 'Life of Brian.' "



However, the film could get more than it asked for. Films poking fun at the Bible -- or, indeed, treating the Bible with anything less than reverence -- have been the subject of protests and criticism.



"Life of Brian," the Python troupe's 1979 comedy about an assumed messiah that parodied the story of Jesus, was protested by clergy in the U.S. and banned outright in Ireland. French protesters threw Molotov cocktails into a Paris theater showing "The Last Temptation of Christ," Martin Scorsese's 1988 film version of Nikos Kazantzakis' novel.



More recently, Mel Gibson's "The Passion of the Christ," though a huge financial success, was criticized by some observers for alleged anti-Semitism, as well as its violence.



Ramis, who observed that a number of biblical films focus on the New Testament, said he deliberately chose to make the Old Testament his subject.



"I told people that I wanted to do for the Old Testament what Monty Python did for the Gospels," he said. "Which is just to kind of take a funny look and project a contemporary sensibility back to these treasured myths of Western civilization.



"It wasn't so much to attack any particular religion," he added. "I figure all religions are

***

(The Frisky) -- Natalie Portman is getting a lot of Oscar buzz for her performance in "Black Swan." And while the young actress certainly deserves the attention for the mind-bending role, we're a little concerned that a dud of a movie is about to hit theaters that could distract critics from her performance in the ballet thriller. Her rom-com "No Strings Attached," also starring Ashton Kutcher, is coming out right before the Oscars.





Sometimes when this kind of thing happens, it makes the stronger performance seem like a fluke and can cost an actor precious Academy votes. But Natalie would not be the first star who went from stellar performance to getting stuck in a stinker.





From "Dreamgirls to "Norbit"





Apparently, a lot of people felt that Eddie Murphy's shot at winning an Oscar for his role in "Dreamgirls" evaporated after his 2007 movie "Norbit." For his role as James "Thunder" Early in "Dreamgirls," Murphy took home a Golden Globe and a Screen Actors Guild Award and earned an Oscar nomination (but not a win), but when "Norbit" dropped in theaters, the movie ended up winning eight Golden Raspberry "Razzie" awards. That's a lot of bad "fruit."





The Frisky: Pics of 15 celebrity slobs





America's sweetheart bombs





Sandra Bullock made history in 2010 for winning both an Oscar and a Razzie in the same year. Actually, make that in the same weekend! Before accepting her Best Actress Oscar for "The Blind Side," the gracious actress accepted a Razzie for Worst Actress in "All About Steve." We're sure her two statues sit side by side.





From "Good Will" to six stinkers





Ben Affleck took home an Oscar in 1997 for writing "Good Will Hunting," so I suppose his acting prowess wasn't exactly on the line. But he followed up that win with a number of truly mediocre roles and was nominated for Worst Actor of the Decade Razzie this year for his contributions to film in "Daredevil," "Gigli," "Jersey Girl," "Paycheck," "Pearl Harbor," and "Surviving Christmas." Ouch. But it should be noted that Affleck did accept his 2004 Razzie in person, so at least he's a good sport.





The Frisky: 12 celebs who've denied getting breast implants





"Catwoman" was a "Monster"





Actress Halle Berry followed her 2002 Academy Award for Best Actress in "Monster's Ball" with a Razzie Award for Worst Actress in "Catwoman" in 2005. Berry accepted her Razzie while holding her Academy Award, which is awesomely ... awesome.





The Frisky: 10 female stars who are OK with nudity





He should have said "no" to "Vice"





Jamie Foxx had a great year in 2004 after winning an Oscar for "Ray," getting another nomination for "Collateral," and having a hit song with "Slow Jamz." But he followed that strong year with films like "Miami Vice" and "Valentine's Day," which, no matter what anyone says, was super mediocre.





She had a good and a bad "marriage" movie





Her performance in 2008's "Rachel Getting Married" earned Anne Hathaway an Oscar nomination, but her other bridal-themed flop, "Bride Wars," the following year made us forget all about it. Wedding-themed movies are just a hard genre to get right.





The Frisky: 10 Hollywood female celebs under 35 who are "out"





From piano man to sci-fi flop





Nothing could make me stop loving Adrien Brody, but he did manage to disappoint critics when he followed up his 2003 Best Actor Oscar for "The Pianist" with "The Singing Detective" and (shudder) "King Kong." And now he's wasting his talent in weird sc-fi movies like "Splice" and "Predators?" Get this man a period piece, pronto!





The Frisky: 30 things every woman should quit doing by 30





TM &

***

(CNN) -- Academy Award-winning composer Maurice Jarre, who scored movies including "Doctor Zhivago" and "Lawrence of Arabia" among others, died Sunday from cancer in Los Angeles. He was 84.

Movie composer Maurice Jarre pictured at the Berlin International Film Festival last month.

Jarre enjoyed an illustrious career, working with Hollywood directing legends including John Huston, Alfred Hitchcock and, most notably, David Lean.

Fellow French composer Alexandre Desplat, who interviewed Jarre for The Screening Room at the Berlin International Film Festival last month, told CNN Monday: "Maurice was an immense artist, an incredible symphonist, a magician of the melody and a benevolent human being."  Watch tribute to Maurice Jarre »

Jarre won Oscars in 1963 and 1966 for his collaborations on the Lean movies "Lawrence of Arabia" and "Doctor Zhivago" respectively.

He then mustered a further six Oscar nominations but his third award came once again through a further collaboration with Lean on " A Passage to India" in 1984.

He then swapped orchestral composition to become a pioneer of electronic scoring, working on the music for, among others, "Ghost," "Witness," "Dead Poet's Society" and "Fatal Attraction."

At the same time his son Jean-Michel Jarre became one of the world's best known electronic musicians with global hits such as "Oxygene" and huge outdoor concerts.

His final movie composition was for the 2000 film "I Dreamed of Africa."

Jarre's career included symphonies, ballet and theatre but it was for his 150 film scores that he was presented with an honorary Golden Bear at the Berlin International Film Festival last month - almost half a century after producer Sam Spiegel hired him to work on "Lawrence of Arabia."

Festival director Dieter Kosslick said in a statement late last year: "Film composers often are in the shadows of great directors and acting stars. It's different with Maurice Jarre; the music of 'Doctor Zhivago,' like much of his work, is world-famous and remains unforgotten in the history of cinema."

Speaking in Berlin to double-Oscar nominee Desplat -- who himself scored "The Curious Case of Benjamin Button" and "The Queen" -- Jarre said: "I never really had a 'bust-up' with a good director. A good director will always find an intellectual understanding. And that's what was great - I had an opportunity with all these people. I don't think I can say that I ever worked with a bad director."

But Jarre also said that directing legends of the rank of Huston and Hitchock had disappeared and no longer existed, adding: "The only problem is now, there is more and more bad music that goes 'dang dang dang dang dang...' So...it's better to turn off the music, and listen to a concert of Mozart."

Senior producer Neil Curry and associate producer Lidz-Ama Appiah contributed to this report.

***

KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia (Reuters) -- Malaysia defended on Friday its practice of caning criminals after a disturbing video of a prison-yard caning session burst onto the Internet, reigniting criticism from lawyers and human rights advocates.



In the video, a naked man is shown strapped to an upright wooden frame, his rear exposed to a uniformed official who lifts a meter-long rattan stick above his head before bringing it down on the prisoner's buttocks, tearing the flesh with each strike.



The video, in which the moaning and shaking prisoner is struck six times, has spread quickly across the Internet, capturing headlines in the Web sites of some European newspapers and forcing the Malaysian government on to the defensive.



"The government at this stage has no plans to abolish the cane as part of punishment," Deputy Internal Security Minister Fu Ah Kiow told Reuters by telephone.



He said the video was an official recording that had been leaked onto the Internet. The video had been produced for deterrent purposes, with excerpts shown during anti-narcotic education sessions to would-be drug dealers, he added.



"This video was taken officially by us for a demonstration purpose, but it is not supposed to have the victim's face identified. Somehow somebody must have taped (copied) it."



Malaysia is not alone in caning criminals, which critics say breaches human rights norms, including the U.N. Convention Against Torture. Neighboring Singapore also wields the rattan stick and caused a U.S. outcry 13 years ago when it caned an American teenager, Michael Fay, four times for vandalism.



But Malaysia's Bar Council, which represents about 12,000 lawyers, recently called for a ban on caning, saying the "cruel" practice was rising in Malaysia, especially on illegal immigrants after hasty hearings arranged at crammed detention centers.



"They have started imposing the caning sentence in a more rigorous way and it can affect anyone who comes in (to Malaysia) without a passport or papers, so it happens to asylum-seekers and refugees," said Latheefa Koya, of the council's Legal Aid Center.



The government denied use of the cane was widespread against illegal immigrants and Deputy Internal Security Minister Fu said it was reserved mainly for the traffickers of illegal immigrants in addition to drug-traffickers and violent criminals.



Fu said the government also faced calls from victims of crime for the use of the cane to be maintained or even increased for some serious crimes "in view of the crime rate in Malaysia".



Crime is seen as a major electoral issue in the run-up to a possible early general election, expected early next year.



"We respect the view of the Bar Council but there are many other views from the people and also from the victims of crimes that there should be an increase (in caning)," Fu said. E-mail to a friend

***

WASHINGTON (CNN)  -- President Obama declared Monday that his stimulus plan is "starting to work" and that 2,000 transportation projects -- costing much less than expected -- are under way.

President Obama on Monday says the transportation projects will help create or save jobs.

"Competition for these projects is so fierce, and contractors are doing such a good job cutting costs, the projects are consistently coming in under budget," Obama said Monday.

The president gave a rapid-fire list of savings: a bid for road work in Connecticut is $8.4 million less than the state budgeted; Louisiana has a project coming in $4.7 million less than expected; projects in Colorado are averaging about 30 percent under the state forecast; and some bids in California are nearly half of what the state projected.

The administration said those savings will stretch the agency's $48 billion stimulus budget.

"Our recovery dollars can go further, and we can do more projects," said Transportation Secretary Ray LaHood said. "This is great news."

LaHood hosted the president and vice president at his department's headquarters in Washington for the  announcement. Officials did not give an overall estimate of money saved from competitive bids.

The three leaders also claimed a victory in the amount of transportation work approved so far, saying the agency has approved its 2,000th infrastructure project as part of the stimulus.

"Some may have thought it would have taken months to get to this point," Obama said, "but we have approved these projects in just 41 days."  Watch as Obama says projects are coming in ahead of schedule »

The stimulus bill was signed February 17, but transportation dollars did not begin flowing until later.

The president said the 2,000th transportation project to receive stimulus funds is one to widen and add an overpass to a stretch of Interstate 94 near Portage, Michigan. Vice President Joseph Biden plans to attend the groundbreaking in June.

Obama said the highway projects from the stimulus bill will create or save 150,000 jobs by the end of next year.

He pointed to the aggressive contractor interest in transportation projects, along with tax cuts going to millions of families from the stimulus plan, and implied it marks a turning point in the economic recovery effort.

"Today, I think it's safe to say that this plan is beginning to work," the president said.

***

(CNN) -- The powerful Service Employees International Union has decided that, because of the $700 billion financial-system bailout, it wants to organize bank workers.



Banks that get taxpayer money need to "ensure their workers have a voice," a union spokeswoman says.



In an e-mail dated November 12 and obtained exclusively by CNN, a member of SEIU's Private Equity Project outlined initial discussions to organize bank workers "since the banking industry is now being infused with billions of taxpayer dollars."



The e-mail was written by SEIU's Inga Skippings to the director of the Washington office of the Association of Community Organizing for Reform Now (ACORN), a longtime ally and partner of the union.



"We need to get a handle on who these workers are, working conditions, etc.," Skippings wrote.



"Do you have ACORN members who work for banks or Freddie Mac/Fannie Mae? Is there anyway [sic] you could check? The banks we're most concerned about are:



-- Fannie Mae  -- Freddie Mac  -- Chevy Chase/B.F.Saul  -- BB&T  -- SunTrust  -- Bank of America/Countrywide  -- Wachovia/Wells Fargo  -- PNC Bank/National City  -- Citigroup



"Please let me know and if you have other suggestions, I'd love to hear them."



Skippings referred questions to a union spokeswoman, who confirmed the authenticity of the e-mail and that the union is considering targeting the banks for unionizing.



"We believe there is special responsibility for companies who receive taxpayer dollars to ensure their workers have a voice on the job," SEIU's Lynda Tran said. "And those workers should have a seat at the table at the companies where decisions that impact the future of their families and the companies that employ them" are made.



"We are talking to workers really broadly in banking," she said.



SEIU is the fastest-growing trade union in North America, according to its own Web site, with a membership of more than 2 million, including health-care industry workers and state and local government employees. It also represents guards and janitors who work in commercial and residential properties.



And its clout continues to grow. SEIU's $85 million in political donations made it the single-largest contributor to either party in the recent elections. The union worked vigorously for the election of Barack Obama, who has named a former union official as his White House political director, a post once held in the Bush administration by Karl Rove.



The official, Patrick Gaspard, formerly was executive vice president of politics and legislation for Local 1199, the SEIU's United Healthcare Workers East.



SEIU, which broke away from the AFL-CIO in 2005, is known for its successful but sometimes controversial tactics: It often targets private equity groups' leaders, as well as banks and companies, with loud and demonstrative rallies. The union's hierarchy has made no secret it hopes to grow under the incoming Democratic administration.



"I would say that we've been very vocal about the optimism about the new administration," SEIU's Tran said. "There are a number of newly elected members of Congress who agree with us on matters relating to working families."



One labor professor said SEIU's timing in trying to unionize bank workers may be on target "because financial institutions are at a moment of weakness."



"Low-wage earners are the growing sector of the work force," said Gregory DeFreitas, an economics professor at Hofstra University and director of its labor studies program. "This is a very shrewd political move to tie this to the bailouts."



DeFreitas said unions tend not to do well in attracting workers during economic recessions because jobs are scarce then. But he said recent surveys indicate a majority of workers would consider organizing, so the public's appetite for unions may be on the upswing.



"Bank teller jobs are one of the few jobs that are actually growing," DeFreitas said. "And they are low-wage earners, so it

***

(CNN) -- Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said Sunday that Israel could accept a peace agreement with a "demilitarized Palestinian state" as its neighbor.





Israel PM Benjamin Netanyahu said he would agree to peace with Palestinians.





In his first speech accepting the concept of a two-state solution for the Middle East conflict, Netanyahu set rigid conditions for moving forward. Among them: unequivocal Palestinian recognition of Israel as the Jewish national state with Jerusalem as its capital, and full demilitarization for a Palestinian state -- no army, no rockets or missiles, no control of airspace.





"I say this in a clear voice -- if we receive a guarantee of this demilitarized unit, we will be prepared to reach agreement to a demilitarized Palestine side by side with the Jewish state," Netanyahu said, according to a direct translation of his speech at Bar-Ilan University's Begin-Sadat Center for Strategic Studies in Ramat Gan, Israel.





Initial Palestinian reaction was negative, with Palestinian legislator Mustafa Barghouti saying Netanyahu was calling for creation of a ghetto state.





"He is proving there is no partner for peace in Israel," Barghouti told CNN.





Chief Palestinian Negotiator Saeb Erakat said Netanyahu "left us with nothing to negotiate as he systematically took nearly every permanent status issue off the table."





"He announced a series of conditions and qualifications that render a viable, independent and sovereign Palestinian state impossible," Erakat said.





"This speech fell far short of every single one of the benchmarks required of Israel in line with international law and existing agreements," he said, including the 2003 Roadmap for Peace.





Netanyahu's speech, billed as a major statement on the peace process, follows President Obama's recent high-profile speech to the Muslim world and a visit to the region by Obama's Middle East envoy, former U.S. Sen. George Mitchell.





Obama welcomed Netanyahu's speech as "an important step forward" and said the president remained committed to a two-state solution that would ensure Israel's security and provide the Palestinians "a viable state," according to a White House statement.





Obama pledged to continue working with all parties "to see that they fulfill their obligations and responsibilities," the statement said.





Netanyahu, of the center-right Likud party, previously refused to endorse a two-state solution.





Netanyahu sounded themes popular with his conservative followers, repeatedly referring to Israel as the Jewish national homeland and demanding recognition of that by all Arab foes, including the Palestinians, for any chance at a peace agreement.





He prompted applause with his statement that "the land of Israel is homeland to the Jewish people, and that is the basis of our right to it."





"The Palestinian leadership must rise up and say in a very straight way that we are tired of this conflict, we will recognize the right of the Jewish people to have a national homeland in this part of the world," Netanyahu said, according to the direct translation.





He said Jerusalem would remain the capital of Israel -- refusing to yield on a sensitive issue for Palestinians -- and that a Palestinian state would have to be fully demilitarized to ensure the safety of Israel.





Obama, in his June 4 speech in Cairo, Egypt, endorsed a two-state solution and urged compromise between "two peoples with legitimate aspirations." He repeated his call for both Israel and the Palestinians to fulfill all obligations under the 2003 Roadmap for Peace, including a halt to any expansion of West Bank settlements by Israel.





Obama called America's bond with Israel "unbreakable" but said Palestinians have suffered in pursuit of a homeland. He also called for an end to Palestinian incitement against Israel and greater security in Palestinian territories.





On Sunday, Netanyahu acknowledged the suffering on both sides from the continuing Middle East conflict, but insisted the roots of the conflict came from the Arab world's refusal to accept Israel's right to exist.

***

Jelena Jankovic is making a reputation for herself as one of the hardest working women in tennis.





Grin and bear it: Jelena Jankovic hopes 2009 will be the year she wins a Grand Slam tournament.





Only a few others on the women's tour competed in as many matches as her last year, and her consistency, blistering forehand and an improved all-round game saw her end 2008 as the world No. 1.





She prepared for the Australian Open -- under way in Melbourne -- in the punishing heat of Mexico and hopes that winning her first Grand Slam tournament under the harsh Melbourne sun will silence the critics who have questioned her right to the No. 1 spot without having won a Grand Slam title.





"I don't understand why so many questions are being asked about that. I mean it's not the end of the world. I just play my tennis and I enjoy every match. I go on the court with a smile and that's all that matters to me. And if it will happen it will happen," she told CNN before the Australian Open.





While sounding somewhat fatalistic about her chances at the first Grand Slam of 2009, it belies a determination that has propelled the upbeat 23-year-old Serbian from an early childhood in Belgrade to the top of women's tennis and a jet-setting lifestyle.





She moved from her native Serbia to Florida when she was just 12 years-old, training at the Nick Bollettieri Tennis Academy -- the same tennis camp that honed the skills of Maria Sharapova and the Williams sisters.





Being away from her family from such a young age made her grow up quickly, she says: "I think I matured much faster than some of the girls my age and made me much stronger as well."





Life as an international tennis professional also means life on the road, and Jankovic admits that sometimes it can be tough.





"For me the most difficult thing is being away from my family and friends, away from my country. Sometimes I just wish I was a normal girl, just staying at home and living a normal life," she told CNN.





But her desire to be the best in the world and determination to succeed is galvanized by the achievements of her fellow Serbian tennis stars on the tour, Novak Djokovic and Ana Ivanovic.





"We are strong individuals and we come from a background where we didn't really have facilities to train, or the best financial status. We made it with our will and with our determination," she said.





"I'm proud that we have gone a long way and we have achieved huge things coming out of a small country. And I hope that will inspire and motivate the younger generation and help them by building a tennis center so that they can train in Serbia, develop their games and not have to go abroad like we had to do in order to become champions.





"It's amazing. In Serbia people are following that sport and waking up at three in the morning to watch us play," she said.





If she can dispatch the opposition in Melbourne with the same composure and determination she's shown in other tournaments she could finally have a title to match her ambition and give her compatriots something to really celebrate in the wee hours of the morning.

***

NEW DELHI, India (CNN) -- Flashback to 1984: As a child, I am glued to my family's black-and-white television set for our daily dose of evening entertainment and news on India's national broadcaster.



India holds its first rocket launch from a fishing village in southern India on November 21, 1963.



But this is no ordinary newscast: Prime Minister Indira Gandhi is speaking via videolink with astronaut Rakesh Sharma, who is aboard a space station.



Indian pride soared as Squadron Leader Sharma, an Indian Air Force pilot, became the first in the nation to explore the celestial realm, part of a joint mission with what was then the Soviet Union.



I don't remember what show it was, but it etched India's "astronomical feat" in the minds of those who watched it, including a 10-year-old like me.



But the Indian connection to space was much older than that milestone.



In the country's space calendar, November 21, 1963, is a key date: It marks the first rocket launch from a fishing village in southern India.



Nike-Apache, a two-stage sounding rocket imported from the United States, took off that day from Thumba, a site that eventually became a favorite location for similar experiments by international scientists.



So far, there have been some 2,200 sounding-rocket launches from that facility, according to the Vikram Sarabhai Space Center.



But the South Asian nation's space program has been far more expansive -- the Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) has more than 60 events that it lists as "milestones" since 1962-63, which includes the successful use of polar and geosynchronous satellite launch vehicles.  See India's space odyssey in photos »



Fast forward to 2008: The country launches its first unmanned mission to the Moon in what is being seen as the 21st-Century, Asian version of the space race between the United States and the USSR -- but this time the two nations involved are India and China.



In September of that same year, a Chinese astronaut took a spacewalk, his country's first.



A month later, India sent Chandrayaan-1 -- Chandrayaan means "moon craft" in Sanskrit -- on a two-year mission to take high-resolution, three-dimensional images of the lunar surface, especially the permanently-shadowed polar regions.



The craft, carrying payloads from the United States, the European Union and Bulgaria, will search for evidence of water or ice and attempt to identify the chemical composition of certain lunar rocks.



Nonetheless, India maintains competition does not drive its space program.



Vikram Sarabhai, seen as the father of India's space program, made this case for government funding of the program in the 1960s:



"We do not have the fantasy of competing with the economically-advanced nations in the exploration of the Moon or the planets or manned space-flight," Sarabhai said, according to ISRO's Website.



"But we are convinced that if we are to play a meaningful role nationally, and in the community of nations, we must be second to none in the application of advanced technologies to the real problems of man and society," said Sarabhai, in what the agency described as a "vision" for India's space endeavors.   Earlier this year, the Indian government increased the federal budget for space research to around $1 billion from some $700 million, ISRO spokesman S. Satish told CNN, as scientists propose to send astronauts into space by 2015 on solely Indian missions.



ISRO was also studying the feasibility of sending a manned craft to the Moon by 2020, Satish said, adding that plans for unmanned Mars missions in the coming years have not been finalized.



The space agency dropped a TV-sized probe on the Moon last November that it said sent sufficient signals to the mother craft before a crash landing.



But the country's space ambitions are not limited to public research endeavors, Satish said.



"We have just entered the commercial satellite launch market," he said, including what ISRO noted is now the

***

(CNN) -- The brutal winter storm that caused havoc from Texas to Maine has paralyzed swaths of Kentucky, where officials are working to cope with what they say is the worst power outage in the state's history.



"We are kind of in a state of emergency. It's pretty bad," said iReporter Dwight Stanley of Louisville, Kentucky.



Andrew Melnykovych, spokesman for Kentucky's Public Service Commission, said it is "an indescribable mess everywhere."



Ice storms covered parts of the state Friday, with moderate snowstorms expected to continue into Saturday morning, the National Weather Service said.



Temperatures that dipped into the teens on Friday are expected to rise to the upper 30s to lower 40s on Saturday, the weather service said.



Larry Holeman, deputy emergency management director of rural Grayson County, called his hard-hit community "a war zone."



The emergency reflects the challenges faced in states such as Kentucky, where many rural and remote regions struggle to keep warm and dry under dire weather conditions.



Nine weather-related deaths have been reported, with two confirmed, said the office of Gov. Steve Beshear. A previously confirmed death has since been found to be unrelated to the weather.



In western Louisville, three adults were found dead Friday morning of apparent carbon monoxide poisoning from a generator the family brought indoors, Mayor Jerry Abramson said.



The deaths prompted authorities to issue a stern warning about the dangers of carbon monoxide.



"We've lost three citizens because people weren't listening to the fire department when they look into the cameras and talk on the radios and say, 'listen up, carbon monoxide kills,' " Abramson said in a press conference Friday afternoon. "We can't talk enough about it."



The storm caused the largest power outage in Kentucky's history, with more than 607,000 customers out of power.  Watch residents of Grayson County, Kentucky, try to cope with outage »



But Melnykovych said that while the state is saying 607,000 customers have lost power, he thinks the number is closer to 650,000 because the state figure comes only from utilities it regulates.



When Hurricane Ike hit in September, 600,000 customers lost power. Melnykovych said the temperature was around 75 degrees and power outages were more of an "inconvenience than a life-threatening situation." iReport.com: Send your wintry weather photos, videos



"Hurricane Ike didn't have this kind of impact," he said.



Of the state's 120 counties, 78 have declared emergencies. So have 47 cities, the governor's office said.



At least 113 emergency shelters have been opened.



Jewel Tomes, who lives in Leitchfield, took shelter at a high school after a complex for the elderly lost power and was "thrilled to have a place to come to."



"The high school here was generous, and more than 500 people have been sheltered here, and we have had cots and blankets and three meals a day. And we had medication," she said.



Around 93,000 customers on 55 water systems remain without access to water because of outages and storm damage.  Photos of storm's impact »



Crews across the state were working to clear roads of snow, ice and trees.



A key concern is getting generators to water treatment facilities because of the large number of people without water.



The Kentucky National Guard, which has had 620 soldiers on duty, is bolstering to 1,000 the number of soldiers aiding recovery efforts.



Three of the battalions are headed to Paducah, Owensboro and Benton in the west and others are headed to other hard-hit spots.



The state said the Federal Emergency Management Agency will operate out of a National Guard center in Frankfort.



Beshear praised the Obama administration's prompt reaction to the storm.



"They really hit the ground running," he said. "They're working very hard to get all the equipment and supplies here that we need."



For a third day, Beshear on Friday visited regions of the state slammed by the storm.



"Western Kentucky has obviously been hit very

***

(CNN) -- A 5.8-magnitude earthquake struck Tuesday off the Cayman Islands, the U.S. Geological Survey said.





The 6.2-mile deep quake hit at 9:23 a.m. ET, 40 miles from George Town, Cayman Islands, the USGS reported. George Town, the capital, is on the western shore of Grand Cayman Island.





There were no immediate reports of injuries in the three-island chain in the Caribbean.





The British territory of the Cayman Islands is about 600 miles (1,000 kilometers) west of Port-au-Prince, Haiti, which was devastated last week by a 7.0-magnitude earthquake.





Tuesday's quake struck about 32 miles (52 kilometers) east-southeast of Bodden Town in the center of the southern coast of Grand Cayman Island.





Are you in the Cayman Islands? Share photos, video





It caused shaking at the Pedro St. James National Historic Site, about a 10-minute drive from Bodden Town, said Sonya Hydes, the gift shop manager.





"There was quite a bit of shaking," she said.





Hydes said she called her husband after the shaking stopped to see if their house was affected. He told her that he felt the quake but that it did not damage their house.





There are reports that the quake toppled power lines in Bodden Town, said Kafara Augustine, a news producer for Cayman 27.





Augustine said she felt the shaking from within her office in central George Town. She and her colleagues quickly evacuated the building, seeking safety in the streets, she said. The two-story building did not suffer any damage and from what she could see, everything else seemed unharmed during the quake, she said.





The quake startled Davy Ebanks, general manager of the North Sound Club, a golf course on the Seven Mile Beach strip of western Grand Cayman Island. He said he was reading about the earthquake in Haiti on the Internet when he suddenly felt shaking.





"I just bolted," he said. "It was rocking and rolling pretty good."





The trembling knocked some picture frames off balance and sent some mannequins tumbling in the pro shop, but otherwise did little damage at the club, he said.





About 215 miles (346 kilometers) from the temblor in Cienfuegos, Cuba -- a city on the southern coast of the communist island -- residents said they felt nothing.





The Caymans are about 167 (268 kilometers) miles northwest of Jamaica and about 140 miles (240 kilometers) south of Cuba, according to the CIA World Fact Book.





CNN's Mark Bixler and Shasta Darlington contributed to this report.

***

PARIS, France (CNN)  -- The Air France plane that crashed a month ago off the coast of Brazil "did not break up or become destroyed in flight," but bellyflopped intact into the Atlantic Ocean, the French air investigation agency announced Thursday.



Relatives and friends of an Air France steward follow his coffin during his funeral last week in Rio de Janeiro.



"The plane went straight down, almost vertically... towards the surface of the water, very very fast," air accident investigator Alain Bouillard said.



Based on visual study of the physical remains of the Airbus A330 that have been recovered, "we were able to see that the plane hit the surface of the water flat. Therefore everything was pushed upwards -- everything was pushed from the bottom to the top" of the plane, he said.



The 228 people killed in the crash "had no time to prepare," he said.  Watch more about Flight 447's descent »



But Bouillard said he did not have autopsy results from the bodies recovered, and did not know why no one lived through the crash.



"I don't know why nobody survived," he said. "I don't know the intensity of the impact. Perhaps we will find out from the autopsies. Perhaps we will never know."



Bouillard said it was still unclear what caused the crash, the deadliest in Air France's 75-year history.



"Today we are very far from establishing the causes of the accident," he said.



But there is no reason to ground Airbus A330 airplanes, he said. "There is no problem with flying these airplanes."



Pressed by a reporter on why he was not ordering the model to stop flying, he said the fleet has flown millions of miles and there are currently 660 of them flying. "Statistically, this would answer the question," he said.



Air France 447 was unable to fly on autopilot at the time of the crash, the investigator said. That was because the autopilot was not receiving speed, wind or direction information, he said.



"These tell us that the plane has to be, in this case, directed by the pilot," he said. He did not immediately say if the pilots were in control of Air France 447.



The last contact with the plane was at 2:10 a.m. local time on June 1.



"Right after that 24 automated messages came through" about the status of the plane, he said. Those messages were what enabled investigators to determine that the autopilot would not have had enough information to fly the plane, he said.



No air-traffic controllers seem to have been monitoring the flight when it went down, investigations have found. It would normally have been "handed over" from controllers in South America to others in Africa while flying over the Atlantic, but that did not happen, Bouillard said.



"We want to know why there was no concern in Dakar (in Senegal, west Africa) when this plane was not handed over," he said.



The plane was flying through severe storms when it went down.



Three other flights on similar routes changed course within an hour after Air France 447 flew into the bad weather.



A Spanish, French and German flight all experienced turbulence in the same region and diverted as much as 100 km (62 miles) off course to avoid bad weather, Bouillard said. All three flights had problems communicating with air traffic control.



Investigators will continue searching for the flight data recorder and the cockpit voice recorder -- commonly known as "black boxes" -- until July 10, said Bouillard, of the French air accident investigation agency known as the BEA.



"They normally give a signal for 30 days. We will keep listening another 10 days," he said.



Air France said Thursday it was of "capital importance" to find the recorders, "which would enable the investigators to analyze the causes of the accident, whatever these may be. No effort must be spared in achieving this end."



Bouillard said investigators would

***

Cleveland, Ohio (CNN) -- The niece of the mayor of Cleveland, Ohio, once lived with murder suspect Anthony Sowell, a registered sex offender charged with murder after the remains of 11 victims were found at his home, a spokeswoman for the mayor said Monday.



Lori Frazier, niece of Mayor Frank Jackson, had a relationship with Sowell that ended two years ago, said Andrea Taylor, a spokeswoman for Jackson's office. Taylor said it is unclear whether the relationship was romantic.



"I just want to know why, why he would do this," Frazier told CNN affiliate WOIO on Friday. "He took care of me, good care of me. I never would have thought there were some bodies in the house."



"I lived with him from 2005 to 2007 and he didn't kill me, but he killed all these girls," she said.



Sowell, 50, is facing five counts of aggravated murder, rape, felonious assault and kidnapping in connection with the deaths. All the victims were African-American women. All that remains of one of them is a skull, wrapped in a paper bag and stuffed into a bucket in the basement.



Sowell served 15 years in prison after pleading guilty to attempted rape in 1989. He was released in 2005.



So far, nine of the 11 victims found at Sowell's home have been identified. The latest two were identified Monday by the Cuyahoga County Coroner's Office, police said. They are Janice Webb, 49, and Kim Yvette Smith, who was 43 when last seen. Both women were from Cleveland.



Webb was last seen on June 3 and was reported missing on August 2, police said. Smith was last seen January 1, but was not reported missing until November 2.



A grand jury on Monday returned an indictment against Sowell in connection with an alleged assault and rape of a 36-year-old woman September 22, Cuyahoga County prosecutors said in a news release. The investigation into that incident was what led police, armed with a search warrant, to Sowell's home, where they discovered the bodies late last month.



The alleged victim encountered Sowell while walking in the neighborhood, and he took her back to his home, where he became violent and raped her, prosecutors said. "While raping her, he strangled her with a cord until she lost consciousness," the statement said. "When she regained consciousness, he led her out of the house."



Sowell faces a charge of attempted murder in the incident, along with two counts of rape, two counts of kidnapping and two counts of felonious assault, authorities said.



Sowell will be arraigned on the new charges Friday, authorities said.



The charges are first-degree felonies except for the assault charges, which are second-degree felonies, prosecutors said. If convicted, he would face a sentence of up to life in prison.



The investigation into the homicides continues, prosecutor Bill Mason said in the news release.



"Upon completion of the investigation, the Cuyahoga County Prosecutor's Office working with the Cleveland Police Department will present evidence to the grand jury seeking the death penalty for these heinous murders committed by Sowell."



Residents of the area near the home said they had noted a smell in the neighborhood, but assumed it was from nearby Ray's Sausage Company.



Asked whether she had noticed a foul odor, Frazier told WOIO, "Yeah, I smelled stuff, but he always told me that -- at first he said it was his stepmother downstairs. And then I guess after she left, he told me that it was Ray's Sausage."



Frazier said Sowell brought other women to the home when she was not there.



"I love my niece very much and while she has made some decisions that have not been in her best interest, she has my full support," Jackson said in a written statement.



"As a family, we are extremely fortunate that she was not a victim in this case as she did have a prior relationship with the suspect that ended approximately two

***

Washington (CNN)  -- Five men missing from the Washington area are in Pakistani police custody, the FBI said Thursday, a day after Pakistani authorities arrested several men whom they described as Americans and accused them of plotting terrorist attacks.





In a statement, the FBI said Pakistani authorities detained the men -- four of whom it said were found to have American passports -- on Wednesday, "after they came to the attention of police." The statement did not give further details and did not identify the men.





"Although positive identification is still pending, the FBI believes they are the missing individuals," the bureau said.





An FBI special agent and two other U.S. government officials from the U.S. Embassy have spoken with some of the men, the FBI said.





Pakistani police said they are confident the men were planning terrorist acts, according to Tahir Gujjar, deputy superintendent of police in Sargodha, where the men were arrested.





Gujjar told CNN that a preliminary investigation suggests that the men came to Pakistan to wage jihad and had sought to link up with the Jaish-e-Mohammed and Jamaat ud Dawa militant organizations, neither of which showed interest, he said. The men wanted to martyr themselves, he said.





Pakistani officials arrested five of the men Wednesday, and a sixth man -- the father of one of the five -- was arrested afterward, Gujjar said.





Usman Anwar, head of the district police of Sargodha, said the men initially made contact with Pakistani militants through YouTube in August while they were still in the United States.





The men were watching videos of Americans being killed in Afghanistan and had posted comments, which caught the attention of the militants, Anwar said.





After contact was made, a Yahoo e-mail account was set up so the men and militants could communicate, Anwar said.





"They were using a typical method that has been used by very notorious organizations," he said, explaining that e-mails were never sent from the account; rather, each side left messages as drafts, which were deleted after they were read.





After the arrests, authorities discovered that the men had received their final orders, including their "exact task, going to a particular spot ... and the exact method of how to get there," Anwar said.





He did not disclose further details.





State Department spokesman P.J. Crowley said that a team made up of U.S. Embassy security officials and FBI officials met with the men Thursday, and that consular officials will probably meet them Friday.





"It's important to emphasize at this point, we are in an information-gathering phase, but we have met with them," he said in a briefing Thursday with reporters.





"We're going to find out how they made their way from Washington, D.C., to Pakistan, why they were there, what their intentions were," he said. "At this point, we've reached no judgments."





A U.S. law enforcement official who was not authorized to speak on the record said FBI agents based in Pakistan were interviewing the men, and added that some based in the United States would probably travel there as well. The official said he had seen reports of a sixth man arrested, but did not comment.





The official, who would not provide a list of those arrested, said authorities are looking at computers the men were using in the United States, as well as cell phones and anything else they may have carried with them.





Pakistani officials said Thursday that the six men are three Pakistani-Americans, an Ethiopian-American, an Egyptian-American and an Eritrean-American.





President Obama said that he envisioned "a series of investigations" into the arrests, but he said he preferred not to comment on them.





The arrests followed a Wednesday raid on a home in Sargodha, about 120 miles south of Islamabad, Pakistani police said.





In the raid, investigators found laptops and maps of Pakistan containing highlighted areas that correspond to regions where terrorists have been active, police said.





A Pakistani official told CNN the men arrived in

***

(CNN) -- Thousands of people turned out Saturday in the southern Austrian city of Klagenfurt for the funeral of politician Joerg Haider, a popular but polarizing figure who led right-wing Austrian politics for decades.



Harald Scheucher, mayor of Klagenfurt, speaks in front of the coffin of Joerg Haider Saturday.



Among those attending the service at the town's central Neuen Platz square were Austrian President Heinz Fischer and Chancellor Alfred Gusenbauer. Haider's widow sat in the front row with her two daughters, all of them dressed in black.



"Many people expected things of Joerg Haider that they themselves weren't able to fulfill, and he too expected things of people that he wasn't able to fulfill," Gusenbauer said at the funeral. "Therefore his death, and the end of his life, may be a time to think about whether death's only consolation is that we can now reconcile things that seemed irreconcilable during his lifetime."



Haider's coffin was draped in the yellow, red and white flag of the southern state of Carinthia, where he was governor, and topped with red roses.



Haider, 58, died last Saturday in a car accident while driving out of Klagenfurt, the state capital. He had just passed another car on a highway when his car hit a concrete post and rolled over several times, police said.



His spokesman said this week that Haider was drunk at the time of the crash.



Besides being Carinthia's governor, Haider was also head of the right-wing BZO party (Alliance for the Future of Austria), which he founded in 2005 after years with the conservative Freedom Party.



Haider came to prominence in 1986, when he became head of the Freedom Party while still in his 30s.



A politician who projected youth and style, Haider appealed to many working-class Austrians, promising to cut their taxes and give money to those with children. Some older Austrians responded to his demands for strict law and order.



But he drew widespread criticism both at home and abroad for his anti-immigrant stance and remarks considered anti-Semitic, and in 1991 he publicly praised Nazi Germany's employment policy.



Asked in 2000 about the statement, Haider told CNN the quote was taken from a long speech and that he never praised the Third Reich. He called the remarks a mistake and publicly denounced Nazism.



But Haider continued to draw attention for his controversial remarks. They included an address to veterans of the Waffen S.S., Adolf Hitler's elite soldiers, in which he praised their character.



The address created an uproar after it was broadcast on German television. Haider said he had simply been speaking to elderly citizens of Carinthia who included some former Waffen S.S. members.



Despite the controversy, Haider said he was not racist: "You will not find any anti-Semitic position in our party program, and you will not find any anti-Semitic speech or statement by me."



The policies of the Freedom Party drew international attention during the elections in 1999. Party campaign posters urged voters to stop the flood of immigration and used the term "over-foreignization," the same word used by Nazi propaganda minister Joseph Goebbels in 1933 to criticize what he called Jewish influence in Germany.



Haider told CNN he favored restricting immigration simply because of Austria's small size, but that he wanted to keep an open border for refugees.



It was his family background, Haider said, that kept singling him out for criticism.



Haider's parents were activists in the Nazi Party long before Austrian-born Hitler annexed Austria to Germany in 1938. Haider's father, Robert, volunteered for the S.A., the notorious brown shirts who terrorized Jews and others before the war. He then served in the German army.



His biographer, Melanie Sully, said Haider felt a strong sense of loyalty to his parents and those in the war generation.



"He feels that what they sacrificed after the war in rebuilding Austria in very difficult circumstances needs to be honored and that they weren't all criminals," Sully told CNN in 2000.



Under Haider's leadership,

***

KHARTOUM, Sudan (CNN) -- Hundreds of angry protesters, some waving ceremonial swords from trucks equipped with loud speakers, gathered Friday outside the presidential palace to denounce a teacher whose class named a teddy bear "Mohammed" -- some calling for her execution.



An undated amateur photo of Gillian Gibbons, who has been found guilty of insulting religion.



The protesters, which witnesses said numbered close to 1,000, swore to fight in the name of their prophet.



Gillian Gibbons, 54, was given 15 days in jail late Thursday after she was convicted of insulting religion. She was cleared of charges of inciting hatred and showing contempt for religious beliefs, her lawyer, Ali Ajeb, said.



Ajeb said they planned to appeal the sentence, which begins from the date she was detained, Nov. 25. Including Friday, she has 10 more days in jail.



British Foreign Secretary David Miliband said he was "extremely disappointed" that the charges were not dismissed.



Meanwhile senior British lawmakers were en route to Khartoum to try to secure Gibbons' early release.



The two members of the House of Lords were set to arrive in Khartoum about 5 a.m. Saturday (9 p.m. Friday ET), Time magazine reporter Sam Dealey told CNN, citing British and Sudanese sources.



They will meet with government ministers and Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir, he said.



Sources close to the British government and the Republican Palace in Sudan say it is expected that a deal will be reached, and Gibbons will be released, Dealey said. Visas for the two, he said, were granted "in record time ... by Sudanese standards."



Friday's demonstrations began as worshippers spilled out of mosques in the capital after Friday prayers. They marched to the palace, which is on the same street as Unity High School, where Gibbons taught grade school students. Those who named the bear were 7 years old.



A heavy police presence was maintained outside the school, but no demonstrators were there.  Watch men brandish knives, shout »



Armed with swords and sticks, the protesters shouted: "By soul, by blood, I will fight for the Prophet Mohammad."



Western journalists who attempted to talk to the protesters were ushered away by men in plain clothes. Gibbons is being held in a women's prison in the Omdurman district of Khartoum, and she will be deported at the end of her prison term, British consular officials told CNN.



British Embassy staff said they were giving the teacher -- from the northern British city of Liverpool -- full consular assistance.



In leaflets distributed earlier this week by Muslim groups, the protesters promised a "popular release of anger" at Friday's protests.



The leaflets condemned Gibbons as an "infidel" and accused her of "the pollution of children's mentality" by her actions.



Omer Mohammed Ahmed Siddig, the Sudanese ambassador to Britain, was summoned for a second time to meet with the British foreign secretary late Thursday after the court's ruling.



Miliband also spoke to the Sudanese acting foreign minister for 15 minutes on the telephone during the meeting, the British Foreign Office said.



"Our priority now is to ensure Ms. Gibbons' welfare and we will continue to provide consular assistance to her," Miliband said in a statement.



The Foreign Office said there would be further talks with the Sudanese government Friday.



Gibbons was arrested Sunday after she asked her class to name the stuffed animal as part of a school project, the Foreign Office said. She had faced charges under Article 125 of Sudan's constitution, the law relating to insulting religion and inciting hatred.



She could have received a sentence of 40 lashes, a fine or jail term of up to a year, according to the Foreign Office.



British newspapers condemned Gibbons' conviction, with the Daily Telegraph calling for the recall of the British ambassador from Khartoum and sanctions against the heads of the Sudanese government. Watch a report on reactions to the verdict »



In an editorial, the tabloid newspaper, The Sun, said Gibbons' jailing was a "grotesque insult to Islam" and called Gibbons

***

(Budget Travel) -- Hard as it may be for anyone under 30 to imagine, there was a time when people used to shoot eight-millimeter films while on vacation and then show them to friends and family gathered around a projector in the living room. Nowadays, capturing video is far easier (whether you use a video camera, a digital still camera with video capability or even a cell phone), as is the sharing: YouTube has proved that millions of folks have learned to upload video to a computer and instantly e-mail a link to family and friends.





Whether you use a video camera, a digital still camera with video capability, or even a cell phone, capturing video has never been easier.





While YouTube remains a popular venue for sharing vacation videos, Web sites specifically targeting travelers are also springing up. The quality of the applications and usefulness of the content, however, vary greatly. We tested four to see which are easiest, which have bugs to work out and which can even help you offset your travel costs.





Travelistic





For anyone just getting the hang of online video sharing, no-frills Travelistic -- founded by veterans of Condé Nast, iFilm and MTV -- is a good start. Before you upload a video, Travelistic directs you through a simple registration process and asks you to write a short description of your clip. When the video is posted, you can e-mail friends to tell them to watch it. You can also create a profile page to list your videos, add links to other people's clips and indicate on a world map where you've been and where you'd like to go.





Cool: Similar to YouTube, Travelistic gives an embed code for most postings, allowing anyone on the Internet to add the clip to his or her own Web site or blog. Likewise, YouTube videos can be embedded into Travelistic.





Not cool: No registration is required to leave comments on other people's videos, leading to spam. Travelistic also doesn't restrict who can post videos, so some material on the site comes from tourism promoters.





Upload time: Painfully slow at 20 minutes.*





Revver





Revver is a general-interest video-sharing site with a category devoted to travel clips. Its process for uploading a video is similar to Travelistic's, but the personal "dashboard" is much more sophisticated. You can collect friends, à la Facebook, and add other people's videos to your playlist (a compilation of favorite clips). There are also more ways to share your videos: The site allows you to use embed codes to link your videos to social-networking sites, and your friends can download the clips as podcasts in iTunes.





Cool: The site affixes small advertisements to the bottom of every video, usually promoting something germane. (For example, an ad for a Miami hotel is attached to a home movie of Miami Beach.) Revver then pays you half the revenue it makes from the video ads -- the total depends on how many people view the ads or click on them. You can track how much you've made in your dashboard, and you're automatically paid through PayPal once you've earned at least $20. Earnings can be substantial. The creators of an extremely popular Diet Coke and Mentos video on the site have made $50,000.





Not cool: Editors screen all of the videos to ensure that no obscene or copyrighted material will be posted to the site -- the process can take several hours or even a day. If your video has more than 10 seconds of a Beyoncé song in the background, for instance, the editors could consider it a copyright violation and block the clip's posting.





Upload time: Five minutes.





Tripfilms





Founded by four friends in New York City, including former IgoUgo chief executive Tony Cheng, Tripfilms is geared toward people who think of themselves as filmmakers, professional or otherwise, with higher-quality and more informative clips than those on other video-sharing sites. But that shouldn't deter the novice videographer; Tripfilms's videos may be slicker than those on other

***

(CNN) -- The wife of a man suspected of killing five people in Tennessee and one in Alabama was among the victims found in southern Tennessee, along with her son, father and brother, police said Sunday.



Jacob Shaffer was arrested in connection with the slayings of six people in Tennessee, police said.



Jacob Shaffer, 30, of Fayetteville, Tennessee, was arrested Saturday after three people were found dead at a home in Fayetteville, 90 miles south of Nashville, Tennessee. Two other people were found at another home on the same street.



The three found in one home were Shaffer's wife, Traci Shaffer, 38; her son Devin Brooks, 16; and the youth's friend and neighbor, 16-year-old Robert Berber, according to a statement Sunday from the Tennessee Bureau of Investigation.



The two people found at the other home were Traci Shaffer's father, Billy Hall, 57, and her brother Chris Hall, 34, authorities said.



Autopsies were being conducted Sunday on the five, and causes of death would be released by medical examiners, the bureau said.



A sixth person was found dead at a business about 30 miles away in Huntsville, Alabama, the Tennessee authorities said. The person's name was not released Sunday.



Jacob Shaffer was in one of the Fayetteville homes when Lincoln County sheriff's deputies arrived Saturday, authorities said. Police believe the deaths happened either Friday night or Saturday, according to Kristin Helm of the Tennessee Bureau of Investigation. Officials said they believe the deaths were related to a domestic dispute.



It was unclear when or how the Huntsville victim died. "We have no clue yet as to what unfolded there and how it relates to here," Huntsville Police Sgt. Mickey Allen said Saturday.



Without naming Shaffer, Allen said Tennessee authorities told him a man confessed to a slaying in Huntsville and to five other killings in Fayetteville.



Shaffer faces five counts of criminal homicide in the Tennessee deaths, the TBI statement said. He was in the Lincoln County Jail without bond Sunday.



CNN's Mayra Cuevas-Nazario contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- The Australian cruiser met the disguised German vessel in the waters off western Australia two years after the two became enemies in World War II.



The gun turret of the Sydney II was discovered with the rest of the vessel in March 2008.



The Australian ship approached, trying to determine whether the vessel was friendly. It wasn't.



What resulted was Australia's worst naval disaster: the sinking of the Australian ship and the loss of its entire crew of 645. The wreckage wasn't found until last year, leading to decades of conspiracy theories about what actually happened.



On Wednesday a long-awaited report on the sinking of the Sydney II ended the mystery that began when it met its fate, November 19, 1941.



Made to look like a cargo ship, the German vessel was in fact a military raider that fired on the Australians when they got close. The Sydney fired back and, in the end, both ships went down.



More than 300 of the sailors on board the German vessel, the Kormoran, survived. But because they were the only witnesses to the disaster, some doubted their accounts, leading to various theories about the real fate of the Sydney.



After the wrecks of both ships were located in March 2008, an Australian commission began an inquiry to formally close the book on the loss of the Sydney.



The results confirm the accounts provided by the German sailors.



They said the Sydney closed in on the Kormoran until it was parallel with the German ship, little more than 1,000 yards away.



"Sydney obviously thought the ship was friendly and was taken by surprise when, after she asked what she believed to be (a friendly ship) to give her secret call sign, the response was a number of salvos that destroyed Sydney's bridge and amidships superstructure and a torpedo strike that crippled the ship and her forward guns," the report said.



The Sydney had given up its tactical advantage of speed and armaments by getting so close to an unknown vessel, the report said.



While that may have been an error of judgment by the Australian captain, Joseph Burnett, the report accepted that other factors -- which may never be known -- influenced his decision.



"It can never be known what matters were, in fact, operating in Capt. Burnett's mind when he decided to take the Sydney to the position described. Nor can it be known what advice, if any, he sought from or was given by other officers on the bridge," the report says.



"What is known, however, is that, in trying to identify the sighted ship, Capt. Burnett was performing his duty as a commanding officer."



The German ship inflicted "enormous damage" on the Sydney during a battle that is believed to have lasted about 35 minutes and left 70 percent of the Sydney's crew dead or incapacitated, said Cmdr. Jack Rush, the lawyer who presented the evidence gathered by investigators to a commission of inquiry led by a retired judge.



It is likely that Burnett, the navigator, and all of the Sydney's senior officers were taken out on the first salvo, Rush said.



A torpedo tore into the Sydney's bow, flooding the forward end of the ship, while the Kormoran fired an estimated 87 rounds from its 15-cm (5.9-inch) guns into the Australian cruiser. The Sydney limped away and sank sometime between 2 hours to 4 1/2 hours later, Rush said.



During the battle, however, the Kormoran itself was hit by an Australian shell that damaged its engines and set the vessel ablaze. With hundreds of mines aboard, its captain ordered the crew to abandon ship, fearing the fire would set those off. Charges were set and the ship was scuttled.



About 80 of the Kormoran's crew of nearly 400 were lost.



A search began only five days after the battle, when the Sydney failed to return to port in Fremantle. And an 11-day delay by Australia's government in announcing the ship's loss fueled what a 1999 parliamentary report called "a proliferation of theories" about the

***

(CNN) -- A cancer treatment that comes in a pill is as effective as the standard chemotherapy for lung patients who had previously been treated for their cancer, according to a study released Thursday.



The intravenous chemotherapy treatment had more severe side effects than the pill in this study.



Results of a large clinical trial were published in the British medical journal The Lancet.



The trial was designed to compare Iressa, a daily pill, to Taxotere, an IV-chemotherapy drug that's administered every three weeks.



This international study included more than 1,400 patients for whom standard chemotherapy had been ineffective.



"Iressa and Taxotere have same survival outcomes," according to Dr. Edward Kim, lead author of the study and assistant professor in M.D. Anderson Cancer Center's Department of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology in Houston, Texas.



The study was paid for by the maker of Iressa, AstraZeneca. Kim says the Food and Drug Administration mandated that the pharmaceutical company conduct this clinical trial.



In the study, patients taking Iressa had an average survival of 7.6 months, and 32 percent survived one year, compared with patients getting the chemotherapy drug Taxotere. Their survival was an average of eight months; 34 percent of patients survived one year.



Kim says this is the largest study in lung cancer comparing an oral therapy with chemotherapy.



Dr. Bruce Johnson, a lung cancer specialist at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston, Massachusetts, who was not involved in this research, says, "this study did what it intended to do in showing equivalency. I can't imagine any clearer evidence."



One significant difference between the two drugs is in side effects. Patients taking Iressa mainly experienced skin rashes and/or mild diarrhea. Patients on Taxotere had many more severe side effects, including hair loss, numbness in hands and feet, severe diarrhea, a drop in blood cells and nausea.



Given the difference, "the single pill trumps chemotherapy," said Dr. Paul Bunn, who heads the International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer Research and also was not involved in the clinical trial.



Johnson says that 5 to 10 percent of patients taking Taxotere will drop out every three weeks because of side effects. Kim points out that if the two treatments have the same survival benefit but one has fewer side effects and is easier to take, doctors want their patients to have the option for this treatment.



Currently, no new lung cancer patients can get Iressa, because doctors are no longer allowed to prescribe it.



In 2003, Iressa got fast-track FDA approval as a treatment for patients with non-small-cell lung cancer, specifically for patients in whom standard chemotherapy had failed. The approval was based on two small phase II clinical trials that showed Iressa was able to shrink tumors by about 10 percent, which led the FDA to believe that the drug would lead to a "positive effect on survival or benefits." More on Iressa from the FDA



When the FDA gives a drug accelerated approval, it requires that the manufacturer continue testing it to determine whether there's a clinical benefit to the patient. If further studies can't show this type of benefit, the FDA has the power to withdraw that drug from the market.



But a year later, results were revealed from a larger, phase III clinical trial that compared Iressa with placebo in patients for whom chemotherapy was ineffective.



"Iressa was better but not statistically significant," said Bunn, who also directs the University of Colorado Cancer Center.



Given this information and because another lung cancer pill -- Tarceva -- had shown a survival benefit, the FDA decided that " it is not reasonable to start new patients on Iressa."



Since 2005, the FDA allows only those already getting Iressa prescribed or those enrolled in clinical trials that were under way at the time to continue taking Iressa.



All three lung cancer experts CNN spoke with regularly see patients and have treated them with Iressa or the other available lung cancer drugs. All said they couldn't predict whether the FDA would allow new patients to be treated with Iressa based on this and

***

An Israel air force pilot, the son of an astronaut who died aboard the space shuttle Columbia in 2003, was killed Sunday in an F-16 fighter jet crash, Israel Defense Forces said in a statement.



A military helicopter hovers over the Hebron Hills, site of the jet crash Sunday of Israel air force pilot Assaf Ramon.



Lt. Assaf Ramon died in the crash near the Israeli community of P'nei Chever in the southern Hebron Hills, the IDF said. The F-16 crashed "during a routine flight as part of the advanced pilot training course," the statement said.



The wreckage of the plane was found by search and rescue forces, the IDF said.



Ramon was posthumously promoted to captain, officials said.



He was the son of Col. Ilan Ramon, Israel's first astronaut.



The elder Ramon died February 1, 2003, with six others aboard the space shuttle Columbia when it broke apart over Texas, minutes before it would have landed in Florida.



Maj. Gen. Ido Nehushtan, Israel air force commander, launched an investigation into the crash, the IDF said. All F-16 training flights were canceled until further notice.



Nehushtan and Maj. Gen. Avi Zamir, head of the Personnel Branch, "visited the home of Rona Ramon and informed her of the tragic event," the IDF said. Rona Ramon is Assaf Ramon's mother and the widow of Ilan Ramon.



The younger Ramon excelled in an IAF pilot training course last month, received a presidential honor, and was given his pilot's wings by President Shimon Peres, Israeli military officials said.



Funeral arrangements were pending.

***

(CNN)  -- Mother Nature provided a little bit of everything in several parts of the country on Saturday.



Vehicles jam a buckled road in Mobile, Alabama, on Saturday after heavy rains.



Heavy winds wreaked havoc on a shopping center in central Tennessee, blowing out windows and damaging the roof, Murfreesboro police spokesman Kyle Evans told CNN Radio.



Glass storefronts at the Jackson Heights Shopping Center were blown out 100 to 150 yards into the parking lot, Evans said.



Evans said three people were treated for minor injuries from flying glass and metal.



Residents in northwest Murfreesboro lost power Saturday night and police warned residents to stay indoors until traffic caused by the incident cleared up.



Elsewhere, a blizzard dumped more than 2 feet of snow in parts of the Plains on Saturday. The blizzard cut power, stranding drivers and prompting governors in Kansas and Oklahoma to issue disaster declarations.



The heaviest snow and ice accumulated in south central and southwest Kansas. In Pratt County, 28 inches of snow fell, with snowdrifts reported up to 6 feet deep. At least nine other counties reported 2 feet of snow, the Kansas Adjutant General's office said.



About 17,000 customers in Kansas lost electricity, more than half of those in Sedgwick County.



The storm left some travelers stranded and in need of last-minute hotel accommodations, according to the front desk manager at the Econolodge in McPherson.



"We have two honeymoon suites open, but other than that we're fully booked. We normally have 84 rooms," iReporter Sally Kelley said.



The housekeepers who made it to work were all outside shoveling, but they struggled to keep up with the snow as it continued falling Saturday afternoon.



"We haven't had people getting mad at us. The people have been great but I think they're really frustrated."



The state Adjutant General's office said whiteout conditions and blowing snow made driving hazardous. The Kansas Department of Transportation shut down several roads in the western and south central part of the state. National Guard Humvees were used to move medical personnel and patients to a hospital in Seward County.



In Oklahoma, where more than a foot of snow fell, Gov. Brad Henry declared a state of emergency in 50 counties.



The state Department of Transportation had several roads blocked in the state and others remained impassable.



"The only people who can get out of their driveways have 4-wheel drive," said iReporter Mark Rennie of Alva, Oklahoma.



Meanwhile, rain along the Gulf Coast battered areas around Mobile, Alabama, and Biloxi, Mississippi.  Watch how the rain is blocking roads in Mobile, Alabama »



Mobile County Emergency Management Director Walter Dickerson said 4 to 6 inches of rain fell on already saturated ground.



Fifteen to 20 roads around Mobile were closed, and  several people had to be rescued after flash flooding trapped their cars.



In Mobile, heavy rains caused a section of roadway to collapse. Three cars ended up in a large sinkhole, including one vehicle that landed on top of another. No serious injuries were reported.



Dickerson said a temporary shelter may be opened for residents displaced by the high waters.



In nearby Baldwin County, Alabama, an apartment complex was evacuated and some main roads were closed.



The main roadway leading into Biloxi, the Interstate 10 loop, was closed for several hours early Saturday before waters receded and allowed traffic to resume. But more than a dozen other roads around Harrison County remained blocked.



Roads were also impassable in some parts of the Florida Panhandle. Officials in the Atlanta, Georgia, metro area, which was under flood watches and warnings, were keeping an eye on surging rivers and creeks.

***

(CNN) -- Strange things seem to happen when Grant Wilson enters a room.

Grant Wilson, left, and partner Jason Hawes were driven by personal experiences to track ghosts.

Human forms materialize in darkened hallways. The dead whisper greetings from beyond the grave. Unseen entities attack and hurl terrified people to the ground.

Every day is Halloween for Wilson, co-star of the Sci Fi Channel's hit show, "Ghost Hunters." Close encounters of the paranormal kind would drive most people to look for another hobby, but Wilson says he ain't afraid of no ghosts.

"That's part of the job," says Wilson, who investigates suspected hauntings with his co-host, Jason Hawes.. "We tell everyone that we train that you'll be punched, slapped and grabbed. Be prepared for it."

Anyone who has watched their 401(k) account evaporate during the recent stock market dive knows something about horror. But Wilson is part of a growing community that prefers getting their chills the old-fashioned way. They are ghost hunters, or, as they prefer to be called, paranormal investigators.

"Ghost-Hunters," which airs a special live show at 7 p.m. Halloween night, is helping lift the stigma once attached to paranormal investigators. The show has become so popular that the group featured in each episode -- The Atlantic Paranormal Society - has spawned imitators across the United States and affiliates in 12 countries.

TAPS, as the "Ghost Hunters" group is informally known, even has its own "Beyond Reality Radio" show, magazine, lecture tours, T-shirts --and groupies.

"Ghost Hunters" has made creepy cool, says David Schrader, a paranormal investigator and co-host of "Darkness Radio," a radio show that investigates paranormal activity.

"Five or six years ago, you'd be embarrassed to sit around the water cooler talking about ghosts, but now everybody talks about it -- it's gone mainstream," Schrader says.

It's also gone Hollywood. Paranormal shows like "Paranormal State" on A&E Television; "Haunting Evidence" on truTV (which, like CNN.com, is owned by Time Warner); "Dead Famous" on the Biography Channel; and "A Haunting" on the Discovery Channel are trying to mimic the success of "Ghost Hunters."

Paranormal investigators aren't just chasing ghosts anymore; they're chasing television gigs, Schrader says.

"Everybody I know has a pilot in development -- including me," Schrader says. "They throw it around like Frisbees. It's become a joke."

The paranormal shows have also created a paranormal circuit. Families and friends attend ghost-hunting conventions, retreats (one was dubbed "GhoStock,") swap tips on ghost-hunting gear and make pilgrimages to famous haunted places like The Stanley Hotel in Colorado, the setting for the Stephen King movie, "The Shining."  I hear dead people. Â»

Why they chase ghosts

Many of these amateur paranormal investigators are inspired -- and freaked out - by what they see on "Ghost Hunters."

Some of the incidents recorded by "Ghost Hunters" are mystifying: Ghostly forms appear on camera, chairs lurch across rooms by themselves and voices of people long dead are played back to their wide-eyed relatives.

In one of the most famous "Ghost Hunters" episodes, a cameraman is grabbed and hurled to the ground --though no one appears to touch him. The cameraman is so shaken that he sobs and quits the show.

Wilson says people who think they have a ghost at home should not try a do-it-yourself home ghost repair. A person who uses Ouija boards or anything else to contact ghosts can unleash malevolent spirits.

"You might not be ready for what happens," Wilson says. Watch Grant's encounter with a ghost Â»

Some ghost-hunters say they entered the field because, like Wilson, they had personal experiences with the supernatural. Others want to know if there is something beyond death.

Others like

***

NEW DELHI, India (CNN) -- Tensions eased in the northern Indian state of Punjab on Tuesday, following widespread violence across the region after a Sikh guru was shot to death and another was wounded at an Indian temple in Vienna, Austria.



Sikh demonstrators brandish sticks as they shout slogans during a protest in Amritsar.



The situation was tense, but under control, Punjab's inspector general of police said Tuesday morning. The army and federal security forces were called in to restore order, added inspector general Parag Jain.



Thousands took part in demonstrations across the Doaba region, where protesters attacked public transportation, knocking out train service in some areas. They also blocked a national highway to Jammu, CNN sister network CNN-IBN reported.



A number of businesses were ransacked as well. Police reported one death.



Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, himself a Sikh, appealed for calm, in a statement.



"There is no place for violence in a secular society like India's and certainly no excuse whatsoever for the violation of the sacred premises of a (Sikh temple) for narrow sectarian or other purposes," India's Ministry of External Affairs said in a statement.



Killed in Sunday's attack in Vienna was 57-year-old Sant Rama Nand.



A second guru, Sant Niranjan Dass, 68, was seriously injured. His health has improved noticeably, according to the Indian Embassy, the Austria News Agency reported. Fifteen others were also wounded.



"Sant Niranjan Dass is doing well," the embassy said. "He could soon be released from the hospital."



Six people were arrested in connection with the attack, which occurred Sunday afternoon in Vienna's 15th district, police spokesman Schwaig Hofar told CNN.



One suspect shot the two gurus, and five other attackers wielding knives assaulted people in the congregation during prayer, Hofar said.



Four of the wounded were suspects, two of them in serious condition, he said.



About 150 people were in the room when the violence took place, he said. Authorities are investigating what triggered the attacks, but Austrian Interior Minister Maria Fekter said Sikhs have lived "exceptionally peacefully" in Austria.



CNN's Ben Brumfeld and Harmeet Shah Singh contributed to this report.

***

LEESBURG, Virginia (CNN) -- The clock is ticking for Ray O'Bryhim: he has less than a week to sell his last 40 cars.



This Virginia dealership cannot legally sell any new Chryslers, Dodges or Jeeps after June 9.



His ads for Pohanka Chrysler-Dodge scream, "Everything must go, regardless of profit!"



On June 9, his franchise to sell new Chryslers and Dodges will be terminated, along with those of almost 800 other Chrysler/Dodge/Jeep dealers nationwide. This comes as a result of Chrysler's announcement last month that they would shrink their dealer base in the United States.



O'Bryhim cannot legally sell any new cars he has left after June 9 -- and because the manufacturer is in bankruptcy protection it isn't obligated to take them back.



A customer comes out of his showroom with the keys in her hand for a new Dodge Nitro SUV she just bought. She won't give her name, because she took the day off work to pounce on the discount. But she says she has been monitoring new-car prices for months, and they just took a steep dive, so she came in and made off like a bandit.



O'Bryhim points to a new Nitro he has discounted 40% off the sticker: $17,510 instead of the MSRP of $29,170. Soon, he says, he may mark it down even further.



"As we get closer to June 9," he says, "we're going to have to do what we have to do to move these cars."  Watch how dealerships are making record price cuts »  His salesmen have sold 80 cars in the 19 days since their termination letter arrived, with the cars and minivans selling faster than the trucks.



Nationwide, Chrysler's terminated dealers had about 44,000 cars sitting on their lots when they got their notifications May 14. Chrysler spokeswoman Kathy Graham says the company plans to help redistribute any leftover inventory to the 2,400 surviving dealers, who could otherwise run low while factories are idled.



"Our manufacturing facilities have been shut down since May 1," she said. "We have dealers that are looking for inventory."



Down the street at Dulles Motor Cars, Hamid and Kevin Saghafi have sold off about half their $1.5 million inventory of Jeeps.



Hamid says they are "taking a beating," asking $10,000 less than the invoice price for high-end models like the Jeep Commander. But he still worries they won't be able to sell them all in time.



"Chrysler has told us they're going to help us send these cars to other dealers' inventories," he says. "But we don't know what kind of prices we're going to be offered."



The affected dealerships are not only furiously trying to sell off their inventory; at the same time, they are trying to figure out what they will do once they stop selling new Chryslers, and how they can save the jobs of their employees. Pohanka will focus on service and used-car sales, or maybe switch to another brand; Dulles will focus on the two other brands they already sell, Subaru and Kia.



How much do the Saghafi brothers stand to lose in shutting their Jeep showroom?



"Millions," says Kevin.



CNN's Brian Todd contributed to this report.