(CNN) -- The leaders of Brazil, Russia, India and China called for the hastening of reform that would give these emerging economies more power in the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.





"The IMF and the World Bank urgently need to address their legitimacy deficits," the leaders said in a statement released at the second summit of the so-called "BRIC" economies meeting on Thursday in Brasilia.





"Reforming these institutions' governance structures requires first and foremost a substantial shift in voting power in favor of emerging market economies and developing countries to bring their participation in decision making in line with their relative weight in the world economy," the BRIC communiqué said.





The countries urged for voting power reform to give developing countries a larger say in the World Bank at the upcoming "Spring Meetings" on April 24 and 25 in Washington and similar quota reform of the IMF completed by the G-20 Summit scheduled for November.





The BRIC summit -- the second since the group met in Russia last year -- was moved up a day, as Chinese President Hu Jintao cut his trip short to return to China after the earthquake in Qinghai province near the Tibetan border killed more than 700 people.





The BRIC nations -- a term coined by Jim O'Neill of Goldman Sachs in 2003 as the group of the fastest growing world economies -- comprise 40 percent of the world's population and about a quarter of its landmass. Together their GDP is roughly two-thirds that of the United States.

***

(CNN) -- Kawasaki have announced they will run Marco Melandri in a one-bike team in the 2009 MotoGP world championship.

Italian Melandri will be the sole Kawasaki rider in the 2009 MotoGP championship.

The news comes just weeks after the Japanese manufacturer confirmed it was to end its MotoGP activities due to the economic downturn.

A statement confirmed the team's return to the sport comes in the wake of "constructive talks between Kawasaki, MotoGP organisers and other involved parties".

"This decision was made after negotiations that followed Kawasaki's January 2009 announcement to suspend its MotoGP activities due to the economic crisis," the statement continued.

"The rider for the new MotoGP team will be Marco Melandri. The team will be equipped with Kawasaki motorcycles and supporting materials.

"That Kawasaki have come to this new team approach is the result of, on the one hand, the need for a strong reduction of MotoGP racing investments and, on the other hand, the necessity to come to constructive solutions for all related parties."

Melandri moved to Kawasaki from Ducati at the end of what was a dismal 2008 season for the Italian, but shortly afterwards was told his new team would not be on the grid in 2009.

While the 26-year-old has earned a welcome reprieve, the man who would have been Melandri's team-mate this season, American John Hopkins, appears set for an extended spell on the sidelines.

***

(CNN) -- A mining company has found what may be the largest gold deposit ever found in the British Isles, the company's chairman said Tuesday.



The price of gold is at historic highs, making new prospects very valuable.



Drill samples indicate more than 1 million ounces of gold may lie below what is now rolling Irish countryside, said Richard Conroy, the chairman of Dublin, Ireland-based Conroy Diamonds and Gold.



With the price of gold near historic highs, the find could be worth as much as $300 million on the market, Conroy told CNN.



The company has been working for 10 years to find gold in a 1,500-square kilometer (600-square-mile) area spanning the border between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland, he said. The site where the company found the gold is near Clontibret, a village in the northern part of Ireland, he said.



"I think it's a major development in Ireland that we now have a significant gold resource," Conroy said. "It's the largest amount of gold, the largest number of ounces, that's ever been reported in Ireland, or indeed in either Britain or Ireland."



The price of gold is currently around $900 an ounce on global commodities markets. Factoring in costs for mine construction and operation, Conroy said, the gold near Clontibret could fetch roughly $300 million.



The company now plans to do more drilling at the site and conduct feasibility studies before moving ahead, he said.



An analyst cautioned, however, that the reported amount of gold is still only an estimate.



"Until you've actually mined the stuff, there's always a moderate level of uncertainty," said William Tankard, a senior analyst at metals consultancy GFMS in London.



One million ounces, if confirmed, would be significant for both Conroy and Ireland, Tankard said. Ireland has small precious metal deposits but nothing as large as Conroy's reported find, Tankard said.



Conroy said only one gold mine is currently active in Ireland.



"By no means is it world-leading, but a million ounces is certainly worth thinking about," Tankard said.



Tankard added that the quality of the gold -- including grade and how concentrated it is -- will also affect its value.

***

BEIRUT, Lebanon (CNN) -- A car bomb struck a U.S. Embassy vehicle Tuesday as it traveled along a coastal highway north of Beirut, killing at least three Lebanese civilian bystanders, according to American and Lebanese officials.

Lebanese soldiers and Red Cross workers stand near charred cars at the site of the explosion in Beirut.

The driver of the embassy vehicle suffered minor injuries, and the sole passenger walked away unscathed, U.S. State Department spokesman Sean McCormack said.

Both were Lebanese nationals, he said. An American citizen who happened to be in the area suffered non-life-threatening injuries, the spokesman said.

Lebanese internal security forces said three Lebanese civilian bystanders were killed in the explosion in Beirut's Dora area, contradicting earlier reports of four.

Twenty-one others -- including the American bystander -- were wounded in the explosion, which was caused by a 15-kilogram (33-pound) bomb placed in a car before the explosion, the security forces said.

The United States is outraged by the terrorist attack, said Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice, who is traveling with President Bush in Saudi Arabia.

"I want on behalf of our country to say to those who were wounded, and certainly to the families of those who were killed, that our condolences are with them," she added.

It was not clear whether the blast was caused by a suicide attack or by a remotely detonated car bomb.

A communique issued by the U.S. Embassy in Beirut said the embassy vehicle was apparently the intended target of the attack, and identified the driver and passenger as Lebanese security personnel for the embassy.

But McCormack cautioned against jumping to any conclusions on the intended target.

"We don't yet have a full picture of exactly what happened, who is responsible, who is exactly being targeted," he told reporters during the State Department's daily briefing.

"We will see over the next day or two ... where the facts lead us."

Citing security concerns, McCormack would also not address unconfirmed reports that the vehicle was part of a convoy for departing U.S. Ambassador to Lebanon Jeffrey Feltman.

A U.S. Embassy statement said Feltman canceled a farewell ceremony that he was to host Tuesday night "out of respect to the victims of today's terrorist explosion."

In addition to the American, an Iraqi and at least three Lebanese were among those wounded in the blast, according to a Western diplomatic source.

Video of the scene showed several damaged cars, including at least one that was left a pile of twisted metal. A nearby high-rise building also sustained damage.

Mohammed Chatah, senior adviser to Lebanese Prime Minister Fouad Siniora, pointed out that the attack happened during "a major political crisis" in Lebanon, which has been without a president for nearly eight weeks amid a bitter political feud.

"This explosion just exacerbates a difficult situation," Chatah told CNN.

Tuesday's blast appears to be the latest in a series of attacks against pro-Western, anti-Syrian targets in the Lebanese capital.

Most recently, an explosion in Beirut's Christian suburb of Baabda killed Brig. Gen. Francois Al-Hajj, the head of operations for the Lebanese army, and his bodyguard on December 12.

Al-Hajj was believed to be a top candidate to take over as army commander in the event current commander Gen. Michel Suleiman was elected to replace Emile Lahoud as president.

Lebanon has been in the midst of a political crisis as pro- and anti-Syrian lawmakers in parliament are locked in a battle to elect a new president.

The nation has been without a president since November 23, when the pro-Syrian Lahoud stepped down at the end of his term.

In February 2005, the assassination of former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik Hariri in Beirut sparked widespread protests that led to the ouster of Syrian forces from Lebanon. E-mail to a friend

CNN's Anthony Mills in Beirut and Elise Labott in Washington contributed to this report

***

(CNN) -- Polygamist sect leader Warren Jeffs tried to hang himself earlier this year while he was in jail awaiting trial, according to court documents unsealed by a Utah judge on Tuesday.

Sect leader Warren Jeffs arrives in court to hear the verdict against him September 25 in St. George, Utah.

Jeffs, the leader and so-called prophet of the 10,000-member Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, is now awaiting sentencing after being convicted on two counts of being an accomplice to rape.

The documents, released by Fifth District Judge James Shumate at the request of the media, also indicate that Jeffs confessed to "immorality" with a "sister" and a daughter more than 30 years ago.

Among the documents is a competency report on Jeffs completed in April, in which social worker Eric Nielsen wrote that throughout the month of January, Jeffs refused food and drink and developed ulcers on his knees from kneeling in prayer for hours.

On January 28, the report said, he attempted to hang himself in his cell. In the days following the suicide attempt, while he was on suicide watch, Jeffs on separate occasions threw himself against the wall and banged his head on the wall.

Jail transcripts show that Jeffs' suicide attempt came three days after a visit with his brother, Nephi, in which he said, "I am not the prophet. I never was the prophet, and I have been deceived by the powers of evil ... I ask for everyone's forgiveness." Jeffs also told his brother: "Farewell forever."

The day before that, Jeffs told a follower in a phone conversation that he was "covered with immorality with a sister and a daughter when I was younger." In the FLDS, members call adult women "sister," and Jeffs' meaning was unclear.

Jeffs' defense attorneys, who argued against the release of the documents, said in a motion opposing the unsealing of the statements that Jeffs recanted them the following month. Defense attorneys claim Jeffs' medical condition influenced his state of mind when the statements were made.

They presented Shumate with a letter from another Jeffs attorney, arguing that the statements' release could influence an Arizona jury when Jeffs stands trial in that state.

Jeffs, 51, was convicted in September of being an accomplice to rape. He was accused of using his religious influence over his followers to coerce a 14-year-old girl into marriage to her 19-year-old cousin. He faces a sentence of up to life in prison when he is sentenced November 20.

The FLDS -- which is not affiliated with the mainstream Mormon church -- is based in the side-by-side border towns of Hildale, Utah, and Colorado City, Arizona. Jeffs, a former school headmaster, is the son of the sect's previous president and "prophet," Rulon Jeffs, who died in 2002.

Jeffs was on the FBI's 10 most wanted fugitives list when he was arrested in August 2006 outside Las Vegas, Nevada.

Critics say that inside the FLDS, marriages are arranged for girls as young as 13, and competition for brides may be reduced by exiling male teens and young men. If male followers are excommunicated, critics claim, wives and children can be reassigned.

During Jeffs' trial, defense attorneys claimed authorities were persecuting Jeffs because of his religious beliefs, including practicing polygamy as the way to heaven.

If Jeffs disavowed being the prophet of the FLDS, it could cause upheaval within the secretive sect. However, two of his followers who spoke to CNN -- although FLDS members usually do not talk to reporters -- said they do not believe he made the statements.

"He is a perfectly priestly man," said a woman who identified herself as Cathy. "He is a man of God, and we will always love him. Once a prophet, always a prophet."

Her husband, Patrick, told CNN, "It's hogwash. I don't believe it ... I will always consider him my prophet." E-mail to a friend

CNN's Gary Tuchman contributed

***

(CNN) -- A former government contract employee was indicted on charges of stealing restricted nuclear energy-related materials and putting the United States at risk, the Department of Justice announced Thursday.

Sources say the classified materials were taken from the East Tennessee Technology Park.

Roy Lynn Oakley, 67, of Roane County, Tennessee, appeared in federal court in Knoxville on Thursday.

Oakley was briefly detained for questioning in the case in January, when authorities first learned of the alleged plot to divulge the materials, government sources told CNN. He voluntarily surrendered Thursday at an FBI field office in Knoxville, the sources said.

Oakley is a former employee of Bechtel Jacobs, the Department of Energy's prime environmental management contractor at the East Tennessee Technology Park, prosecutors said.

The indictment states that Oakley, "having possession of, access to and having been entrusted with sections of 'barriers' and associated hardware used for uranium enrichment through the process of gaseous diffusion ... having reason to believe that such data would be utilized to injure the United States and secure an advantage to a foreign nation, did communicate, transmit and disclose such data to another person."

The transfer took place January 26, the indictment alleges. Oakley is also charged with converting the material and "restricted data" to his own use. He began doing so on about October 17, 2006, and continued through January, prosecutors said.

Prosecutors said the materials involved have been examined by scientists and posed no threat to people who may have come into contact with them.

Oakley's attorney, Herb Moncier, said outside court Thursday that Oakley's job was to break rods "into little pieces" and throw them away. Moncier said Oakley had a security clearance, but Moncier did not believe it was a high-level clearance.

The government alleges that in January, Oakley attempted to sell the "pieces of scrap" to someone he thought was a French agent -- but in reality was an undercover FBI agent, Moncier said. He said he questions whether those broken pieces would be considered an "appliance" under the law.

"Mr. Oakley has cooperated fully for the last six months," said Moncier, who added that he had traveled to Washington for work on the case.

Each count carries a possible sentence upon conviction of up to 10 years in prison and a $250,000 fine.

"While none of the stolen equipment was ever transmitted to a foreign government or terrorist organization, the facts of this case demonstrate the importance of safeguarding our nuclear technology and pursuing aggressive prosecution against those who attempt to breach the safeguards and put that technology in the wrong hands," Kenneth Wainstein, assistant attorney general for national security, said in the Justice Department statement.

One government source said the materials involved are not the "crown jewels," but they should not have been taken from the facility.

A "barrier" is used to filter uranium during the enrichment process, according to nuclear energy officials, but a significant number of barriers are needed to do that job.

Sources told CNN that federal authorities have been following Oakley and investigating the case for at least six months, after he allegedly tried to sell the classified material.

Oakley, described as a low-level employee, apparently did not make contact with any foreign government and is not a foreign agent of any kind, an official familiar with the case said.

A government official with with knowledge of the case said that when authorities learned of Oakley's alleged intentions six months ago, the FBI and Department of Energy launched a joint investigation.

The FBI then developed a sting operation, government officials familiar with the case said, and authorities intervened before there could be any involvement of a foreign country.

East Tennessee Technology Park is an area of the DOE's Oak Ridge reservation "where we are currently decontaminating and decommissioning buildings that were last used in 1985," Gerald Boyd, manager of the DOE's Oak Ridge site office, said Thursday. "When they were in use, now over 20 years ago, some of the buildings at ETTP housed facilities used for the

***

KABUL, Afghanistan (CNN) -- The death toll from Tuesday's fatal bomb blast in this country's northeast has increased to 75, Afghan officials said Friday.





Afghan women weep over the coffins of victims from Tuesday's bomb blast.





Zohur Afghan, a spokesman for Afghan Education Ministry, said that after a thorough investigation, officials determined that 59 schoolchildren and five teachers were killed and 93 children and three teachers were wounded.





In addition, the blast killed six legislators and five of their bodyguards. It was the deadliest-ever suicide attack since the fall of the Taliban regime in late 2001.





The victims were killed as they were visiting a sugar factory in northeastern Afghanistan's Baghlan province. The blast went off as schoolchildren lined the route where as many as 18 national lawmakers and dozens of local dignitaries walked on their way to visit a sugar plant as part of an economic assistance plan for the northeastern province.





The ministry spokesman said the age of the students ranged from 8 to 17 years old. Afghan officials also said that the education minister has issued a ban on students assembling for such events in all schools around the country.





Afghan President Hamid Karzai called the attack a "heinous act of terrorism."





Among the lawmakers listed as dead was Mustafa Kazemi, the former commerce minister and spokesman for the opposition, who is also a top warlord in the region. Other lawmakers killed included Abdul Mateen, Alhaj Sahibur Rahman, Hajji Muhammad Aref Zarif and Sebghatullah Zaki, the statement said. E-mail to a friend





Journalist Farhad Piekar in Kabul contributed to this report.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Federal investigators at the Nestle USA plant in Danville, Virginia, have found evidence of E. coli bacteria in an unopened package of raw chocolate chip cookie dough, two sources at the Food and Drug Administration told CNN Monday.



A Nestle spokeswoman says the tainted product was in a 16.5-ounce package and read "best before 10 JUN 2009."



Researchers were testing the bacteria to determine if it bears the same genetic fingerprint as the E. coli linked to an outbreak of illness that has affected at least 69 people in 29 states.



The tainted sample was manufactured last February 10 at the Nestle Plant in Danville, said the sources, both of whom requested anonymity.



All of the infected persons had been confirmed as having the outbreak strain of E. coli 0157:H7, the CDC said Monday.



Those affected range in age from 2 to 65, however 64 percent are less than 19 and 73 percent are female.



Thirty-four people have been hospitalized and nine developed a kidney disease called hemolytic uremic syndrome. No deaths have been linked to the outbreak.



A spokeswoman for Nestle said the company's baking division was informed Monday of the finding. She said the tainted product was in a 16.5-ounce package that had a day code of 9041 and a "best before 10 JUN 2009" on the package.



The plant where the dough was produced has been shut since June 18.

***

(CNN) -- A Connecticut paramedic has been charged in the alleged sexual assault last month of a woman who was only semiconscious in the back of an ambulance, according to police.





Mark Powell, 49, was charged with first-degree sexual assault and unlawful restraint after he turned himself over to authorities Thursday, according to Hamden Police Capt. Ronald Smith.





Smith said the 22-year-old woman received emergency medical treatment after hitting her head on Christmas Day and was transported to Yale-New Haven Hospital. It was during that time in the ambulance that the alleged victim, who was strapped to a stretcher, was assaulted, Smith said, citing the woman's account.





The woman said she waited three days to report the incident because she was embarrassed and afraid, according to Smith.





The American Medical Response released a statement earlier this week saying that Powell has been placed on administrative leave.





"AMR takes very seriously our responsibility to provide safe care and transport for our patients, and we do not tolerate any kind of abusive behavior," said Charles Babson, General Manager of American Medical Response.





Powell has been released on $25,000 bond and is scheduled to appear in court January 19.





It is unclear whether he has retained legal counsel.

***

(CNN)  -- South Africa strengthened their grip on the Tri-Nations with a 29-17 victory over Australia in Cape Town on Saturday.



The Springboks charge forward in their 29-17 victory over Australia at Newlands.



It was the third straight win for the world champions, who were indebted to the boot of Morne Steyn as he totaled 24 points with seven penalties and a drop goal at Newlands.



The Wallabies took a surprise lead in the second minute as Ashley Cooper barged over for a try with Matt Giteau converting, but the home side slowly took command.



Steyne kicked three penalties in the space of six minutes to put them ahead and added a fourth after Berrick Barnes had restored Australia's lead with a drop goal.



Steyne then sent over a drop goal of his own and South Africa moved further ahead as Victor Matfield went over for their only try of the match.



With the Wallabies reduced to 13 men as Giteau and Richard Brown were sin-binned, Steyn took advantage with another penalty to put them 23-10 ahead at the half.



Steyn added his sixth penalty shortly after the break, but Giteau charged through for a try and converted his score to give them hope at 26-17.



Steyn's final penalty with two minutes remaining wrapped up the victory.



South Africa, who have played all their three matches at home, lead the standings with 12 points, with New Zealand on four and Australia, who have played a game less, with a solitary point.



Victory continues a fine run of form for the Springboks, who beat the British and Irish Lions 2-1 in a thrilling series which preceded the annual Tri-Nations tournament.

***

(CNN) -- Iran tested a missile-launching system and several types of short- and medium-range missiles Sunday, the state-run Press TV said.



A short-range missile is test-launched during war games in Qom, Iran, south of Tehran, on Sunday.



Earlier, the country's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps had said it would stage missile exercises beginning Sunday to promote the armed forces' defense capabilities.



The tests, which are expected to last until Monday, are code-named "Payghambar-e Azam 4" or "The Great Prophet 4," Press TV said.



The missiles, fired at targets around the country Sunday, included the Fateh-110, a short-range ground-to-ground missile, and Tondar-69, a short-range naval missile, the station said. Several models of medium-range Shahab missiles were tested at night, Press TV reported.  Watch Iranian missile tests »



The final stage of the tests will be held Monday morning, when Iran plans to test the long-range Shahab missile, the station said.



In May, Iran said it tested a surface-to-surface missile that is capable of reaching parts of Europe.



At the time, a White House official said actions in Iran were noteworthy.



"Of course, this is just a test, and obviously there is much work to be done before it can be built and deployed. But I see it as a significant step forward in terms of Iran's capacity to deliver weapons," said Gary Samore, special assistant to the president on nonproliferation.



The latest test follows Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad's disclosure Friday that Iran was building a second uranium enrichment facility.  Watch analyst's view on missile tests, nuclear tensions »



The United States and Israel believe that Iran is seeking nuclear weapons under the guise of a civilian nuclear energy program.



Iran has denied the allegation.

***

(CNN) -- About 10 men armed with pistols and small machine guns raided a casino in Switzerland and made off into France with several hundred thousand Swiss francs in the early hours of Sunday morning, police said.





The men, dressed in black clothes and black ski masks, split into two groups during the raid on the Grand Casino Basel, Chief Inspector Peter Gill told CNN.





One group tried to break into the casino's vault on the lower level but could not get in, but they did rob the cashier of the money that was not secured, he said.





The second group of armed robbers entered the upper level where the roulette and blackjack tables are located and robbed the cashier there, he said.





As the thieves were leaving the casino, a woman driving by and unaware of what was occurring unknowingly blocked the armed robbers' vehicles. A gunman pulled the woman from her vehicle, beat her, and took off for the French border.





The other gunmen followed into France, which is only about 100 meters (yards) from the casino, Gill said.





There were about 600 people in the casino at the time of the robbery. There were no serious injuries, although one guest on the Casino floor was kicked in the head by one of the robbers when he moved, the police officer said.





Swiss authorities are working closely with French authorities, Gill said. The robbers spoke French and drove vehicles with French license plates.





CNN's Andreena Narayan contributed to this report.

***

(CNN)  -- A Jersey City, New Jersey, police officer shot in the line of duty last week died of his injuries Tuesday, a day before his 38th birthday, a spokeswoman for the city's mayor announced.



Police officers gather at the site of a shootout in Jersey City, New Jersey, on Thursday.



Jennifer Morrill said Officer Marc DiNardo, who was wounded last Thursday in a shootout, passed away Tuesday morning.



Jersey City Police Chief Thomas Comey told reporters Monday night that DiNardo was not expected to live.



DiNardo was one of five officers injured early Thursday as they moved in for a tactical entry into an apartment where a shooting suspect and another person were holed up. Officials say the officers were met with gunfire, and a shootout ensued. Both suspects were killed, and DiNardo suffered two gunshot wounds to the face.



Melissa Bartholomew, a family friend and fellow police officer, read a statement Monday from DiNardo's family, which includes his wife Mary, three young children and his parents. She said DiNardo, whose 38th birthday is Wednesday, had a personality that no one could forget.



"Marc was not a selfish man. He was a moral man; a man who gave himself for those who couldn't care for themselves," she said.



DiNardo's family plans to donate his organs, said Joe Scott, president of LibertyHealth and its Jersey City Medical Center. "This unselfish act will live on in the lives that Marc will impact through organ donation."



Officer Michael Camacho, who was also wounded in the shootout, was upgraded from critical to serious condition and moved out of the intensive care unit, Scott said Monday. Camacho was shot in the neck during the gun battle.



The other three officers were treated at a hospital and released.

***

Kabul, Afghanistan (CNN) -- Seven insurgents were killed when a group of more than a dozen men launched an early morning attack on Bagram Air Base in Afghanistan on Wednesday, officials said.





Army spokesman Lt. Col. Clarence Counts said that five service members were wounded in the attack and a building suffered minor damage. He said the attack included rockets, small arms and grenades.





Taliban spokesman Zabiullah Mujahid told CNN that 20 armed men wearing suicide vests stormed the base around 4 a.m. (7:30 p.m. Tuesday ET), with four of them detonating explosives at the entrances to allow the other men to move in. Mujahid said that a "major firefight" took place inside the base.





But Army Specialist Christina Dion, a spokeswoman who both lives an works on the base, told CNN that personnel were ordered to enter bunkers when the base came under attack and were allowed to return to their huts and tents about 90 minutes later.





"We're always prepared to deal with attacks on our base," Counts said. "The response this morning was immediate."





The fighting eventually tapered off about 7:30 a.m. local time, said NATO spokesman Lt. Col Todd Breasseale.





Another Bagram spokeswoman, Maj. Virginia McCabe, could not say if flights into and out of the air base had been stopped and said that authorities are investigating how the incident started.





"Established security procedures are in place," she said, adding that personnel with "mission-essential" responsibilities were continuing to work.





Bagram is a heavily fortified base, its perimeter guarded by high fences and thick, concrete walls. Dion said she didn't believe anyone could have made their way into the main portion of the base.





Taliban fighters have lobbed rockets into the base in previous attacks.





CNN's Adam Levine and Paula Hancocks contributed to this report.

***

(Mashable) -- The AP Stylebook has released its new social media guidelines, including the official change from"Web site" to "website" (a move first reported back in April) and 41 other definitions, use cases and rules that journalists should follow.





Among the more interesting changes -- at least from a grammar and style standpoint -- are separating out "smart phone" as two words, hyphenating "e-reader," and allowing fan, friend and follow to be used both as nouns and verbs.





Beyond that, the AP has also defined a number of acronyms that are commonly used in texting and instant messaging. While most of them should be fairly well-known to regular web and mobile phone users (ROFL, BRB and G2G are among the definitions) one actually was new to me: POS.





According to the AP, this stands for "parent over shoulder" (I've used POS to refer to something else occasionally, but I digress), and is used by "teens and children to indicate, in an IM conversation, that a parent is approaching." Elsewhere, other terms making the cut include "trending," "retweet" and "unfriend" ("defriend" is also acceptable, though the AP concludes it's less common).





Finally, the AP also offers some basic rules of thumb for how social media should and shouldn't be used by journalists, with a focus on making sure they continue to confirm sources and information they find on blogs, tweets and other forms of social media.





The full 2010 AP Stylebook, which includes the new social media guidelines, was released today and is available on the AP's Web site.





© 2010 MASHABLE.com. All rights reserved.

***

(EW.com) -- There are two ways for pop stars to make a Survivor Album: either power-sing through your problems like Christina Aguilera, or make like Rihanna and dance till you forget what you're supposed to be getting over.





On her first release since checking out of rehab, Demi Lovato wants to have it both ways. She's front-loaded "Unbroken" with leave-no-synth-effect-behind R&B (''You're My Only Shorty,'' featuring Iyaz), shy love-in-this-club tracks (''Who's That Boy''), and Timbaland bangers (''All Night Long,'' with Missy Elliott). So it's a little unnerving when she gets to the album's second half -- the part where, as she told Ryan Seacrest, ''I'm singing about some issues that I've never even spoken about before.''





Having struggled with cutting since she was a preteen, Lovato admits, ''I ended up with wounds to bind ... and I just ran out of Band-Aids'' on the hugely affecting ballad ''Fix a Heart.''





Demi Lovato covers Lil Wayne's 'How to Love' in NYC: Watch it here





The piano confessional ''For the Love of a Daughter'' finds her picturing herself at age 4, begging her dad to ''put the bottle down'' and keep his ''selfish hands'' to himself. And then there's ''Skyscraper,'' an anthem so honest you can hear her voice breaking.





Taylor Swift teams with Hayley Williams in Nashville for 'That's What You Get'





Clearly it's been a tough year for Lovato. But as Rihanna could tell her, sometimes bad years make great songs. B+





See full review at EW.com.





CLICK HERE to Try 2 RISK FREE issues of Entertainment Weekly





© 2011 Entertainment Weekly and Time Inc. All rights reserved.

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- Radio host Don Imus has prostate cancer.



Radio shock jock Don Imus has been diagnosed with prostate cancer.



The shock jock made the announcement on his radio show Monday morning.



Imus learned of the Stage 2 prostate cancer diagnosis last Wednesday, said Laurie Cantillo, program director for WABC-AM of New York.



A bone scan indicated that the cancer has not spread, she said, and doctors believe it is fully treatable.



Stage 2 prostate cancer means the cancer can be felt on exam but has not spread beyond the prostate gland.



Imus, 68, said he's been on an organic diet for the past 10 years, avoiding meat and fish and eating mostly fruits and vegetables.



"It wasn't great, but I was surprised," Imus said after learning the results of a biopsy that was performed last Monday. He added that he plans to go to San Francisco, California, for a second opinion.



Imus said he's spoken with Sen. John Kerry and former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani about his diagnosis. Kerry and Giuliani are both prostate cancer survivors.



Imus exuded confidence while discussing his situation. "They are predicting they can treat it. They can cure it."



Imus returned to the radio in December of 2007, months after his inflammatory remarks caused the cancellation of his morning radio show on the CBS radio network. His four-hour program is syndicated nationally by the Citadel Broadcasting Corp.



Known for decades for his outspoken comments and off-color humor, Imus sparked a public outcry with his comments in April 2007 about the Rutgers University women's basketball team.  The controversy eventually led to the cancellation of his show by CBS Radio.



He called the Scarlet Knights "tough girls" and "nappy-headed 'hos" during a national broadcast a day after the team lost the NCAA championship to the University of Tennessee Lady Volunteers. He later apologized.

***

(CNN) -- Mexican authorities on Thursday continued to investigate the kidnappings of at least six people from a Holiday Inn in Monterrey, Mexico, Wednesday.





Nuevo Leon state Attorney General Alejandro Garza y Garza said in a news conference that the unidentified gunmen entered a second hotel as well, the state-run Notimex news agency reported.





A convoy of between 10 and 15 vehicles carrying as many as 30 gunmen pulled into the Holiday Inn at around 2 a.m., Garza y Garza said.





According to him, the gunmen brought a handcuffed man into the lobby, who gave them information on the intended victims.





A businessman from Mexico City, Luis Miguel Gonzalez, was kidnapped, along with three other guests, Garza y Garza said.





The other guests were identified as Angel Ernesto Montes de Oca of Mexico City, Manuel Juarez and Aracely Hernandez, an employee of a staffing company near the border with the United States.





A hotel receptionist, David Salas, was also kidnapped, together with another hotel employee, authorities said.





A security guard at the hotel was missing, but it was not confirmed that he too was kidnapped, Garza y Garza said.





Before leaving, the gunmen took the computer from the reception desk as well as the video from the security camera, he said.





Minutes later, there was a report of the same group of gunmen entering the Mision Hotel, located near the Holiday Inn. Police responded to the hotel, but the officials there declined to report a crime to the authorities.





Northern Mexico, particularly the states of Tamaulipas and Nuevo Leon, have seen a recent uptick in violent activity, much of it blamed on warring drug cartels.

***

(CNN) -- A hiker found the body of a skydiving instructor missing for nearly four months, police in Moab, Utah, said Wednesday.





The state medical examiner's office positively identified the remains found Sunday near the west Kane Creek area as those of David Brown, 37, according to a police statement.





"It's an extremely rough area," Moab Police Chief Mike Navarre told CNN Salt Lake City affiliate KSL. "It's hard to climb around in there, to walk around in there, even from the air to see something from there; it's not surprising to me that we didn't find him on those first searches."





Police are awaiting further autopsy results. "Throughout the investigation, we have found no signs of foul play," Navarre said.





An acquaintance who helped in the search told CNN in July that Brown left behind cash, a passport and his driver's license. Brown disappeared June 29 in the vicinity of Skydive Moab, northwest of the town, said owner Clint MacBeth. MacBeth found Brown's personal items, including an unspent paycheck.





Brown's family in Halifax, Nova Scotia, filed a missing person report after he disappeared.





According to MacBeth, friends initially assumed Brown had gone to Las Vegas to visit his girlfriend. But they later realized he wore only shorts, a T-shirt and sneakers, making him unequipped to deal with 100-degree-plus temperatures, MacBeth said.





Moab is known for its red-rock landscapes and proximity to Arches National Park and Canyonlands National Park.

***

(CNN) -- David Beckham believes the furore that followed his return to the LA Galaxy from his loan spell with AC Milan earlier this year has galvanized the team.





The Galaxy won the MLS Western Conference Championship with a 2-0 win at home to Houston Dynamo on Friday night, Beckham setting up Gregg Berhalter's 102nd-minute opener.





They will face Real Salt Lake, who upset the favored Chicago Fire 5-4 in a penalty shootout to win the Eastern Conference title on Saturday to reach the MLS Cup final in Seattle next Sunday.





Beckham had been subjected to abuse by his own fans after missing the start of the MLS season when he was in Italy, while Galaxy captain Landon Donovan questioned his commitment to the LA franchise.





However, the England midfielder -- who missed Saturday's 1-0 friendly defeat by Brazil in Qatar to play for his club -- thinks the situation helped bring the team together.





"There's nothing wrong with a bit of controversy in a club, it brings players and teams together and it's done that," Beckham told ESPN in a post-match interview.





"I don't have to say anything about myself, I leave that down to other people to decide.





"I love playing soccer. I work hard for my teammates, myself, my manager, the fans and I hope that's enough for people."





Beckham joined the Galaxy from Real Madrid in 2007 but they struggled to make an impact during the Englishman's time with the team until the arrival of former USA national team coach Bruce Arena.





Beckham, who returns to Milan in January as he bids to win a place in England's World Cup squad, believes this season's achievements have already gone some way for making up for the previous two seasons.





"We want to win next week but reaching it is the biggest thing," he told the UK Press Association.





"We've done that, done the hard work and this team deserves it."

***

(CNN)  -- Buy a $175,000 package to attend the Oscars and you might buy yourself trouble, lawyers for the Academy Awards warn.



The 81st annual Academy Awards will be held on February 22 from Hollywood's Kodak Theatre.



The advertising of such packages -- including four tickets to the upcoming 81st annual Academy Awards and a hotel stay in Los Angeles, California -- has prompted the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences to sue an Arizona-based company.



The Academy accused the company Experience 6 of selling "black-market" tickets, because tickets to the lavish movie awards show cannot be transferred or sold.



Selling tickets could become a security issue that could bring celebrity stalkers or terrorists to the star-studded event, says the lawsuit, which was filed Monday in federal court in the Central District of California.



"Security experts have advised the Academy that it must not offer tickets to members of the public and must know identities of the event attendees," the lawsuit says.



"In offering such black-market tickets, defendants are misleading the public and the ticket buyers into thinking that purchasers will be welcomed guests, rather than as trespassers, when they arrive for the ceremony."



Experience 6 did not return calls from CNN for comment. On Tuesday morning, tickets to the event were still being advertised on the company's Web site.



The Oscars will be presented February 22 from Hollywood's Kodak Theatre.



The Academy Awards broadcast will air on ABC. Hugh Jackman is scheduled to host.

***

TEHRAN, Iran (CNN) -- Thirty people convicted of drug and other criminal charges will be hanged on Sunday, Iran's semi-official Fars News Agency reported Saturday.



A convicted Iranian drug dealer is hanged from a crane in the southern city of Shiraz in September.



The 30 had their cases tried by the highest judicial authorities and were found guilty of the charges brought against them, Iran's judiciary said in a statement.



The verdicts are final, and the sentences will be carried out Sunday, according to Fars.



According to Amnesty International, Iran executed 317 people last year, second only to China's 470. The U.S. executed 42 people in 2007, according to Amnesty International.



The Iranian judiciary's statement said that all 30 were convicted of crimes including murder, murder in commission of a crime, disturbing public safety and security, being a public nuisance while drunk and being involved in illegal relationships -- relationships between men and women who are not married to each other.



Kidnapping and using weapons while committing a crime were among the charges.



The statement said that 20 of the people were convicted of drug and alcohol dealing, armed robbery and smuggling arms.



The judiciary said it will provide more details later as to the crimes committed by those condemned and added that the hangings should serve as a warning to those who are contemplating committing such crimes.



Others are awaiting trial, and their sentences will be carried out as soon as the verdicts are pronounced by the courts, the judiciary said.



The judiciary asked the public to notify the authorities if they have any information that might lead to arrest and convictions of criminals.



Iran's government launched a campaign March 20 to increase public security and bring the crime rate down.



Police cracked down on drug dealers, whom they called criminal gang members, and habitual criminals who use guns in the commission of their crime. Alleged weapons smugglers and people who break social and religious laws, including adulterers, were also targets.



National television showed scenes of what were described as criminals being paraded in chains as a deterrent to others. The wave of arrests has subsided, as officials are now prosecuting the suspects and sentencing those convicted.



Journalist Shirzad Bozorgmehr contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Yemenia Airways is canceling all its flights between Yemen and the Comoros Islands after this week's crash on the same route, the airline said Saturday.



Bahia Bakari holds her father's hand as she lies on a stretcher in a plane after landing in France.



One more flight between Sanaa and Moroni is scheduled for Sunday, but all flights on the route are canceled after that, Yemenia said.



A Yemenia Airways Airbus 310 went down early Tuesday, carrying 142 passengers and 11 crew members. It originated in Yemen's capital, Sanaa, and went down just miles from Comoros' capital, Moroni.



One person, 13-year-old French girl Bahia Basari, survived for hours in the Indian Ocean clinging to the debris of the downed plane. She arrived home in France on Thursday, where she was reunited with her father.  Watch teen survivor from crash »



She is the only known survivor from the crash, which killed her mother.



The Airbus 310 plane tried to land at the airport in Moroni, then made a U-turn before it crashed, Comoros Vice President Idi Nadhoim said.



The Comoros Islands are between the east African country of Tanzania and the island nation of Madagascar.



French and U.S. divers are helping to search for debris and bodies. The French military has detected a rescue beacon, but rescue workers say the wreckage is difficult to reach in deep waters.



The plane's data recorders have yet to be found, said Capt. Mohammed Abdel Rahman Abdel Qadir, a spokesman for Yemen's civil aviation department.

***

Baghdad, Iraq (CNN) -- At least 18 people have been killed and 80 injured in a car bomb blast in central Baghdad as deadly violence returned to the streets of the Iraqi capital for a second day.



The blast was caused by a suicide bomber who drove through the checkpoint, toward a government forensic office, Iraq's ministry of information said.



Tuesday's attack followed three vehicle bombings near hotels in the city on Monday which killed 36 people and wounded 71 others.



The latest bombings come amid concerns over security and fears of a fresh wave of sectarian violence between the country's rival Shia and Sunni factions as the country prepares for crucial national elections on March 7.



The buildup to that vote has been dominated by controversy over the legitimacy of hundreds of candidates banned from participating because of alleged links to former dictator Saddam Hussein's regime.



The 511-name "blacklist" issued by Iraq's Accountability and Justice Commission, which is charged with purging former members of Hussein's Baath Party from public life, includes many prominent Sunni Arab politicians.



Banning such candidates has raised fears of alienating the Sunnis -- an issue during the 2005 elections that analysts say was a contributing factor to the years of sectarian violence that followed.



Monday's bombings also followed the execution earlier in the day of Hussein's cousin and notorious henchman Ali Hassan al-Majeed -- also known as "Chemical Ali."



In a statement issued Tuesday, the U.S. Embassy in Baghdad condemned the attacks on the hotels.



"The terrorists who committed these senseless crimes aim to sow fear among the Iraqi people. We are confident, however, that the Iraqi people will stand fast and work together to build their common future in peace and security," the embassy said.



CNN's Yousif Bassil contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Denny's restaurants served about 2 million free Grand Slam breakfasts during its eight-hour promotional giveaway on Tuesday, the company reported Wednesday.





Cooks fill the pass-through window with Grand Slam breakfasts Tuesday at a Denny's in Emeryville, California.





The company used a commercial during the third quarter of Sunday's Super Bowl to announce it would give away its signature breakfast from 6 a.m. to 2 p.m. Tuesday, and the response was spectacular.





Media outlets across North America reported lines of customers stretching outside and around restaurants and strangers crowding together into booths to take advantage of the special.





The restaurant chain's approximately 1,500 stores served an average of 130 Grand Slams per hour to customers who waited an average of 60 minutes for their free pancakes, eggs, bacon and sausage, the company said.





"We had an extraordinary day," Denny's CEO Nelson Marchioli said when the promotion was over. "We were hoping to reconnect with millions of Americans today, and we did.





"We have received the most heartwarming comments from our servers, our managers and above all our customers. This Free Slam Day has exceeded our expectations in every way." iReport.com: Miami customers line up for Denny's meal





Denny's doesn't disclose specific cost information, but including the cost of the food, the Super Bowl spot and other production costs, the promotion cost the company roughly $5 million, it said.





The Grand Slam started as a baseball-related promotion in Atlanta, Georgia, in the mid-1970s and has been served chainwide since 1977. Its normal price varies by market but averages around $5.99. Denny's said it sells 12.5 million Grand Slams a year.





At the normal average price of $5.99, Denny's gave away meals Tuesday with a retail value of $11.9 million. But the goodwill value could be priceless. iReport.com: Vouchers run out at Georgia Denny's





"The key is to get the guest to come back," Troy Morgan, a Denny's franchisee in Sacramento, California, told CNN affiliate KCRA-TV.





"So, we show them great hospitality and we're confident we're going to win guests and get them to return again and again."





A Denny's competitor, IHOP, is planning its own giveaway. The chain promises to give a short stack of three pancakes to all comers on "National Pancake Day," February 24. IHOP requests a donation to Children's Miracle Network or other local charities in exchange.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN)  -- President Obama will rack up plenty of frequent flyer miles this summer with planned trips in Africa, Russia and Italy.



President Obama will travel to Ghana for two days after the G8 Summit in July.



Obama, along with his wife, Michelle, will visit Accra, Ghana, on July 10 and July 11, the White House said Saturday. It will follow Obama's trip to the G8 summit in L'Aquila, Italy, from July 8 to July 10.



Obama will address various bilateral and regional issues with Ghanaian President John Atta Mills, the White House said in a news statement.



"The President and Mrs. Obama look forward to strengthening the U.S. relationship with one of our most trusted partners in sub-Saharan Africa, and to highlighting the critical role that sound governance and civil society play in promoting lasting development," according to the statement.



Obama announced a week ago that he will visit Egypt on June 4 to deliver a speech on America's relationship with the Muslim world.



Egypt is "a country that in many ways represents the heart of the Arab world," White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs said at the time.



Gibbs deflected several questions at his daily briefing about whether Egypt is a wise choice given President Hosni Mubarak's resistance to making his government more democratic.



Obama originally promised to deliver the speech during his first 100 days, but senior administration officials say the date slipped in part because of security and logistical issues.



Obama has visited Africa before as a senator. In 2006, he received a hero's welcome in his father's native Kenya.



Before the G8 summit, the president is scheduled to travel to Moscow from July 6 to July 8 at the invitation of Russian leader Dmitry Medvedev.



The G8 is made up of Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Russia, England and the United States.

***

(CNN) -- Christine Beatty, chief of staff for former Detroit Mayor Kwame Kilpatrick, pleaded guilty Monday to charges stemming from their text-messaging sex scandal case and will serve four months in jail, according to the Wayne County prosecutor's office.

Under a plea deal, Christine Beatty, shown in August at an arraignment in Detroit, will serve five years probation.

Beatty pleaded guilty to two counts of obstruction of justice, according to Maria Miller, the prosecutor's spokeswoman. Charges of perjury and misconduct against Beatty will be dropped as part of the plea arrangement, she said.

Beatty agreed to a plea arrangement under which she will serve five years probation -- the first 120 days to be served in jail -- and pay a $100,000 fine, "based on [Beatty's] ability to pay," Miller said.

Beatty will begin serving her jail sentence on January 5, when she will be formally sentenced, Miller said.

Kym L. Worthy, prosecuting attorney for Wayne County, released a statement saying she is "very pleased that this defendant admitted her guilt."

"We live in an age where greed and protecting one's secrets is glorified and accepted," Worthy said. "Now the city of Detroit, the region and the state of Michigan can truly begin to move forward when this ugly chapter in Detroit's history is put to rest."

In September, Kilpatrick resigned as mayor and pleaded guilty to two felony obstruction of justice charges stemming from his efforts to cover up his relationship with Beatty.

Like Beatty, Kilpatrick was sentenced to five years probation with the first four months to be served in jail. He is serving that sentence in the Wayne County jail.

At the time of his sentencing in October, the judge in the case called Kilpatrick "arrogant and defiant," particularly for a televised speech that aired hours after Kilpatrick entered his pleas.

"That night, the community expected to hear a message of humility, remorse and apology," Wayne County Circuit Judge David Groner said at Kilpatrick's sentencing. "Instead, we heard an arrogant and defiant man who accused the governor, among others, for his downfall."

In addition to his jail and probation sentence, Kilpatrick must also pay the city of Detroit $1 million in restitution, and forfeit any future pension.

Initially, Kilpatrick was accused of blocking a criminal investigation into his office and firing a police deputy to cover up an affair with Beatty, then his chief of staff.

When that deputy, Gary Brown, filed a whistle-blower suit, Kilpatrick and Beatty denied under oath that an affair had taken place between them.

Text messages that contradicted Kilpatrick's and Beatty's denials of an affair were made public in January by the Detroit Free Press, and county prosecutor Worthy charged Kilpatrick and Beatty with multiple counts of perjury, obstruction of justice and misconduct in office.

The most serious charges would have carried a maximum penalty of 15 years in prison upon conviction.

Beatty resigned her post after the text messages were made public.

Kilpatrick initially refused to resign after the scandal broke, and Michigan Gov. Jennifer Granholm called a hearing on whether she should remove him from office at the request of the Detroit City Council. Granholm adjourned those hearings after Kilpatrick pleaded guilty and resigned in September.

***

(CNN)  -- The same day a cease-fire agreement was to go into effect, a high-ranking Yemeni official accused rebels of trying to assassinate him.



Deputy Interior Minister Gen. Mohammed Bin Abdullah al-Qawsi told Almotamar, the newspaper of the ruling party, Friday that "his car came under intensive fire shots in an attempt to assassinate him." He added that he was in the northwestern city of Saada to inspect security forces and accused Houthi rebels of carrying out the attack, according to the state-run Saba News Agency.



Also in Saada Friday, troops and rebels exchanged fire, killing one and injuring others, Saba reported.



The rebels did not immediately respond to the reports, which followed the announcement of an end to a six-year battle between the government and Shiite Muslim Houthi rebels.



Despite the reports of violence, the truce deal was still intact, said a Yemeni government official who is not authorized to speak to the media.



A "few skirmishes" occurred, including an attack on a security official's motorcade, he said. He would not say whether that official was al-Qawsi. Such violence is common in the early stages of peace deals, he said.



"There are many reasons why this happened, and they were expected," the source said. "One, some of the militia fighters have not been informed yet that the truce was executed. Two, there were revenge killings -- some of the Houthi tribesmen carried out attacks against government forces. These could be considered tribal revenge killings."



The government agreed to end all military operations against the Houthis beginning midnight Friday, an apparent end to violence that even tumbled into Saudi Arabia. Houthi rebel leader Abdul Malik al-Houthi earlier signed off on the cease-fire and took to his Web site to order his followers to respect the agreement.



The cease-fire conditions include clearing mines, not interfering with elected local officials, releasing civilians and military personnel, abiding by Yemeni law, returning looted items, and ending attacks within the country's northern neighbor, Saudi Arabia.



The Yemeni government official said rebels were expected to free seven captured Saudi soldiers Saturday.



The revolt by the Houthis in northern Yemen began in 2004. The conflict is believed to be both separatist -- over who will have power in the area -- and sectarian -- whether Shiite Islam will dominate, even though the majority of Yemenis are Sunni. The rebels are supporters of slain Shiite cleric Hussein al-Houthi.



CNN's Mohammed Jamjoom contributed to this report.

***

BEIRUT, Lebanon (CNN) -- The Lebanese army has arrested 10 suspected members of a terrorist network who the military believes were planning to attack targets abroad, the army said.



The army claims suspects planned to create cells to monitor and attack UNIFIL troops, among other things.



Most of the suspects are not from Lebanon, said the army, which does not identify the network in the statement it released. Officials also don't say when or where the suspects were captured.



"As a result of intensive investigation by the Lebanese army intelligence directorate in following up on radical terrorist networks, the directorate was able to arrest ten persons of one of these networks, belonging to different Arab nationalities," the statement said.



According to a military probe, some of those arrested had used their jobs in private companies as a cover for surveillance and monitoring operations.



The army urged private employers to verify the legal status of their employees or job seekers and report any suspicious information.



The army claims the terrorists in custody were planning to:



• Smuggle wanted terrorists from the Palestinian refugee camp Ein el-Hilweh, located south of Beirut, to other countries. One of the network's members was to bring them fake documents and money for their trip.



• "Harbor radical elements" from the terrorist group Fatah al-Islam and give them fake documents to help them enter the Ein el-Hilweh camp.



• Create terror cells to monitor the Lebanese army and UNIFIL, the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, to carry out attacks against them.



• Carry out surveillance of money exchange centers and jewelry stores as possible robbery targets to help finance their operations.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- United States accident investigators are probing two recent failures of airspeed and altitude indications aboard Airbus A330s -- the same type of plane that crashed into the Atlantic nearly a month ago.



Investigators are looking into incidents aboard two other Airbus A330s.



The planes landed safely and there were no injuries or damage, the National Transportation Safety Board said Thursday. One flight was between the United States and Brazil in May and the other between Hong Kong and Japan in June.



The probes were launched in the aftermath of the June 1 crash in the Atlantic Ocean -- when Air France Flight 447 was flying to Paris, France, from Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. All 228 people on board the plane, an A330, were killed.



Investigators are looking at the possible role of airspeed sensors known as pitot tubes, among other factors, as a possible cause of the Flight 447 crash.



That flight sent 24 automated error messages in the four minutes before it crashed, the head of the French accident investigation board, Paul-Louis Arslanian, has said. The error messages all indicate there were problems with on-board information about the plane's speed, which can cause some of the plane's instruments to stop functioning, Arslanian said.



Search teams are looking for the bulk of the plane's wreckage and for its flight data recorders.



The first of the two incidents being investigated by the NTSB happened May 21, when a TAM Airlines flight from Miami, Florida, to Sao Paulo, Brazil, experienced a loss of primary speed and altitude information while in flight, the NTSB said.



"Initial reports indicate that the flight crew noted an abrupt drop in indicated outside air temperature, followed by the loss of the Air Data Reference System and disconnections of the autopilot and autothrust, along with the loss of speed and altitude information," the NTSB said.



The flight crew used backup instruments and the primary data was restored in about five minutes, the NTSB said.



Another "possibly similar" incident happened June 23 on a Northwest Airlines flight between Hong Kong and Tokyo, Japan, the NTSB said.



Investigators from the NTSB are gathering data recorder information, monitoring system messages, crew statements and weather information, the NTSB said.

***

(CNN) -- Swimming legend Michael Phelps struggled in his attempt to adapt to the old-style racing suits at the World Cup short-course event in Sweden on Tuesday.



The 14-time Olympic gold medal winner qualified for finals in only one of three events in Stockholm, his best result being seventh of eight to go through in the men's 100 meter medley.



Racing for the first time since winning five golds and a silver at the world championships in July, the American missed out on the 100m freestyle after qualifying in 16th of 23 competitors.



His time of 47.77 seconds was 1.84 seconds slower than the leading mark set by Sweden's Stefan Nystrand.



The 24-year-old, who was disqualified in the 100m backstroke, set a time of 53.13 seconds in the medley. The fastest man, South African Darian Townsend, came home in 52.48.



Phelps was one of the few swimmers to revert to the old-style suits, which will become mandatory after January 1 as world ruling body FINA seeks to rein in the high-tech costumes which have sent records tumbling at an incredible rate in the past two years.



He will swim in the 100m butterfly and 200m medley heats on Wednesday, and then head to the next leg of the World Cup in Berlin at the weekend.



In Stockholm on Tuesday, Chinese swimmer Jing Zhao set a new world record in the heats of the women's 50m backstroke, clocking 26.08 seconds.



She beat the mark of 26.17 posted by Australia's Marieke Guehrer  in the previous meet of the series in Moscow on November 6.



In the men's 50m butterfly, South Africa's Roland Schoeman was first in a new World Cup record of 22.29.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- A British surgeon amputated the arm of a wounded teenager in Congo, Africa, with help from instructions sent to him by text message.



British surgeon David Nott, center, with two colleagues in a Congo field hospital where he carried out the operation.



David Nott texted his surgical colleague Meirion Thomas, who is one of only a handful of UK surgeons familiar with the difficult procedure of removing the collar bone and shoulder blade.



David Nott realized that teenager J, whose arms had been ripped off and who was now gangrenous, had only a few days to live.



"I knew that the only way to save this boy's life was to do a forequarter amputation, and I knew that Professor Meirion Thomas was really the expert," Nott said.



Nott, a vascular surgeon at the Royal Marsden Hospital in London, who volunteers one month a year with humanitarian organization Doctors Without Borders, had never performed such an operation. Watch an interview with Nott »



Thomas replied almost immediately with 10 steps Nott should follow to carry out the procedure and then signed off with "Easy! Good luck."



David Nott followed his colleague's instructions step by step: "I felt I had like my guardian angel on my left shoulder showing me what to do. I just got on with it, and everything he told me, I just did".



Nott and his team embarked on the three-hour operation with just one pint of donated blood.



Teenager J is said to have made a full recovery while Nott stayed to keep an eye on his wounds.



Thomas said, "All I did was tell David the 10 steps, and I knew that he would follow them."

***

(CNN) -- Half a million homes remained without power across the Northeast and mid-Atlantic region on Sunday, as rain continued to pound states from West Virginia to Connecticut for a second day.



The rain caused flooding and airport delays across the region, even as Saturday's high winds -- reaching hurricane force in some areas -- waned dramatically on Sunday.



"High winds are over, but the rain and flood threat remain in Mid-Atlantic and Northeast," CNN meteorologist Jacqui Jeras said. "There are major travel delays -- and more expected on Monday."



Some coastal areas have received up to six inches of rain since Saturday, according to the National Weather Service. Flood warnings remained in effect in parts of the Eastern Seaboard into Sunday night, including much of New England.



Flooding in West Virginia caused one death there, authorities said.



Con Edison reported more than 100,000 customers without power in New York City and Westchester County on Sunday, while the Long Island Power Authority said that 150,000 of its customers were without electricity.



"The ground is so wet from all the snow we've had this winter, it's helping the trees to topple over, as well as our utility poles," said Long Island Power Authority president and CEO Kevin Law. "The conditions are still too terrible to get crews out there."



Law said that some customers will likely go without power until early in the week.



Roughly 100,000 New Jersey customers saw their electricity restored Sunday, along with 30,000 PPL Electric Utilities customers in Pennsylvania. But tens of thousands of other homes in New Jersey and Connecticut were still without power on Sunday.



iReport: Share photos, video of storm damage



The outages were mostly due to power lines downed by Saturday's winds, which toppled trees and utility polls. Wind speeds reached 75 miles per hour at New York's JFK International Airport -- as strong as a Category 1 hurricane -- and 72 miles per hour in Atlantic City, New Jersey.



New York-area airports reported delays of at least two hours on Sunday, while Boston's Logan International Airport averaged 40 minute delays.



In the Midwest, meanwhile, flooding continued on Sunday because of snow melt, rains and ice jams. Farther west, North Dakota's Red River is expected to reach major flood stage around Fargo and Moorhead on Tuesday.

***

(CNN) -- An unusual exhibition is confusing and amusing tourists and locals in central Copenhagen this month.



Strange signs from around the world can be seen in Copenhagen, Denmark.



"Signspotting" is a collection of more than 100 signs found by travelers around the world and recreated by travel writer Doug Lansky.



"I wanted it to look as if we'd stolen the sign or someone with a professional camera had taken a really good picture of it," he told CNN.  See pictures from Signspotting in Copenhagen. »



Lansky started his collection almost 17 years ago, encouraged by friends who found his photos of strange signs more compelling than his treasured holiday snaps.



As a travel columnist for the Chicago Tribune, he set about collecting photos of as many bizarre signs as he could. Interest in the project became so big that he eventually used them to replace the column itself.



Signspotting Weekly was taken up by six papers, and before he knew it people began to send him pictures of signs they'd seen, eventually enough to fill a floor-to-ceiling cabinet.



The photos filled two volumes of Signspotting books for Lonely Planet. Lansky chose the best for the first exhibition in Stockholm last year.



"I felt bad I hadn't seen them. I knew I wasn't going to go around the world to track it down so I thought I'd do it this way," he said.



Creating the exhibition took hours of painstaking work to digitally enlarge the photos so they looked like the real thing.



"When most of these people sent these signs in they were on a postcard-sized photo and the actual sign was about the size of a postage stamp. To blow them up to this size was tricky," he said.



The photos were then mounted onto real signs on metal poles standing in concrete bases.



The free exhibition opened in Copenhagen, Denmark last week and will move to Arhus, Denmark on July 1st. Lansky is currently building a second exhibition for the Edinburgh Fringe Festival in August.

***

(CNN) -- Fashion designer Vivienne Westwood and members of the Sex Pistols have led tributes to the band's former manager Malcolm McLaren who died of cancer on Thursday aged 64.





As manager of the Sex Pistols and owner, with his then-lover Westwood, of the Sex boutique in London during the mid-1970s, McLaren was considered one of the pioneers of the punk movement.





"When we were young and I fell in love with Malcolm, I thought he was beautiful and I still do," Vivienne Westwood said in a written statement.





Westwood's son with McLaren, Joe Corre, her other son, Ben Westwood, and McLaren's girlfriend, Young Kim, were with him when he died in Switzerland after a battle with mesothelioma.





"I thought he is a very charismatic, special and talented person. The thought of him dead is really something very sad," said Westwood.





The lead singer of the Sex Pistols, John Lydon, better known as Johnny Rotten, also paid tribute to the band's former manager.





"For me, Malc was always entertaining, and I hope you remember that," Lydon said. "Above all else, he was an entertainer, and I will miss him, and so should you."





McLaren and the Sex Pistols had a turbulent relationship during the band's brief, spectacular and controversial career.





Originally known as the Strand, McLaren drafted in Lydon as lead singer and renamed the band the Sex Pistols. Lydon had been spotted wearing a Pink Floyd T-shirt with the words "I hate" added to it.





The Sex Pistols' raucous public appearances and raging lyrics on songs like "Anarchy in the UK" and the sneering "God Save the Queen" -- which became a hit despite the BBC's refusal to play it -- made the band notorious on both sides of the Atlantic by 1977.





The Sex Pistols broke up in 1978 after one studio album, in large part because of a feud between McLaren and Rotten, who walked off stage at the end of the band's last show declaring, "Ever get the feeling you've been cheated?"





The band's surviving members have regrouped for periodic tours since 1996, but its official Web site still refers to McLaren as its "(mis)manager."





McLaren went on to assemble the pop act Bow Wow Wow and record several albums of his own in the 1980s and '90s.





CNN's Stephanie Halasz and Todd Leopold contributed to this report.

***

Four alleged Venezuelan agents have been arrested in the U.S. and charged with trying to persuade a U.S. citizen to keep quiet about a growing international election scandal.



Miami businessman Guido Alejandro Antonini Wilson



The U.S. Justice Department said the four wanted to prevent Guido Alejandro Antonini Wilson, a businessman from Miami, Florida, from talking to authorities.



On August 4, Antonini Wilson flew in a privately chartered aircraft from Caracas, Venezuela, to Buenos Aires, Argentina, where customs officers discovered $800,000 in cash in his possession.



The U.S. Justice Department said Wednesday the four men charged wanted to stop Antonini Wilson from revealing the origin of the $800,000.



"The complaint filed today outlines an alleged plot by agents of the Venezuelan government to manipulate an American citizen in Miami in an effort to keep the lid on a burgeoning international scandal," Kenneth Wainstein, assistant attorney general for national security, said in a written statement.



The agents, who worked for the government of Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez, wanted to ensure Wilson did not disclose "the source and destination and the role of the government of Venezuela in the attempted delivery of the approximately $800,000," the statement said.



The Justice Department statement does not say Chavez personally knew of the transaction, but says the office of the vice president and members of the Venezuelan Intelligence Directorate were aware of the matter.



U.S. Attorney Alex Acosta in Miami said: "Today's complaint alleges an effort by the agents of Venezuela to travel to the U.S. for the purpose of coercing our citizens to help conceal the true nature of a growing international scandal."



Although documents did not identify which candidate was to receive the donation, federal law enforcement officials confirmed the funds were intended for the campaign of Cristina Fernandez de Kirchner, who went on to win the election.



The four men -- three Venezuelans and one Uruguayan -- made an initial court appearance in U.S. District Court in Miami on Wednesday afternoon.



Those named in the complaint are identified as Moises Maionica, 36; Antonio Jose Canchica Gomez, 37; Rodolfo Edgardo Wanseele Paciello, 40; Franklin Duran, 40; and Carlos Kauffmann, 35. Officials said Gomez remains at large.



After Argentine customs found the $800,000 on Antonini Wilson, they seized the cash and sent him to Miami.



Later, however, an Argentine judge issued an order for him to appear in court and, at the request of the Argentine government, Interpol issued an international wanted notice for him, U.S. State Department officials said.



The officials said that on August 31, the Argentine judge requested Antonini Wilson's extradition. The request was delivered to the State Department on September 4, and Justice and State are currently reviewing the extradition request.



The U.S. officials said they do not expect to take any further action while the Justice Department is pursuing its investigation and prosecution of the Venezuelan and Uruguayan nationals arrested in Miami. Antonini Wilson is not in custody, they added. E-mail to a friend

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN)  -- A judge Wednesday approved Katherine Jackson's request that Michael Jackson's estate get the bill for the cost of this week's burial of her son.



A private funeral for Michael Jackson, here in 2002, will be held Thursday in Glendale, California, his family says.



More than two months after his death, the pop singer will be interred in a private ceremony Thursday evening at Forest Lawn Memorial Park in Glendale, California, the Jackson family said.



A short hearing was held Wednesday morning before Los Angeles County Superior Court Judge Mitchell Beckloff to consider Katherine Jackson's petition.



The special administrators of his estate -- in control of the purse strings until the will is probated -- did not object to the Jackson family's request.



The cost of the burial is a secret -- kept under court seal by Beckloff's order -- but it is believed to include paying Glendale police to handle traffic and security around the cemetery.



The ceremony, which will be closed to the public and news media, is set for 7 p.m. at the cemetery's Holly Terrace in the Great Mausoleum, a family spokesman said.



On July 7, Jackson's family and friends gathered at Forest Lawn's Hollywood Hills cemetery for a short service just before a public tribute to the singer in downtown Los Angeles.



There has been widespread speculation about the whereabouts of Jackson's body. It has remained a closely guarded secret.



The pop star's siblings and parents have been divided over where to bury him, several family members have said.



Older brother Jermaine Jackson has said he wanted the singer to be buried at his former Neverland Ranch in Santa Barbara County, California, while others have objected.



The burial comes less than a week after the Los Angeles County coroner made public his conclusion that Jackson's June 25 death was a homicide. The coroner ruled that the anesthetic drug propofol and the sedative lorazepam were the primary drugs responsible for the death.



Los Angeles police detectives have not concluded their criminal investigation into the singer's death. No one has been charged.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- The White House did not intend to show any disrespect toward Nancy Reagan when it failed to invite the former first lady -- a vigorous supporter of stem-cell research -- to a bill-signing ceremony on the subject, White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs said Tuesday.



Nancy Reagan watches President Obama sign the Ronald Reagan Centennial Commission Act Tuesday.



"I think she speaks in real personal terms about the issue," Gibbs told reporters.



"And I think her candor and her courage have been heartening, and we certainly meant no slight to her whatsoever."



On Monday, Vanity Fair published an interview with Nancy Reagan on its Web site in which she suggested the Obama administration missed an opportunity by not inviting her to witness President Obama signing a measure in March expanding federal support for stem-cell research.



The former first lady has long promoted such steps despite objections from many in the GOP.



She has argued that expanded stem-cell research could have helped her husband, who suffered from Alzheimer's disease.



"I would have gone, and you know I don't like to travel," she told the magazine.  Watch more on Gibbs' reaction to the controversy »



"Politically, it would have been a good thing for (Obama) to do. Oh well, nobody's perfect. He called and thanked me for working on it. But he could have gotten more mileage out of it," she said.



Gibbs' comments also come the same day Mrs. Reagan attended a White House ceremony marking Obama's signing of legislation authorizing a Ronald Reagan Centennial Commission.



The 11-member commission will plan activities marking Ronald Reagan's 100th birthday on February 6, 2011.  Watch Obama laud Reagan's optimism »



Mrs. Reagan is slated to attend the unveiling of a new statue of President Reagan on Wednesday morning at the Capitol and then share a private White House lunch with first lady Michelle Obama.



Obama issued an apology to Mrs. Reagan earlier this year after joking in a news conference that she held seances during her years in the White House -- an apparent reference to reports she consulted with astrologists during her husband's presidency.

***

London, England (CNN) -- A British auction house plans to sell off newly discovered sketches done by Adolf Hitler when he was a struggling student trying desperately to get into art school.





The 12 charcoal and crayon sketches cover "typical student subjects" and don't display a great deal of promise, Mullock's Auctioneers said. They include two drawings of an elderly woman thought to be Hitler's mother, as well as studies of objects, landscapes, models, and even a Roman senator.





All are signed and some even have Hitler's Vienna address, Mullock's said.





The sale also includes the original portfolio in which Hitler kept the sketches, which is signed and has his address, Mullock's said.





"They look quite typical of an aspiring student hoping to get into art school -- tentative and not very certain about his perspective when he's using pencil and pen, making basic errors by getting the top and the bottom of a candlestick wrong in relation to each other, and so on," said Michael Liversidge, emeritus dean of arts at Bristol University in England.





Letter by Hitler to Britain sells at auction





The sketches lack technical skill but are "not so bad that one can't imagine him learning.





"But there's not latent genius here, and not much beyond a moderate school grade," Liversidge said. "Probably if the artist was at school today you wouldn't encourage him to keep the subject up."





The sketches have been owned by a professional artist who had them for years in his own collection and for his own interest, said Richard Westwood-Brookes, the historical documents expert at Mullock's. The artist brought the works to Mullock's attention.





Mullock's plans to auction the sketches April 15 in Ludlow, England, about 125 miles northwest of London. They're expected to bring between £4,000 and £6,000 (about $6,100 and $9,100) each, the auction house said.





The drawings all date from around 1908 and 1909, when Hitler was a "penniless dropout" trying to get accepted into the prestigious Vienna Academy of Fine Arts to train as a professional artist, Mullock's said.





The school rejected him twice, so Hitler hung around the city, trying to make a living producing watercolors to sell to tourists, Mullock's said.





The rejection by the academy may have had huge implications for Hitler later in life, Westwood-Brookes said.





"Many believe that it was this rejection that turned his mind and unleashed the monster within him, which was to bring forth so much evil on the world," he said. "... In a sense, therefore, the academic decision of the art establishment in Vienna can go down as one of the most monumental decisions in all of history."





Nevertheless, Westwood-Brookes said, "On the evidence of these sketches, you can see why the Vienna Academy turned him away."

***

(CNN)  -- Investigators looking for the source of a salmonella outbreak linked to tomatoes will focus on farms in Mexico and Florida, federal health authorities said Friday.



Since April, more than 500 people have contracted the same strain of salmonella, linked to raw tomatoes.



The tracebacks "have taken us from point of consumption all the way back to certain farms in Mexico and Florida," said Dr. David Acheson, associate commissioner for foods at the Food and Drug Administration.



The agency will send teams of investigators to  farms in both locations this weekend as well as to the pathways from those farms in an attempt to determine where the contamination occurred, he said.



The tomatoes may not have been contaminated on a farm, he stressed; the contamination could have occurred in a packing shed, warehouse, supplier chain or distribution center.



"We are going to all of those places to see if there are any problems that could indicate how or why these tomatoes got contaminated," he said.



The reported advance in the investigation came as the toll mounted, with 552 people identified as having contracted the strain of Salmonella Saintpaul since April in 32 states and the District of Columbia. It is one of the biggest outbreaks of tomato-caused illness in history, officials said.  See where the cases have been reported »



Though the number of reported victims has risen dramatically in recent days, that does not signify a large number of new infections, Acheson said.



Instead, he credited improved surveillance and laboratory identification of previously submitted strains for the increased number.



The bulk of the new reports were in Texas, which tallied 265 cases, according to Ian Williams, chief of the OutbreakNet Team at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.



At least 53 of the victims, whose ages range from 1 to 88 years, have been hospitalized. The victims are almost evenly split between males and females.



Though no deaths have been officially attributed to the outbreak, a man in his 60s in Texas who had cancer also had the infection, which may have contributed to his death, Williams said.



The outbreak began April 10, and the latest case was reported June 10.

***

(CNN) -- Iraq scored in injury time Friday to beat 10-man China 1-0 and all but end their opponent's hopes of qualifying for the 2014 World Cup finals.





The Asia Group A match in Doha was a mirror image of the side's earlier clash in China a month ago, with Younis Mahmoud, who scored the only goal in Shenzhen, coming up trumps again in injury time.





China were handicapped by a red card for Zhang Linpeng and paid for missed chances.





Iraq, coached by former Brazil legend Zico, have moved into a strong position in the qualifying section, which is led by Jordan, who confirmed their place in the second stage by beating Singapore 2-0.





Jose Camacho's China would have to win their final two games and see Iraq lose by a heavy margin to Jordan and Singapore to claim an unlikely second in the group.





"China played bravely, but we won the match and the result has almost guaranteed our place in the last ten," Zico told the official FIFA website.





"The game went as we predicted. We knew China would attack, so we focused on defending in the first half before sealing victory late on."





Japan and Uzbekistan joined Jordan in clinching qualification Friday, continuing their domination of Group C.





Japan routed Tajikistan 4-0 and Uzbekistan beat North Korea 1-0 with Timur Kapadze scoring the only goal of the match for the hosts.





The big surprise of the day was the 1-0 defeat for Group D leaders Australia in Oman with Amad Ali scoring the winner in the 18th minute.





Australia will still be expected to progress after four earlier wins, with Frank Rijkaard's Saudi Arabia moving into second in the group after a 3-0 win over Thailand.





In Group B, South Korea stayed top by beating the UAE 2-0 and Mahmoud El Ali grabbed the only goal of the game as Lebanon shocked hosts Kuwait 1-0 to move into second.





Iran held on to top spot in Group E but needed an injury-time equalizer from Mojtaba Jabari to scramble a 1-1 draw in Bahrain.





Iran lead Qatar, who recorded a 4-0 home win over Indonesia, on goal difference.





In the first round of African qualifying, the outstanding result Friday was 3-1 win for the Congo DR in Swaziland with Togo held 1-1 in Guinea Bissau. Totttenham's Emmanuel Adebayor is set to return for Togo in the second leg next Tuesday.





A star-studded Argentina side were held to a disappointing 1-1 home draw by Bolivia in their third match of qualifying from South America.





Argentina, boasting the likes of Lionel Messi and Gonzalo Higuain, found the visitors hard to break down and even fell behind as Martins Moreno scored in the second half.





It needed an equalizer from Ezequiel Lavezzi to salvage a point, with Argentina booed from the field.

***

(CNN) -- Turkey snatched a last-gasp winner to eliminate Euro 2008 co-hosts Switzerland and keep their own quarterfinal hopes alive with a 2-1 victory in rain-drenched Basel on Wednesday night.



Patrick Mueller, left, and Swiss goalkeeper Diego Benaglio battle for the ball with Arda Turan of Turkey.



Arda Turan scored with a deflected effort in the third minute of time added on to set up a Group A finale against the Czech Republic on Sunday to determine who takes the second quarterfinal place behind Portugal.



The Turks came from behind after Hakan Yakin gave the Swiss a 32nd-minute lead, with substitute striker Semih Senturk heading a 57th-minute equalizer through the hands of goalkeeper Diego Benaglio.



The St Jakob Park stadium had been flooded by a deluge early in the match, with the downpour continuing until just before half-time.



The treacherous conditions made defending a nightmare for both teams, and Arda almost put Turkey ahead in the 29th minute with a farcical effort.



With minimal visibility in the heavy rain, Benaglio punched a vicious free-kick by stand-in captain Nihat Kahveci onto the head of the 21-year-old winger -- but the ball bounced to safety off the outside of the post.



However, it was the Swiss who adapted the better and they took the lead through the veteran Yakin.



He was on hand to awkwardly steer home from close range with his weaker right foot after Eren Derdiyok -- who like Yakin is of Turkish origin -- beat the offside trap to collect a long pass from defender Philippe Senderos.



Derdiyok calmly check inside the defense in the penalty area and sent a low cross towards Yakin -- who had to wait anxiously at the far post as the ball was held up in a huge puddle of water.



Yakin had earlier been denied by Turkey goalkeeper Volkan Demirel, who also did well to tip a swerving free-kick by Tranquillo Barnetta around the post.



Yakin also missed an even easier chance than the goal he scored in the 34th minute when he stabbed the ball wide of the post following a superb right-wing cross by Valon Behrami which cut out the defense and goal custodian.



Turkey, sensing a lucky escape, came out after the break with renewed purpose and posed a greater threat as the pitch slowly drained of the excess water.



Semih justified his second-half introduction when he rose highest to meet Nihat's superb inswinging cross from the left flank, and Benaglio could only palm the powerful header into the back of the net.



Tempers flared as both sides went in search of the victory, but there was no repeat of the violent scenes that followed Switzerland's World Cup playoff victory against the Turks in November 2005.



Volkan made another superb save from Yakin, and Turkey held off the Swiss onslaught before Arda cut in from the right and fired a shot from just outside the penalty area which clipped the heels of Patrick Mueller and looped over the helpless Benaglio.



"I did wish for rain to stop. I did pray to God for that," Turkey coach Fatih Terim told reporters. "We couldn't predict mud in the middle of the summer.



"It's not easy to come back from a goal down at the European Championship, considering we hit the woodwork once. But we fought a lot in the second half and we created many opportunities."



He added: "Tonight we reminded everyone a little bit about Turkey. Against the Czech Republic, we will be unforgettable."



Defeat was a bitter blow for Switzerland, whose fellow co-hosts Austria will also be eliminated on Thursday if they lose to Poland in Vienna.



"Of course the disappointment is huge," Switzerland coach Koebi Kuhn said. "But I can't blame it on any player or anyone else. We lost twice unluckily."

***

JERUSALEM (CNN) -- Israel has expelled Venezuela's ambassador in response to Venezuela's expulsion of an Israeli envoy and the rupture of diplomatic relations earlier this month.





A pro-Palestinian mural in the Venezuelan capital, Caracas.





Venezuelan head of mission Roland Betancourt and two other diplomats were given until Friday to leave.





"Due to the decision of Venezuela to cut relations with us a few weeks ago, we told the Venezuelan charge d'affaires that he and his staff should leave Israel," Foreign Ministry official Lior Hayat said. "We told them they are declared persona non grata in Israel."





Venezuela expelled Israeli Ambassador Shlomo Cohen and staff on January 6 and broke off diplomatic relations on January 14 in protest of Israel's attack on Gaza. Bolivia also broke off relations with Israel that day.





Venezuelan Foreign Minister Nicolas Maduro defended his country's actions, saying Israel violated basic human rights with its military action.





"Our decisions were just, correct, aligned with and adjusted with the spirit of our constitution, which mandates that we seek international peace," Maduro said in a statement on the foreign ministry's Web site.





Maduro said Venezuela's actions are compatible with its support for the creation of a Palestinian state.





He has not spoken, he said, with any Israeli officials over this week's expulsion of the Venezuelan diplomats.





"The response of the state of Israel is weak, late, and in any case for us it's an honor," Maduro told the Qatar-based television network Al-Jazeera. "We're proud that the state of Israel that exists today, led by these criminals, made this decision."





Israel and Venezuela have had diplomatic tensions before. Israel recalled its ambassador to Venezuela in August 2006 "in protest against the one-sided policy of the president of Venezuela, Hugo Chavez, in light of his outrageous defamatory remarks against the state of Israel, and in reaction to the recalling of the Venezuela ambassador to Israel," the foreign ministry said at the time.





A January 21 cease-fire put an end to fighting between Hamas militants in Gaza and Israel, which had launched a three-week offensive, saying its goal was to stop missile strikes into southern Israel.





More than 1,200 Palestinians, many of them civilians, were killed. Israel lost about 10 soldiers and three civilians.

***

(CNN) -- Los Angeles Galaxy reached Major League Soccer's (MLS) championship match on Sunday after a 3-1 defeat of Real Salt Lake in the Western Conference final.





The Galaxy, two-time MLS Cup winners, reached the deciding game for a record seventh time thanks to goals from captain Landon Donovan, American Mike Magee and Ireland striker Robbie Keane in front of their home fans at the Home Depot Center.





Manager Bruce Arena's Galaxy will face Houston Dynamo in the post-season's final match, after Dynamo beat Sporting Kansas City in the Eastern Conference final.





The final, which will take place at the Home Depot Center, could be midfielder David Beckham's last match for Los Angeles, with the former England captain's contract expiring at the end of the season.





But Beckham, 36, is focused only on the upcoming match with Dynamo, after playing in the MLS Cup 2009 when the Galaxy were beaten by Real Salt Lake in a penalty shoot-out.





"We're happy to be winning the Western final, but we know that there is one more game to go so we're not getting carried away," the former Real Madrid and Manchester United star told the league's official website.





"We did that a couple of years ago and we paid for it. We didn't win the MLS Cup final, so hopefully this will be something that we're happy to win [on Sunday], but we know that we've got one more game."





Galaxy went ahead on 23 minutes when Donovan, 29, converted a penalty after Andy Williams' push on Omar Gonzalez.





Dynamo responded almost immediately, striker Alvaro Saborio scoring with a close-range header to equalize after 25 minutes.





Beckham, capped 115 times by England, helped Galaxy regain the lead on 58 minutes, his pin-point cross headed home by Magee.





Former Tottenham and Liverpool forward Keane secured the win for Galaxy with 22 minutes remaining, wriggling free of his marker before firing a low shot beyond Salt Lake goalkeeper Nick Rimandi.





Dynamo needed second half goals from defender Andre Hainault and forward Carlos Costly to see off the challenge of Sporting Kansas City in front of a record crowd at Livestrong Sporting Park.





The 16th MLS Cup final will complete the 2011 season and will be played on Sunday November 20.

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN) -- Many Americans are finding ways to trim their holiday budgets this year, but reports are showing that buying video games is one place consumers are not cutting back.



Through November, video game sales are up 22 percent over 2007.



According to market researcher NPD Group, U.S. retail sales of video games totaled $2.91 billion in November, a 10 percent jump from a year ago. Overall sales this year through November are more than $16 billion, up 22 percent from 2007.



Anita Frazier, an analyst from NPD, cites the industry's wide content variety on newer generation consoles such as Nintendo's Wii, Sony's Playstation 3 and Microsoft's XBOX 360 as a reason for the strong performance. Frazier also says that video games are a relatively cheap form of entertainment, considering the hours of value they provide.



Matt Helgeson, senior editor at Game Informer magazine, agrees.



"Video games can take between 10 and 40 hours, sometimes 50 hours, to complete" depending on the title, Helgeson said. "Gamers can often get two to three months out of one game."



Furthermore, during these recessionary times, Helgeson explains that video games "provide the ultimate escapism."



According to NPD, some of the top-selling game titles in November include "Gears of War 2," which sold 1.6 million copies, and "Call Of Duty: World At War," which sold 1.4 million. Nintendo's "Wii Play" and "Wii Fit" put up impressive numbers, as well.



With those kinds of sales, video games have potential to be one of the most popular stocking stuffers for kids this holiday season.



Helgeson says that these days, games are a core part of being a kid, and it's no longer a question of "do you play video games?" Instead the question is "what games are you playing?"



"Ages, races, social groups -- video games cut across all platforms," Helgeson said. Whether you're shopping for a hardcore gamer or something for the family, "there is something for everybody."

***

DENVER, Colorado (CNN) -- It was classic Clinton.



It was Sen. Hillary Clinton's big night but before her speech even began, former President Bill Clinton reached out in his box and firmly embraced a young African-American man.



Clinton gripped the young man tightly; to millions watching on television, it was clear he could feel Mervyn Jones Jr.'s pain.



As he sat down for his wife's headlining address, Bill Clinton's silent embrace of the 25-year-old son of recently deceased Ohio Rep. Stephanie Tubbs Jones resonated loudly.



Rep. Tubbs Jones, of course, was a solid and loyal Clinton supporter, standing by the Clintons even when many other black leaders were shifting their support to Barack Obama.



Then, in her speech, Sen. Clinton herself took a moment to mention Tubbs Jones and her son.



"Steadfast in her beliefs, a fighter of uncommon grace, she was an inspiration to me and to us all," Clinton said. "Our heart goes out to Stephanie's son, Mervyn Jr."



The public moment of recognition was the result of years of friendship.



" I remember the first time President Clinton ran for office [in 1992]," Jones Jr. told CNN. "He came to Cleveland. I must have been 8 years old.



"My mother got the chance to meet him. ... They have been best of friends ever since," he said.



And, perhaps, it was also a reminder that if you stand by the Clintons, the Clintons will stand by you.



Tubbs Jones endorsed Hillary Clinton for president in April 2007 but with Sen. Barack Obama's success during the primaries, many African-American superdelegates came under pressure to back Obama instead.



Tubbs Jones, however, held steadfast even as others in her position switched their allegiance.



"I'm going to be with her until she says, 'Stephanie, I'm no longer in this fight. You're free to do something else,'" Tubbs Jones told CNN's Wolf Blitzer in March. "In politics, all you have is your word," she added.



She passed that same sense of commitment on to her son.



"If you give somebody your word, you're going to go ahead and do it," Jones Jr. said the day after Hillary Clinton's address to the Democratic National Convention. "Otherwise, it's not worth anything."



"The same goes in politics," he added. "If you don't have your word, you don't really have anything to stand on in politics. So, that's one thing I did learn [from my mother] at a very early age."



When Sen. Clinton asked Jones Jr. to sit with her husband during what was perhaps her most important speech to date, he agreed.



"She always said that if you don't stick by somebody in the bad times, you never know how good the good times are going to be," Jones Jr. said, explaining his mother's view of loyalty.



Tubbs Jones, 58, died suddenly a week ago of a brain aneurysm. She was in her fifth term in the House of Representatives and was the first African-American woman to represent Ohio in the House.



What would Tubbs Jones have thought of Sen. Clinton's call Tuesday for Democrats to unify behind Obama?



"She would've been standing up, hooting and hollering saying, 'Wow. That's exactly what we needed. Way to be a team player,'" Jones Jr. said.



In what some political analysts were calling the first speech of her second campaign for president, Hillary Clinton did her part on stage.



And, in the box, her husband held on tightly to the son of an old friend ­and sent a message of his own that may resonate as an important moment in the long-term resurrection of the Clinton brand in American politics.

***

(CNN) -- Rep. Joe Wilson said Sunday he will not apologize again for yelling out that President Obama lied during the president's speech to Congress last week.



Rep. Joe Wilson, R-South Carolina, shouts "You lie!" during President Obama's speech Wednesday night.



"I am not going to apologize again," the South Carolina Republican said on "FOX News Sunday" when asked about pending disciplinary steps against him by the Democratic-controlled House of Representatives.



Wilson said he already apologized to Obama and that the president accepted it. However, he insisted that Obama "was misstating the facts," and that Democratic leaders in the House were "playing politics" by continuing to focus on the issue.



House Democrats plan to censure Wilson if he refuses to apologize on the House floor this week.



Wilson issued a statement about that Sunday, saying, "The American people are fed up with the political games in Washington, and I refuse to participate in an effort to divert our attention away from the task at hand of reforming health insurance and creating new jobs."  Watch the debate over Wilson's comment »



The controversy has shifted the focus of the heated health care debate by calling attention to claims by Republicans that a health care overhaul sought by Obama and Democrats would provide free insurance coverage for illegal immigrants.



Obama and Democratic leaders insist that nothing in any of the health care proposals currently before Congress includes health care coverage for illegal immigrants or would provide taxpayer money to help illegal immigrants buy private health coverage.



However, Wilson and other opponents of Democratic proposals say the plans provide no enforcement mechanism to screen applicants for citizenship requirements. Wilson said Sunday that Republican amendments calling for such enforcement were rejected by congressional committees that have passed the Democratic proposals.



When asked if Obama had lied to Congress, Wilson responded: "I believe he was misstating the facts." He noted that Senate Finance Committee members negotiating a compromise agreement have called for enforcement mechanisms similar to what Republicans are proposing.



The national response to Wilson's nationally televised outburst, in which he yelled "You lie" as Obama spoke about health care to a joint session of Congress, shows the deep public divide over the issue.



Wilson and his opponent for re-election next year have each raised more than $1 million since Wilson's heckling of the president on Wednesday, according to aides for each.



In addition, Wilson has posted a Web video that asks for campaign cash to fend off attacks from political opponents.



Immediately after Obama's speech Wednesday, Wilson issued a statement that apologized for inappropriate behavior. He also called the White House that night and spoke to Obama's chief of staff, Rahm Emanuel, who told Wilson that Obama accepted his apology.



Obama said publicly that he accepted the apology. Wilson "apologized quickly and unequivocally, and I'm appreciative of that," the president said.



Wilson said Sunday that should be enough, adding that he respected the president and "would never do something like that again."

***

(CNN) -- Police arrested 46 people Saturday morning after they swept through a downtown city square in Boston, Massachusetts, evicting "Occupy" protesters encamped there since late September, officials said.





CNN affiliate WCVB broadcast images of handcuffed demonstrators being led away by police, who first offered the group the option of leaving before making arrests, according to police spokesman Eddy Chrispin.





"The city is in the process of clean-up and trying to restore Dewey Square to its prior state," said Chrispin. "For the most part, it was nonviolent."





By late Saturday morning, an "Occupy Boston" twitter feed was abuzz with news of the eviction.





"Occupy Boston is NOT done! You can't evict an idea! :) The camp may be gone but the people, ideas & passion isn't," read one post.





Another post promised to offer "details about the plan as soon as we know."





"For now, get some rest. It will be a big afternoon!"





On Wednesday, a judge ruled that demonstrators' First Amendment rights do not extend to seizing and holding areas on which they sit.





Authorities are "obligated by law to preserve Dewey Square as a space open to the public," wrote Superior Court Judge Frances A. McIntyre.





Boston Mayor Thomas Menino, who in the past appeared to tolerate his city's chapter of the nationwide movement, later signaled that the area could be a safety hazard as winter weather rolled in, imposing a Thursday deadline for the group to clear out or face eviction.





By Friday, however, protesters remained firmly entrenched in more than 100 tents.





Saturday's arrests was the city's second large-scale action against demonstrators since the movement began there in late September.





In October, 129 people were arrested during a march in which protesters allegedly blocked traffic and refused to disperse.





The movement, which first sprang up in a Lower Manhattan park, seeks to highlight what it sees as corruption and growing income disparities between the nation's richest 1% and the rest of the country.





CNN's Dan Verello contributed to this report

***

(CNN)  -- Cervelo's Xavier Tondo won the toughest stage of this year's Paris-Nice cycling classic as Alejandro Valverde finished second to ratchet up the pressure on race leader and their fellow Spaniard Alberto Contador.





It was the biggest victory of Tondo's fledgling career and reward for a solo break with just under 40km remaining of the 220km ride from Peynier to Tourrettes-super-Loup.





The whittled down chasing bunch closed fast in the final kilometers but Tondo had five seconds to spare with Valverde leading the charge to claim six bonus seconds.





It left him 14 seconds adrift of reigning Tour de France champion Contador ahead of a difficult final day in the south of France.





Young Slovakian Peter Sagan, who claimed his second stage win of the race in dramatic style pm Friday, finished third to retain the green jersey of points leader.





Tondo was delighted to win in his debut year for Cervelo, with his main duties this season set to be as a helper for Carlos Sastre in the Giro d'Italia and other major tours.





He felt he was ready to challenge on Friday, but suffered bad luck with a mechanical problem, dropping over two minutes to lose his chance for the overall crown.





"It gave me a chance to go in the breakaway today and I felt very good on the climb," he told the official Web site www.letour.fr.





"It's incredible for me, in my first year with Cervelo. It's my 10th victory as a pro, but in the past I only rode for small teams," he added.





Sunday's final leg is a 119km stage based around Nice with several tough climbs where Contador has predicted he will seal his final victory.





Meanwhile, last year's winner Michele Scarponi claimed the fourth stage of the Tirreno-Adriatico to take the overall lead.





Scarponi was in a small elite group who forged clear about 4km from the finish of the 243-km route from San Gemini to Chieti.





He now leads Benoit Vaugrenard of France by 18 seconds in the overall classification.

***

(CNN) -- World No. 2 Novak Djokovic was on track to defend his Dubai Tennis Championship title when torrential rain, thunder and lightning halted play in Saturday's final against Mikhail Youzhny.



The Serbian led 7-5 2-0 when the heavens opened on the desert emirate and flooded the court, and after a long delay it was decided to resume play on Sunday afternoon.



Top seed Djokovic won a topsy-turvy first set in 63 minutes as there were five breaks in serve overall, then rain forced a half-hour delay.



He was 30-15 up in the third game against the Russian seventh seed when the weather intervened again, and umpire Mohamed Lahyani ruled that the court was too wet for further play.



Workers tried to clear the water, but to no avail.



Djokovic is seeking to avenge his semifinal defeat by Youzhny at the World Tennis Tournament in Rotterdam a fortnight ago and claim his 17th ATP Tour title.



Youzhny lost to Robin Soderling in the Dutch final after suffering a hamstring injury, leaving him with five career titles.



Meanwhile, world No. 7 Elena Dementieva will face fellow Russian Alisa Kleybanova in Sunday's final of the inaugural Malaysian Open as she seeks to win a third title this year.



Top seed Dementieva defeated Austria's Sybille Bammer 6-3 6-1 in her semifinal on Saturday, while Kleybanova beat Japan's Ayumi Morita 6-4 6-1.

***

(CNN) -- A former federal prosecutor was arrested Wednesday on charges related to the murder of a witness in a drug case, among many other counts, the U.S. Attorney's Office in Newark, New Jersey, said.



Former federal prosecutor Paul Bergrin is charged with leading a racketeering conspiracy that included a murder.



Paul Bergrin and three others were taken into custody after a federal grand jury in New Jersey indicted them on 14 counts, including murder, racketeering, wire fraud and money laundering charges, a statement from Acting U.S. Attorney Ralph J. Marra Jr. said.



The indictment charges Bergrin with leading a racketeering conspiracy that included the murder of a witness in a drug case and an attempt to hire a hit man in another drug case, the statement said. Bergrin also is charged with wire fraud and money laundering, Marra said.



Gerald Shargel, Bergrin's attorney, said his client would plead not guilty to all charges.



"This is largely dredging up old issues, and we intend to vigorously fight the charges," Shargel said.



The U.S. Attorney's Office statement said Bergrin was involved in the murder of a confidential witness in one federal drug case and tried to hire a Chicago, Illinois, hit man to kill a witness in another drug case. The second killing never occurred, the statement said, because the proposed hit man was a cooperating witness in the case.



Marra called Bergrin's alleged conduct "simply shocking."



"A licensed lawyer, a former prosecutor essentially became one of the criminals he represents, supporting, encouraging, indeed directing, a criminal enterprise that engaged in murder and murder conspiracies, drug trafficking and financial fraud," Marra said in the statement. "Bergrin can now expect to feel the full weight of the very legal system he turned on its head with his conduct."



Bergrin was an assistant U.S. attorney in New Jersey before going into private practice. According to the New York Law Journal, Bergrin, 53, pleaded guilty this month to two misdemeanor counts for his involvement with a prostitution ring.  He later represented U.S. Army Sgt. Javal Davis, one of seven people charged in the Abu Ghraib prison abuse scandal in Iraq. In that case, Davis entered a plea agreement on reduced charges before his court martial began.



A recorded message at Bergrin's Newark, New Jersey, office said it was closed today, and messages left with Bergrin's cell phone and the cell phones of two associates went unanswered.

***

(CNN) -- The medical examiner has ruled that the death of Daniel Kerrigan, the father of figure skater Nancy Kerrigan, was a homicide, the Middlesex County district attorney's office said Tuesday.





The skater's brother, Mark, was arraigned in January on assault and battery charges in an incident involving his father, but the district attorney's office would not say if other charges might be filed against the younger Kerrigan in light of the medical examiner's finding.





Daniel Kerrigan, 70, died January 24 after an alleged altercation with his son at the Kerrigan home in Stoneham, Massachusetts.





The Kerrigan family released a statement through their attorney expressing disappointment "that the medical examiner would release a cause of death without having all of the relevant facts. We believe this finding to be premature and inaccurate."





"The Kerrigan family does not blame anyone for the unfortunate death of Dan Kerrigan, who had a pre-existing heart condition," said the family statement, released by attorney Tracy Miner.





Mark Kerrigan, 45, pleaded not guilty to the charges against him January 26. Through his attorney, he denied any responsibility in his father's death.





According to Middlesex County Assistant District Attorney Elizabeth Keeley, police responded to a 911 call at approximately 1:30 a.m. January 24 from Brenda Kerrigan, wife of Daniel and mother to Mark and Nancy Kerrigan.





Keeley told District Court Judge Mark Sullivan during the arraignment for Mark Kerrigan that there was a violent argument and struggle between the father and his son, resulting in the elder Kerrigan falling or collapsing on the kitchen floor. Keeley said Mark Kerrigan told authorities "that he did in fact have an argument with his father, the argument became physical, he grabbed his father around the neck, and at some point the father collapsed to the floor."





According to Keeley, police found Mark Kerrigan in the basement of the house, "clearly intoxicated" and "extremely combative." He refused to comply with police officers, said Keeley, and they had to subdue him with pepper spray before forcibly removing him from the home.





Mark Kerrigan's attorney, Denise Moore, said in court that Kerrigan was unemployed, was recently released from a correctional facility and was living at home with his parents. He is taking medications and seeking psychological help for post-traumatic stress, apparently from his time in the Army, she added.





Despite appeals from his attorney, the judge ordered Kerrigan held on $10,000 cash bail. His next court appearance is expected to be February 24.





Nancy Kerrigan first gained prominence by winning a bronze medal at the 1992 Winter Olympics in Albertville, France. In 1994 she earned a silver medal in Lillehammer, Norway. But she is perhaps best remembered for being injured in an attack before the 1994 Winter Games by skating rival Tonya Harding's ex-husband and an accomplice.

***

(CNN) -- Kate Meinhardt felt like a clown jammed into a Volkswagen bug when she lived in a 21-square-foot room aboard a circus train.

Kate Meinhardt crammed her life into a 21-square-foot room while she lived aboard a circus train.

Bungee cords crisscrossed her walls once a week to prevent an avalanche of items from raining down. A microwave, mini refrigerator, her laptop and baskets of personal items lined the dorm-like room.

Showering, going to the bathroom and even doing laundry became racing contests on the train, Meinhardt said. The 13 people on board shared one shower, two toilets and one washer and dryer.

"It's a pretty tough life living in such a small space," she said. The 23-year-old spent almost a year as an animal handler for Ringling Bros. and Barnum & Bailey Circus.

While most iReporters haven't run off to join the circus, some have traded in their homes for smaller digs. One iReporter even opted for a floating lifestyle, where he could sail away at a moment's notice. iReport.com: Living in tight quarters

Living on a 25-foot boat was only supposed to be temporary, but Jim Smith loved it so much he stayed there for a year.

"I have lived in a 25-foot sailboat, a 28-foot motor home, a 32-foot sailboat and now an 800 square-foot apartment," Smith said in his iReport. "I was happiest with the 25-foot sailboat."

While docked in Panama City, Florida, Smith kept his expenses to a minimum. The marina slip rent was only $200 and electricity was included in the rent, he said.

The boat did not have refrigeration so Smith kept his food inside an insulated ice box. For 79 cents at the discount grocery store, he could buy a 10-pound bag of ice that would last him several days, even during the summer.

Air conditioning wasn't a luxury Smith had either, but fans and sea breezes kept him cool.

"Sometimes the less you have, the more you like it," he said.

The portable lifestyle also charmed a father-son duo who set out on a yearlong European vacation. A camper van took them wherever they wanted, whenever they wanted.

Spencer Pearson and his 15-year-old son, Bryce, bought a 150-square-foot van in Germany for their European excursion. Living out of the van meant "no reservations, no packing and unpacking of suitcases, no strange beds," Pearson said.

Modern amenities weren't amiss on the van, which included everything from the Internet and entertainment to a complete bath and kitchen, and there were occasional hotel stays and meals out that made the trip more pleasant.

The simple life also enticed Deborah Greant and her husband to trade in their Calgary, Canada, home for an RV.

Both she and her husband have neuromuscular problems and needed extra help taking care of their large home. Since moving into a 240-square-foot RV, they can manage the house themselves.

"We didn't want to be owned by our things," Greant said. "We jettisoned pretty much everything except things from former generations."

While two people living in an RV can be tight, imagine a family of six trying to do the same.

Mounting living expenses and a job relocation prompted the Chervenkas to sell their home and move into a 32-foot RV. Two pets came along, too.

The Chervenkas weren't forced to do this. Their goal was to become debt-free and save money for their children's college educations.

When pilot Tim Chervenka got transferred to Charlotte, North Carolina, the family set up camp in a 32-foot RV. The temporary situation turned into a permanent one.

The family said goodbye to paying a first and second mortgage and pricey utilities. They now pay only $500 a month, utilities included.

"It's made such an adjustment in our personal life without the juggling," Cindy Chervenka said. "We have so much more family time. It's a good feeling."

Cindy

***

(CNN) -- An audio message purportedly from al Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden has accused President Barack Obama of being unable to fulfil his election pledge to pull U.S. troops out of Iraq.



Osama bin Laden is seen in an image taken from a videotape that aired on Al-Jazeera in September 2003.



The tape emerged on radical Islamist Web sites, just two days after the United States marked the eighth anniversary of the September 11, 2001, terror attacks.



"To the American people, this is my message to you: a reminder of the reasons behind 9/11 and the wars and the repercussions that followed and the way to resolve it," the message said.



"From the beginning, we have stated many times ... that the cause of our disagreement with you is your support of your allies, the Israelis, who are occupying our land in Palestine. Your stance along with some other grievances are what led us to carry out the events of 9/11."



The video plays the audio over a undated photograph of bin Laden. The video also shows a banner with the American flag as the backdrop and an image of the New York City skyline with the twin towers of the World Trade Center -- destroyed in the 9/11 attack -- still standing, said terrorism analyst Laura Mansfield.



CNN could not independently authenticate bin Laden as the speaker in the 11-minute video posted on Sunday by As-Sahab Media -- al Qaeda's production company.  Watch CNN's Octavia Nasr's analysis of the message »



Obama was "a vulnerable man who will not be able to stop the war, as he promised, but instead he will drag it to the maximum possible extent," the message said.



Though U.S. troops no longer patrol Iraq's major cities and a large number have left, tens of thousands remain in the country and are expected to stay for years to come.



The message claims that the Obama administration is under the influence of the Republican White House it replaced, pointing out that the president kept Robert Gates as defense secretary -- a holdover from the Bush administration.



"Prolong the wars as much as you like. By God, we will never compromise on it (Palestine), ever," the message continued.



Mansfield noted that the video brings no new images of the elusive bin Laden, who was last seen in footage two years ago on the sixth anniversary of the terror attacks.



Bin Laden has released audio messages since then, most recently on June 9.

***

(CNN) -- Former President John F. Kennedy saw a proposed ban on above-ground nuclear tests as a way to thaw U.S.-Soviet relations after the Cuban Missile Crisis, according to recordings released Thursday.

President John F. Kennedy expresses a desire to thaw U.S.-Soviet relatations, on newly released recordings.

"If it does represent a possibility of avoiding the kind of collision that we had last fall in Cuba, which was quite close, and Berlin in 1961, we should seize the chance," Kennedy said in a July 1963 meeting with top government scientists. He signed a treaty with the Soviets and the British the following month that banned nuclear tests in the atmosphere, underwater or in space.

Kennedy's presidential library in Boston, Massachusetts, released the four-minute recording of the meeting, held just four months before his assassination. The scientists taking part included John Foster and Norris Bradbury, the directors of two of the top U.S. nuclear laboratories; Glenn Seaborg, then-head of the Atomic Energy Commission; and a member of the commission, John Palfrey.

Kennedy expressed hope that the treaty could produce "the possibility of a detente" between Washington and Moscow, "which may not come to anything but which quite possibly could come to something."

The meeting took place just nine months after the discovery of Soviet missiles in Cuba brought the world's major nuclear powers to the brink of war. Kennedy said the Soviets were having "domestic, internal economic problems" and he was worried about the rise of China after a major diplomatic split in 1960.

"I don't think anybody can say with any precision, but there isn't any doubt that the dispute with China is certainly a factor," Kennedy said, adding, "They want to avoid a nuclear struggle or ... they want to lessen the chances of conflict with us."

But he said the rising nuclear ambitions of China, which would conduct its first tests the following year, could force the United States to resume its own tests.

"It may be that the Chinese test in the next year, 18 months, 2 years, and we would then make the judgment to see if we should go back to testing," he said.

***

(InStyle.com) -- Michelle Obama dazzled on the dance floor Tuesday night at the Neighborhood Inaugural Ball in Washington, wearing an elegant, one-shouldered ivory gown created for her by 26-year-old designer, Jason Wu.



First lady Michelle Obama dazzled in a Jason Wu original gown.



The one-of-a-kind silk chiffon confection was embellished with organza rosettes, Swarovski crystal rhinestones and silver embroidery.



The first lady accessorized with diamond chandelier earrings, a white gold and diamond ring and a stack of diamond bangles by jeweler Loree Rodkin.



The president summed up his wife's look best before their first dance -- to Beyoncé's rendition of "At Last" -- when he said, "First of all, how good-looking is my wife?"



Michelle Obama has worn Wu once before, during an interview with Barbara Walters. Wu, one of America's leading young designers, debuted his first collection in February 2006 and has since earned accolades such as Fashion Group International's Rising Star Award.  Watch InStyle.com's Joe Berean discuss the gown »



Obama was likely introduced to the designer in one of her favorite Chicago, Illinois, boutiques, Ikram.



The new first lady has made a conscious effort to support young, diverse talent in the fashion community.



In choosing Wu, who is originally from Taiwan, Obama continues a tradition of wearing American designers who hail from other countries.



They include Cuban-American designers Isabel Toledo, who designed her yellow lace inauguration ensemble; Narciso Rodriguez, designer of the red and black dress she wore on election night; and designer Thakoon Panichgul, originally from Thailand, who designed the floral dress she wore the evening her husband accepted the Democratic nomination for president.



Michelle Obama's style statement is one meant to inspire ethnic and class diversity in the world of fashion.



Aside from being a socially conscious purveyor of style, Obama also sends a clear message of hope and promise by choosing colorful, reasonably priced pieces.  Watch the Obamas enjoy the night »



She prefers bright, cheerful shades such as yellow, electric blue, red and purple, and has been seen on multiple occasions in head-to-toe looks from moderately priced American retailer J.Crew. In fact, daughters Malia and Sasha braved Tuesday's chilly weather in coats from the brand's children's collection.



Michelle Obama was first seen in J.Crew during a visit to the "Tonight Show" with Jay Leno on October 27.



"This is a J.Crew ensemble," she told the host. "We ladies, we know J.Crew."



The first lady also said she had a penchant for Internet shopping, saying, "When you don't have time, you gotta click!"



Obama wore J.Crew again at the Kids' Inaugural Concert on Monday. She gave the colorful ensemble a luxe spin with dangling green sapphire earrings from Loree Rodkin and a Deco-inspired belt buckle.



InStyle magazine Fashion Director Hal Rubenstein appreciates Obama's straightforward approach to fashion.



"People tend to think classic looks are synonymous with boring, but they're not," he explains. "Michelle Obama has a specific style that works for her. She has a lady-like approach to style that is elegant and inspiring.



"What we'll see as a result is this idea of looking put-together and sophisticated, as opposed to being daring or flamboyant. It's all about looking polished, like you know what you're doing."



Get a FREE TRIAL issue of InStyle - CLICK HERE!

***

Islamabad, Pakistan (CNN) -- Pakistan's Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gilani made a U-turn Saturday -- first declaring that the military offensive against Islamic militants in South Waziristan had ended, then saying there is no timeframe for its completion.



The Pakistani army is conducting an intense operation to rout militants from their haven along the country's border with Afghanistan. The militants, in turn, have launched a series of deadly attacks in retaliation.



Answering a question from a reporter who asked whether the government will engage in dialogue with the Taliban in South Waziristan, Gilani said the operation was over.



"There was talk of dialogue even during the Malakand Operation. But now, the operation in South Waziristan is over. In fact, at the moment, there is talk of an operation in Orakzai Agency," he said.



Malakand is another operation that the military is conducting in another region. Orakzai is one of seven districts that make up the Federally Administered Tribal Areas of Pakistan. Like South Waziristan, it is also considered rife with militants.



Gilani's comments, made in the eastern city of Lahore, were aired on national television. But hours later, he backtracked.



"It could have been in a different context," he told reporters in Karachi. These remarks were also aired on television.



Gilani also declined to say when the offensive might end.



"We will take military action wherever we get information about the presence of militants," he said.



When reached for clarification, the prime minister's office pointed CNN to the second statement.



The army did not comment on Gilani's remarks. A release it sends out daily made no mention of an end to the offensive on Saturday.



Instead, Saturday's release provided the usual breakdown of operations in various parts of the country, including South Waziristan.



CNN's Samson Desta and journalist Nasir Habib contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- In an unusual step, NASA scientists interrupted testing of the refurbished Hubble Space Telescope to aim the orbiter's camera at Jupiter and capture an image of the planet's mysterious new scar.



The revamped Hubble telescope captured these images of an impact scar near Jupiter's south pole.



The resulting picture, taken Thursday, is the sharpest visible-light photo of the dark spot and Hubble's first science observation since astronauts repaired and upgraded it in May, NASA said.



Earth-based telescopes have been trained on Jupiter since an amateur astronomer in Australia noticed the new mark, probably created when a small comet or asteroid plunged into Jupiter's atmosphere and disintegrated, early Monday.



But in its rarified orbit 347 miles above the Earth, the Hubble has a better view of the gaseous planet.



This week's event marks only the second time scientists have recorded debris colliding with Jupiter, the fifth planet from the sun and the largest in our solar system. The appearance of the impact spot is changing day to day in the planet's cloud tops, making it a priority for scientists to document it quickly.



Although the Hubble is not expected to resume full operations until late summer and its new camera is still being calibrated, NASA scientists decided the Jupiter event was too significant not to put the orbiting observatory back into action for a day.



"Because we believe this magnitude of impact is rare, we are very fortunate to see it with Hubble," said Amy Simon-Miller of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. "Details seen in the Hubble view shows a lumpiness to the debris plume caused by turbulence in Jupiter's atmosphere."



Jupiter's colorful atmosphere is 86 percent hydrogen and 14 percent helium, with tiny amounts of methane, ammonia, phosphine, water, acetylene, ethane, germanium and carbon monoxide. The chemicals are responsible for producing the different colors of Jupiter's clouds.



The object created a mark on Jupiter that has about same diameter as Earth, though the object itself was probably only 50 to 100 miles across, said Anthony Wesley, the astronomer who first noticed the scar.



The mystery object was probably moving at speeds of about 50 to 100 kilometers (31 to 62 miles) per second when it struck near Jupiter's south pole, Wesley said.



The new image of Jupiter was taken with Hubble's Wide Field Camera 3, which was installed by the astronauts aboard space shuttle Atlantis in May. Because it is still being calibrated, the camera's full power has yet to be seen, NASA said.



The Hubble has been in orbit since 1990 and can capture images that telescopes on Earth can't, partly because it doesn't have to gaze through the planet's murky atmosphere.



The unplanned Jupiter photo shoot will add delays to the recommissioning of Hubble, NASA said. But scientists are at a point in the telescope's reboot where they have enough flexibility to employ Hubble to look at the unexpected astronomical event, they said.

***

Port-au-Prince, Haiti (CNN)  -- Long lines formed under the watchful eye of American and multinational troops as a wide-scale food distribution effort reached capacity Thursday in Port-au-Prince, Haiti.





Nearly 160,000 Haitian women each collected a 25-kilogram (55 pounds) bag of rice under a distribution plan coordinated by the United Nations, several private humanitarian agencies and the Haitian government.





The effort was launched Sunday but not all 16 fixed distribution points around the capital were operational until Thursday.





So far, 600,000 people affected by the devastating January 12 earthquake have been able to collect food under this plan, said Marcus Prior, spokesman for the United Nations World Food Programme.





"We're encouraged by the way the system is working to get food out into the city to those in need, but still have a long way to go," Prior said.





Only women were given food coupons beforehand and allowed to stand in line to collect for their families.





"Our long experience in food distribution tells us that by delivering food into the hands of women, it is more likely to be redistributed equitably among the household -- including the men," Prior said.





U.S. and U.N. troops have been keeping strict control over the crowds. Prior said the distribution plan has been orderly so far.





The death toll from the earthquake has reached 212,000, Prime Minister Jean-Max Bellerive said Thursday.





More than 300,000 people were injured and more than 1 million were made homeless, he told CNN's "Larry King Live."

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- A Bedouin who was just a boy when a U.S. Navy pilot's plane crashed in the Iraqi desert in 1991 was the key to finding his remains more than 18 years after he was killed, the Pentagon says.



Marines conduct recovery efforts at the crash site of U.S. Navy Capt. Michael Scott Speicher, shot down in 1991.



The new details of the final hunt for U.S. Navy pilot Scott Speicher, who was lost over Iraq on the opening night of the Gulf War in January 1991, were released by the Pentagon Friday.



Two sites were searched by U.S. troops who dug west of Baghdad, Iraq, in Anbar province, one at the plane crash site and another 2 kilometers away.



The remains of Capt. Speicher were found at the second location.



The U.S. military has long said Speicher had ejected out of his jet after it was hit by an Iraqi missile.



After years of searching, it was just last month that the military got the crucial information that led them to the burial site.



A Bedouin who was just 11 years old at the time of the crash came forward and connected the military with other locals who had knowledge of generally where the crash and burial locations were.



The tipster did not know exactly where Speicher was buried but he knew others who had the knowledge, the military statement explained.



"He willingly provided his information during general discussion with MNF-W [Multi-National Force-West]personnel and stated he was unaware of the U.S. government's interest in this case until queried by U.S. investigators in July 2009," according to the statement.



Bedouin are desert-dwelling nomadic Arabs.



One hundred and fifty U.S. military troops were dispatched to dig for the remains at the crash site and did not find any sign of the pilot. At the second site the troops discovered skeletal fragments, according to the statement.



Dental records initially identified the bones as Speicher's and, on August 2, DNA results came back positive.



Speicher's remains will be taken to Jacksonville, Florida, for burial, according to a family spokeswoman.



Speicher was a lieutenant commander when shot down, but because his status remained uncertain, he received promotions during the past 18 years, reaching the rank of captain.

***

(CNN) -- At least three tornadoes caused massive damage in Virginia and injured more than 200 people on Monday, officials said.





This Suffolk, Virginia, house was destroyed by an apparent tornado Monday.





At least 200 were injured in Suffolk where a twister destroyed several homes and businesses, said Bob Spieldenner of the Virginia Department of Emergency Management.





The storm hit the 138-bed Sentara Obici Hospital, though Spieldenner said the facility was still operational and accepting patients.





A second tornado struck Colonial Heights -- about 60 miles northwest, near Richmond -- injuring at least 18 people, he said.





A third twister damaged several homes near Lawrenceville, about 70 miles south of Richmond, said Bryan Jackson, a meteorologist with the National Weather Service, which confirmed all three tornadoes.





Gov. Tim Kaine declared a Virginia-wide state of emergency as hazardous weather continued through the central part of the state.





The Suffolk twister touched down just before 4 p.m. ET and plowed its way east into Norfolk, damaging scores of homes, stores and cars and downing dozens of trees and power lines, Jackson said.  Watch as a witness describes the tornado form »





Video footage from the scene showed roofs torn off homes, cars flipped over, trees snapped in two and a caved-in section of a newly constructed shopping center.





Furniture, fences and mounds of other debris were tossed in streets, parking lots and lawns.  Watch the storm's massive destruction from the air »





A tornado warning over the area remained in effect Monday evening.





Jeff Judkins, the city's emergency management coordinator, said there also were reports of people trapped inside cars. It's the worst damage he's seen in the area, he said.





An emergency shelter will be established by Monday night, Suffolk spokeswoman Dana Woodson said.





Officials initially reported a fatality, but later determined that it was unrelated to the storm, she said. E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN)  -- President Obama said in an interview aired Sunday that the hardest decision he's made since taking office was to send more troops to Afghanistan.



In a "60 Minutes" interview, President Obama said, "I fundamentally disagree with Dick Cheney."



Also in the interview on CBS' "60 Minutes," Obama defended his decision to shut down the U.S. prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba,  and he countered criticism from former vice president Dick Cheney.



"I fundamentally disagree with Dick Cheney -- not surprisingly," Obama said. "I think that Vice President Cheney has been at the head of a movement whose notion is somehow that we can't reconcile our core values, our Constitution, our belief that we don't torture, with our national security interests. I think he's drawing the wrong lesson from history."



Obama was responding to comments Cheney made to CNN's "State of the Union" on March 15, when he said the president is making the nation less safe by closing the Guantanamo prison and ending interrogation practices that Bush administration critics consider torture for terror suspects.



Just a month into office, Obama ordered 17,000 troops to Afghanistan, the original front in the "war on terrorism" sparked by the September 2001 attacks on New York and Washington.



"I think it's the right thing to do. But it's a weighty decision because we actually had to make the decision prior to the completion of the strategic review that we were conducting," Obama said.



Coming off a tumultuous week over the millions in bonuses paid out to employees of AIG, Obama said Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner's job is secure despite critics calling for his resignation.



Obama joked that even if Geithner were to tender his resignation, the president would tell him, "Sorry buddy, you've still got the job."



Geithner has come under fire over the $165 million in bonuses AIG paid its top executives after the insurance giant received more than $170 billion in federal bailout money.



A loophole in the recently approved economic stimulus bill, included at the behest of the Treasury, allowed AIG to pay the bonuses.



"It's going to take a little bit more time than we would like to make sure that we get this plan just right," Obama said.



The president also stressed that his administration won't endorse a House bill that would levy a 90 percent tax on bonuses paid out by companies that receive bailout money.



"As a general proposition, you don't want to be passing laws that are just targeting a handful of individuals," Obama said. "You want to pass laws that have some broad applicability ... you certainly don't want to use the tax code to punish people."

***

Nairobi, Kenya (CNN) -- An English tourist kidnapped from a remote Kenyan resort is being held by pirates in a remote corner of Somalia, according to experts and security analysts in Nairobi.





"Gangs from Southern Somalia took her up the coast and then moved her several times," said Andrew Mwangura, a piracy expert and maritime editor of Somalia Report, an independent online publication.





Judith Tebbutt was abducted by armed men from a remote safari lodge near to the Somali border earlier this month.





Her husband, David Tebbutt, was killed in the attack when he resisted, according to Kenyan police.





A Kenyan man has been charged in connection with the attack, a lawyer familiar with the case told CNN Monday.





Ali Babitu Kololo, who worked at the luxury resort in Kiwayu where the attack took place, was charged with robbery with violence and abducting with the intention to murder, according to a lawyer present at the hearing at the Lamu law courts.





Kololo pleaded not guilty to both counts.





A second man, Issa Sheck Saadi, is expected to appear in court at a later date.





Details of the incident are still sketchy and the British government has asked journalists not to reveal the exact location of Tebbutt to avoid abduction attempts from rival gangs.





Initially, it was feared that al-Shabaab, the al Qaeda-linked militant group, had conducted the operation as a revenge attack against the British nationals.





But a security analyst based in Nairobi, who tracks piracy operations but is not authorized to speak to the media, also believes this is the work of pirates.





"This is not the work of al-Shabaab," he said, "this is the work of southern armed gangs and pirates."





No ransom demands have been made yet, says Mwangura.





But if Somali pirates carried out the operation, it represents a marked departure in tactics.





For years, pirates have attacked commercial ships in the busy shipping lanes between Europe and Asia. A cargo ship has insurance, and after months of negotiations pirates can often clear several million U.S. dollars.





Some analysts believe that Somali pirates are now moving onto land because it's getting harder out at sea.





"Their inability to operate freely in the waters is forcing them onto land," says Andrews Atta-Asamoah, a senior researcher at the Institute for Security Studies. "It's significant if you place it in the context of the struggle against piracy. Since the whole push against piracy by international navies, the pirates have been looking for new territory and new frontiers."





Atta-Asamoah says that Kenya is a natural target because if its porous border with Somalia and a high number of foreign visitors and workers.





The Kenyan government, prompted by their reliance on tourism for foreign exchange, says they are making every effort to secure the border with Somalia.





Others say that, rather than a trend, this is a one-time attack caused by a more prosaic fact: the weather.





Monsoon rains off the coast of Somalia at this time of year makes operating offshore difficult.





"This incident is a special case," says Mwangura.

***

(CNN) -- One of Zimbabwe's top officials blamed his country's spreading cholera outbreak on what he calls "a genocidal onslaught" by Zimbabwe's former colonial ruler -- Britain.

Zimbabwean clinics have been overwhelmed by the cholera epidemic, according to aid organizations.

"Cholera is a calculated, racist attack on Zimbabwe by the unrepentant former colonial power, which has enlisted support from its American and Western allies so that they can invade the country," Information Minister Sikhanyiso Ndlovu told reporters. Britain ruled the country as a colony until 1965.

Ndlovu's claims triggered quick and pointed reaction from Britain and the United States.

In Washington, State Department spokesman Rob McInturff called Ndlovu's accusations "patently ridiculous."

Referring to Zimbabwean President Robert Mugabe, McInturff said Friday that, "Mugabe is clearly unwilling to take any meaningful action (to stop the cholera outbreak)."

On Thursday, Mugabe said "there is no cholera in the country." His spokesman later said that Mugabe was sarcastically ridiculing what he believes are Western designs to invade the country.

Britain's Africa minister, Mark Malloch-Brown responded by saying, "I don't know what world he (Mugabe) is living in," according to the British newspaper The Guardian.

Malloch-Brown made the comment during a one-day trip to South Africa, where he visited a Johannesburg church housing 1,600 Zimbabweans who have fled their country, the newspaper said.

"There is a raging humanitarian crisis in Zimbabwe as well as an economic crisis and still there is no representative government able to lead the country out of this disaster," he said, according to The Guardian.

Cholera has ravaged Zimbabwe, causing nearly 800 deaths and infecting more than 16,000 people, the World Health Organization says.

The outbreak could surpass 60 000 cases, according to an estimate by the Zimbabwe Health Cluster, which is a group coordinated by the World Health Organization.  View image gallery of Zimbabwe's cholera crisis Â»

Cholera, a bacterial waterborne disease that causes diarrhea, dehydration and, if not treated, death in a matter of hours, is widespread in Zimbabwe but help is not.

Like the general Zimbabwean economy, the country's health delivery system is strapped, lacking modern drugs and machinery, while doctors and nurses have been striking for over a month.

On Friday, the State Department issued a travel warning for U.S. citizens because of the cholera outbreak and violence that has flared as Zimbabwe's economy has deteriorated.

"The public health system in Zimbabwe no longer provides even basic services due to a lack of staff, electricity, clean water, and medical supplies," the travel warning said. "Americans who fall ill while in Zimbabwe may find it difficult to find treatment."

At the State Department's daily press briefing Friday, spokesman Sean McCormack said the situation in Zimbabwe will be one of the topics Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice will discuss when she visits the United Nations next week.

"The number of cases of cholera -- statements from Robert Mugabe notwithstanding -- is going up, not down," McCormack said. "The crisis has not ended. People's lives are in danger."

Health experts say the Zimbabwean government can win the battle against cholera only if it imports adequate stocks of water-treating chemicals and disposes of refuse and sewerage properly.  Watch shocking footage of Zimbabwe's humanitarian crisis (Discretion advised) Â»

A Doctors Without Borders epidemiologist in Zimbabwe said, referring to the capital city, that "the scale and sheer numbers of infection, especially in Harare, is unprecedented." He said the group has treated more than 11,000 patients since August and has 500 international and local staff members treating people in cholera centers across the country.

He said the main reasons for the outbreak are poor access to clean water, uncollected garbage in the streets and burst and blocked sewage systems.

"The fact that the outbreak has become so large is an indication that the country's health system can't cope," he said.

Meanwhile, in his statement Thursday Mugabe said, "I am

***

(CNN) -- Researchers have discovered a previously unknown group of rare monkeys in the forests of Vietnam.



The Tonkin snub-nosed monkeys were so skittish, researchers captured a photo of only one: an adult male.



Several biologists caught fleeting glimpses of about 15 or 20 Tonkin snub-nosed monkeys in a remote area near the Chinese frontier, the wildlife conservation group Fauna & Flora International said Thursday.



The "bizarre-looking" monkeys -- on the brink of extinction -- were so skittish around people that researchers were able to snap a photo of just one of them: an adult male scampering through the trees.



The monkeys were "very sensitive to the presence of people, giving warning signs to one another and fleeing" whenever biologists approached, the group said in a statement.



"It was apparent that the monkeys associated humans with danger -- perhaps due to ongoing threats from hunters," the group said.



So few Tonkin snub-nosed monkeys have survived in the wild that scientists thought until recently that they were extinct. Now they estimate that roughly 200 remain, mainly in parts of northern Vietnam near the Chinese border.



Hunters with a taste for bush meat and the loss of habitat have pushed the Tonkin snub-nosed monkey toward extinction, according to the International Union for the Conservation of Nature.



It classifies the primate as critically endangered "because its population size is estimated to number fewer than 250 mature individuals, with no subpopulation greater than 50 mature individuals, and it is experiencing a continuing decline."



Fauna & Flora said it is working with a variety of groups to improve the livelihoods and "reduce human pressures on the forest ecosystem" in an effort to safeguard the newly discovered group, which was spotted in a patch of forest in the Quan Ba district of Vietnam's Ha Giang province.



The sighting thrilled conservation biologist Le Khac Quyet, described by Fauna & Flora as "one of the few people in the world who can claim to be an expert on this mysterious species" and as the person credited with discovering the new group of that species.



"When I saw the Tonkin snub-nosed monkeys ... I was overjoyed," he said in the Fauna & Flora statement.



"There is still time to save this unique species, but with just 200 or so left and threats still strong, we need to act now."

***

WASHINGTON (CNN)  -- Accused terrorists held at Guantanamo Bay complained of abuse that they said led them to tell their CIA interrogators lies, according to sections of U.S. government transcripts made public on Monday.



A detainee walks at Camp 4 detention facility at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, in May.



Suspected al Qaeda figure Abu Zubaydah told a military tribunal in 2007 that he was physically and mentally tortured for months. "They did not care about my injuries," said Zubaydah, according to the newly released transcripts, adding, "doctors told me that I nearly died four times."



When Zubaydah was captured in Pakistan and badly wounded during a shootout in March 2002, U.S. intelligence officials considered him a major player in al Qaeda.



He was treated for his injuries, then later subjected to waterboarding and other harsh interrogation techniques after CIA interrogators said he stopped cooperating with them. According to a Justice Department memo released in April 2009 by the Obama administration, Zubaydah was waterboarded at least 83 times by CIA interrogators in August 2002.  See timeline of events »



In the newly released section, Zubaydah said his interrogators discovered "that I am not number three in al Qaeda."



The transcripts were released in response to a Freedom of Information Act lawsuit brought by the American Civil Liberties Union. The Obama administration reviewed the highly redacted portions of the transcripts that were released shortly after the Combatant Status Review Tribunals were held at Guantanamo Bay in the spring of 2007. The sections made public on Monday still remain heavily blacked out.  See key players in interrogation policy »



Khalid Sheik Mohammad, the self-proclaimed mastermind of the 9/11 attacks, told the military panel he made up stories when tortured. In broken English, Mohammad told of being questioned about the location of Osama bin Laden.



"Where is he? I don't know," said Mohammad. "Then he tortures me. Then I said yes, he is in this area..."



Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri, accused of plotting the attack on the USS Cole that killed 17 Americans in 2000, said his interrogators "drown me in water," apparently in reference to the times he was subjected to waterboarding. According to the transcripts, he claimed he was able to run 10 kilometers (6.2 miles) before he was detained, "now, I cannot walk more than 10 minutes."



ACLU Attorney Ben Wizner said in a statement that the documents "provide further evidence of brutal torture and abuse in the CIA's interrogation program and demonstrate beyond doubt that this information has been suppressed solely to avoid embarrassment and growing demands for accountability."



Wizner said the ACLU will go back to court to seek the full release of all of the documents.



CNN's Carol Cratty, Mike Ahlers and Larry Shaughnessy contributed to this report.

***

NAIROBI, Kenya (CNN) -- Heavy rains triggered by El Nino weather patterns could potentially prove devastating for east African nations that have been water-starved for months, the United Nations has warned.



A Turkana boy holds an empty cup in a village in northwestern Kenya.



Kenya, Somalia, Tanzania and Uganda are facing mudslides, crop destruction, waterborne diseases and disrupted road networks, the U.N. Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs said Friday. Djibouti, Eritrea and Ethiopia could also be affected.



The effects of flooding are expected to be exacerbated because so much greenery has disappeared in the drought.



"More than 23 million people in pastoral, agricultural and suburban communities, as well as internally displaced people and refugees in the region, are reeling from the impact of water and food shortages, pasture scarcity, conflict and insecurity," said John Holmes, the under-secretary general for humanitarian affairs who is coordinating emergency relief operations.



"While we cannot prevent these climatic shocks, we certainly can mitigate their disastrous effects through forward planning and the right funding from the donor community," he said.



Uganda, hit by El Nino a decade ago, is planning to apply some of the lessons learned this time around, said Fred Opolot, a government spokesman.



"The government has allocated funds and resources to areas that will be affected," he said. "Our disaster preparedness department is using press briefings, among other ways, to inform the public."



Though the department is not very well-funded, he said, the government is working with groups such as the United Nations and international aid agencies to prepare for floods.



"It is a multifaceted effort ... we want to ensure citizens are sensitized to the dangers of El Nino and things such as bridges are in good condition."



The rainy season begins in the Horn of Africa in mid-October and runs through the end of the year. Meteorologists have forecasted that this year's rains will be more intense than usual because of the El Nino phenomenon, caused by a rise in temperature in the Pacific and Indian oceans.



Aid agencies are already buckling under the weight of helping millions of people who have suffered through months of failed crops, drought and erratic rains caused by climate change.



In Somalia, 450,000 people in the Juba and Shabelle river basins could suffer, the United Nations estimates. In neighboring Kenya, some 750,000 people -- 150,000 of whom are refugees -- could be affected.



The Turkana, a pastoral tribe in northeastern Kenya, is already reeling from a severe drought that has left scores of people dead and remains of skeletal cows strewn across the flat, arid land. The remote region has no access to resources, making it especially vulnerable to natural disasters such as floods.



CNN's Moni Basu and Faith Karimi contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- A judge ordered an ex-aide to former Sen. John Edwards on Friday to turn over a sex tape said to depict Edwards and his former mistress, an official in a North Carolina court said.





Judge Abraham Penn Jones found former Edwards aide Andrew Young and his wife, Cheri, in civil contempt of court, said Tammy Keshler, a judicial assistant in Chatham County Superior Court.





He ordered them to give the court the tape and other materials they may have by 2 p.m. Wednesday, she said. The judge said he could jail the Youngs if they do not comply, she said.





The Youngs appeared in court in Pittsboro, about 35 miles west of Raleigh, North Carolina, to contest a temporary restraining order forbidding them from disseminating the videotape.





The couple has said they possess "a video recording showing Senator Edwards engaged in sexual activities with a woman who, from all indications, is not his wife and who the Youngs believe to be Ms. Hunter, based upon her appearance," court documents say.





The woman on the tape is visibly pregnant, the Youngs say. That means the video might not be the one specified in the restraining order, because Rielle Hunter, Edwards' former mistress, said that tape was created in September 2006, the Youngs say.





"This means that, as a matter of human biology, Ms. Hunter would have given birth no later than June 2007," the Youngs say.





Hunter was pregnant in 2007 and gave birth to Edwards' daughter Frances Quinn on February 27, 2008.





In the court documents, the Youngs suggest that Hunter might have mistaken when the video was made. Even if that is the case, they say, Hunter abandoned the videotape in the trash at their home and made no effort to recover it until almost two years after she had left their home.





Friday's court proceeding is the latest development in a saga involving one-time Democratic presidential hopeful Edwards.





In January, he admitted that he had fathered a child with Hunter, a videographer who worked on his campaign.





Edwards, 56, had publicly denied paternity for more than a year. About a week after his admission, Edwards confirmed reports that he had legally separated from his wife, Elizabeth.





Those announcements came just before Andrew Young released an embarrassing book about the Edwardses and his campaign.





In the book, Young portrays John Edwards as a cold, calculating and reckless politician willing to deny fathering a girl, risk his marriage and put the Democratic Party in potential political jeopardy, all in the name of pursuing the presidency.





After Hunter became pregnant, Young says in the book, he agreed to the North Carolina senator's request to lie, allowed Hunter to live in his home and said he was the father, though Young was married with three children.

***

Washington (CNN) -- Apparently no good deed goes unpunished for President Barack Obama, who was trying to make sure he didn't get a flabby belly after Thanksgiving but wound up with a fat lower lip instead.





White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs said the president received a dozen stitches after getting hit with an errant elbow during a Friday morning basketball game with White House aide Reggie Love and others at the Fort McNair military base in Washington.





The elbow belonged to Rey Decerega, who works for the Congressional Hispanic Caucus Institute. According to White House aides, Decerega went up for a shot and turned into the President, who was playing defense and accidentally got hit in the mouth.





"I learned today the president is both a tough competitor and a good sport," Decerega said in a statement released by the White House. "I enjoyed playing basketball with him this morning. I'm sure he'll be back out on the court again soon."





According to Gibbs, "After being inadvertently hit with an opposing player's elbow in the lip while playing basketball with friends and family, the president received 12 stitches today administered by the White House Medical Unit. They were done in the doctor's office located on the ground floor of the White House."





Aides said Obama was given a local anesthetic while receiving the stitches, and doctors used a smaller-than-usual filament. That increased the number of stitches needed to patch up the tear, but it made a tighter stitch so that the scar on the president's lower lip should be smaller.





Obama frequently plays basketball, works out on a daily basis, and was undoubtedly playing Friday to work off some extra Thanksgiving calories. An official White House menu showed that in addition to turkey and the usual trimmings, the first family dined Thursday on six types of pie: apple, sweet potato, pumpkin, banana cream, cherry, and huckleberry.





Asked by CNN if Decerega will be getting a presidential pardon, a top White House aide just laughed.

***

(CNN) -- Americans and other foreigners were among those caught up in the bloodshed and chaos of the terror attacks in Mumbai, India, on Wednesday and Thursday.

A foreign national held hostage by gunmen for nearly 24 hours is released from the Oberoi hotel in Mumbai.

At least six foreigners were among the 125 dead, police said.  Targets included two luxury hotels, the Oberoi and the Taj Mahal, as well as a cafe popular with Western tourists.

A man told a local television station that he was in the Oberoi around 10 p.m. Wednesday when gunmen entered the lobby and began rounding up guests, asking for anyone with a U.S. or British passport and taking about 15 of them hostage.

Fire raged at the Oberoi, the scene of much bloodshed as explosions and gunshots rang out Thursday morning. Outside the Taj Mahal, screaming and fighting broke out as reporters scrambled to capture the chaotic scene.

Australian filmmaker Anthony Rose told CNN that he had just arrived at the Oberoi hotel when he heard gunshots in the lobby and saw a fellow Australian shot in the leg and then shot at close range in the head by one of the attackers.

He said that he and others in his film crew fled through back doors in the hotel to escape the shooters.

Among those killed in the two days of violence was British yachtsman Andreas Liveras, according to St. George's Hospital in Mumbai.

At least one French national is trapped in the Oberoi hotel, according to the French Foreign Ministry in Paris.

A woman from Nashville, Tennessee, was shot in the arm and leg by the attackers, who barged into a ballroom at her hotel, her husband told CNN affiliate WSMV.

Andi Varagona operates a holistic health clinic in Nashville and was in Mumbai for training, her husband, Santos Lopez, told the station.

According to Lopez, his wife called him and said, "We were ambushed and we were shot."

When he asked Varagona if she was all right, she told him she had been shot in the leg and arm and was at that moment being wheeled into surgery, Lopez said.

"My God, I cried more than I cried in my entire life," Lopez told WSMV. "I mean, it's just been so overwhelming with emotion. ... You tend to believe that things that happen in the world happen to other people, until it happens to you."  Watch hostages walk from the building looking dazed Â»

WSMV is reporting that Varagona came out of surgery Wednesday night -- a bullet removed from her leg.

An American woman, who was still inside the Taj with her husband, told CNN by phone Thursday that television feeds into the rooms had stopped and she did not know what was going on.

"We have water and we're hunkered down and patient and ready to wait it out," she said. "We're OK. Last night was a different story, but today we're OK."

The woman, whom CNN is not identifying so as not to disclose her location to the gunmen, said she heard gunfire outside her room Wednesday night and "a man with an American accent screaming for help."

Aparna Dash, an American who lives in Pennsylvania but is visiting Mumbai on business, was staying at the Oberoi hotel. She was on the phone with her husband, who was in the United States, when the first explosions rang out.

"She thought it was firecrackers and didn't think much of it," her husband, Biswa Dash, told CNN. "But then in the coming hours, she realized what was going on and all the people in the hotel began trying to get out, to rush down the stairs."

Aparna Dash had made it down to the fifth floor from her room on the 26th floor, her husband said, and found an American woman sitting on the stairs, dazed and crying. iReport.com: Are you there? Share your story and send photos and video

"They were telling [the woman] that she needed to get up and keep moving

***

WASHINGTON (CNN)  -- Federal authorities have charged seven men in North Carolina with supporting terrorism and conspiracy to commit murder abroad, the Justice Department announced Monday.



Daniel Patrick Boyd, left, and Mohammad Omar Aly Hassan are two of the seven men charged.



Officials said one of the men, identified as North Carolina resident and U.S. native Daniel Patrick Boyd, had traveled to Pakistan and Afghanistan, where he trained in terrorist camps to carry out "violent jihad."



Boyd, 39, who went by the name Saifullah, was charged along with two of his sons: Dylan Boyd, 22, also known as Mohammed, and Zakariya Boyd, 20.



The four others also are residents of North Carolina, and all seven are accused of engaging in weapons training and military tactics in their home state, the Justice Department said.



"We consider this significant. We've been watching them for some time, and we think they were dangerous," said a federal law enforcement official who asked not to be identified.



The Boyd family and defendant Mohammad Omar Aly Hassan are identified as U.S.-born citizens. Defendant Hysen Sherifi is identified as a native of Kosovo who is a legal permanent resident of the United States, and Hiyad Yaghi and Anes Subasic are said to be naturalized U.S. citizens. Officials did not immediately identify their native countries.



The indictment, made public by the Justice Department, says Daniel Boyd and others left the United States for Israel in June 2007 to "engage in violent jihad but ultimately returned to the United States after failing in their efforts."



The defendants, with a substantial cache of weapons, had "practiced military tactics and use of weapons on private property in Caswell County, North Carolina, in June and July 2009," the indictment says.



The documents make no reference to a direct threat to individuals or property in the United States.



In a written statement, the Justice Department's top counterterrorism official, David Kris, said that Daniel Boyd, "a veteran of terrorist training camps" had conspired with others to recruit and help young men travel overseas in order to kill."



The U.S. attorney in Raleigh, George E. B. Holding, said, "These charges hammer home the point that terrorists and their supporters are not confined to the remote regions of some far-away land, but can grow and fester right here at home."



The defendants made an initial appearance in federal court in North Carolina. Officials said they are expected to return to court Thursday for detention hearings.

***

Paris, France (CNN)  -- Syrian President Bashar Assad says peace talks with Israel could resume if the Jewish state showed willingness to fully engage in the process.



"This peace process cannot only be relaunched by one party. Syria wants peace and we have a mediator, Turkey, which is ready to use its mediation role as well as the European partnership. What we are missing is the Israeli partnership, and we need it in order to renew peace talks and obtain results," Assad told reporters.



Assad traveled to France, sat down with President Nicolas Sarkozy on Friday for a one-hour lunch, and held a press briefing, where he blamed Israel for the stalled talks with Syria.



Turkey recently had mediated indirect talks between Israel and Syria, neighboring countries that have been adversaries for years. Among their many differences are Israel's occupation of the Golan Heights from Syria in the 1967 Six Day War and Syria's ties with Iran and anti-Israel militants.



His visit to Paris comes days after the visit of Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu. Questioned on Netanyahu's statement that Israel was ready to relaunch peace talks Syria without pre-conditions, Assad emphasized that if Israel is serious about talks, Syria is ready to send experts to Turkey and begin discussions with Israeli experts.



Asked if he was ready to meet Netanyahu in person at some point without conditions, Assad didn't say he would or wouldn't, but said it would depend on the subject of the discussion.



"Are we talking about the menu or about land restitution? We must talk about territory restitution. For this matter, mechanisms and a framework exist. The negotiators know the mechanisms. It is neither me nor Netanyahu," he said.



Asked about the role of France in the peace process, Assad said he hopes France backs the relaunch of the peace negotiations through Turkey and persuades Israel to accept this mediation process.



As for the peace process in the wider Middle East, he said it will only work if Israel stops tearing down the other side's rights and demands.



Assad said he and Sarkozy discussed living conditions in the Hamas-controlled Palestinian territory of Gaza -- reeling from the ongoing conflict with Israel, including the fierce Israeli offensive against militants that began late last year after constant rocket attacks on Israel by Gaza guerrillas.



Saying a civilian was shot on Friday by Israeli troops, Assad said he asked Sarkozy to stop violence against civilians in the territory.



Israel Defense Forces and Gaza security sources both confirmed an incident, but the sides had different accounts.



The IDF said soldiers identified a number of suspected terror operatives who appeared to be planting explosive devices adjacent to the northern Gaza security fence near "the Karni humanitarian crossing." The soldiers opened fire and identified hitting two of the suspects -- one of which was transferred to an Israeli hospital; the other operative died of his wounds. Three other suspects were taken for questioning.



The Palestinian security sources said a special force opened fire on a number of youths near the border fence with Israel in central Gaza. One of the youths was killed and four others were taken by the Israeli soldiers.



Assad said he and Sarkozy also discussed Iran's nuclear program and Lebanon.



Journalist Claire Boube contributed to this report.

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- In 2009, some units of the New York Police Department still function more like "Dragnet" than "CSI." They rely on typewriters.



Records show New York City signed a $432,900 contract for typewriter maintenance with in 2008.



NYPD Deputy Commissioner Paul Browne confirmed the department's continued, if limited, use of the 20th-century writing devices, explaining that they're mainly used for filling out property vouchers -- forms that officers must file when they seize items during case investigations. The typewriters also are retained in case a technological meltdown disables the NYPD's computers, he said.



The vintage typing machines do not come cheap.



Public records show that the city signed a $432,900 contract for typewriter maintenance with Afax Business Machines in 2008, as well as a $99,570 contract with that company in 2009. Typewriter company Swintec received a $982,269 contract from the city in 2007.



Eugene O'Donnell, a former New York police officer who now lectures at the John Jay College of Criminal Justice, said the typewriters are an anachronism -- and a waste.



"The two places you'd find typewriters are the museum and the police department," O'Donnell said. Typewriters create significant efficiency and storage problems for the department, he added, causing extra labor and unwieldy paper trails.



Deputy Commissioner Browne emphasized that "we have a $4 billion budget" and the financial resources devoted to typewriters are relatively miniscule.



Officers interviewed by CNN on the street had no soft spots for the contraptions.



"It's so antiquated," said one officer who did not want to be identified.



Her partner shared her frustration. "It's very inconvenient -- you have to find ink, you have to find this, find that."

***

TEHRAN, Iran (CNN) -- A former Iranian presidential candidate is calling on one of the Islamic republic's most powerful clerics to approve a special committee to investigate alleged mistreatment of detainees arrested in the aftermath of the disputed presidential elections.



Mehdi Karrubi says an "impartial committee" is needed to investigate alleged mistreatment of detainees.



In an open letter to Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani posted Saturday on his party's Web site, reformist Mehdi Karrubi says an "impartial committee" is needed to "investigate these tragedies with transparency until they are resolved." He said he is willing to lead the investigation in a "truthful, unbiased fashion."



The letter is dated July 29 and was posted on the Karrubi's Eetemade-Melli (National Trust) party's Web site, called Saham News. The Web site said the letter was posted after Rafsanjani failed to respond.



The treatment of detainees at Iran's prisons has increasingly become a high profile issue, with human-rights groups accusing guards of conducting harsh interrogations, beatings, sleep deprivation, and threats of torture to coerce false confessions.



Iranian media reported that Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, Iran's supreme leader, ordered one prison, Kahrizak, shut down amid reports it did not measure up to the required standards. Kahrizak's chief was fired and arrested over allegations of detainee mistreatment, according to local reports Saturday.



A special parliamentary committee has made rounds at Tehran's Evin prison, but did not find any signs of abuse, according to recent media reports. Hundreds of detainees have since been reportedly released from Evin, though "political figures" were held and put on trial.



In his plea for an investigation, Karrubi says he has heard descriptions of torture and violence that make his "body shake," though he doesn't specify a prison.



"Some of the former detainees have told of such brutal and violent, repeated rapes of the young women [in detention] that have caused irreparable damage to their reproductive systems," Karrubi says in the letter. "Others have raped our detained young men with such brutality that they [the victims] have been afflicted by depression and are no longer speaking with anyone and refuse to leave the dark corners of their houses."



He adds that an investigation will "teach a lesson to the thugs and criminals in the future and prevent the smearing of the reputation of the Islamic Republic."



Rafsanjani -- a former president and head of the Assembly of Experts, the council responsible for appointing or removing the supreme leader -- called for the release of the detainees during a highly anticipated July 17 sermon at Friday prayers.



He backed Iranian opposition leader Mir Hossein Moussavi in the presidential election, in which hardline President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad was declared the overwhelming winner. Karrubi and Moussavi unsuccessfully challenged the results for weeks, and Ahmadinejad was sworn in for his second term last week.



Rafsanjani himself has been accused of helping fuel the post-election unrest as part of recent mass trials of the remaining detainees over the past week.

***

(CNN) -- As tens of thousands of people cheered Barack Obama's presidential victory at his home base in Chicago, Illinois, others were celebrating near his future house.



People celebrate the victory of President-Elect Barack Obama outside the White House early Wednesday.



At least 1,000 people gathered on Washington's Pennsylvania Avenue in front of the White House late Tuesday night, shouting "Obama! Obama!" and "Yes we can!" Uniformed Secret Service officers were overheard, saying they'd never seen anything like it.



In Boston, Massachusetts, thousands of people -- many of them college students -- hit the streets to celebrate the election of the country's 44th president. The sound of car horns could be heard across the city, CNN affiliate WCVB reported. iReport.com: See, share your reaction



Boston police said the celebrations were peaceful, but they closed some streets to control the crowds, WCVB reported.



In Chicago's Grant Park, where police estimated at least 200,000 had gathered to hear Obama claim victory, the crowd erupted in cheers and screams after news organizations projected him the winner.  Watch Obama address the crowd »



One of them, Brian Braddy of Chicago, said he is a Republican-turned-Democrat.



"I believe in [Obama] because he's younger, so he sees things differently, I hope," Braddy said.



Talk-show host Oprah Winfrey was also among the thousands in attendance at the Chicago celebration.



"It feels like hope won," Winfrey said. "It feels like it's not just victory for  ... Barack Obama. It feels like America did the right thing.



"It feels like there's a shift in consciousness. It feels like something really big and bold has happened here -- like nothing ever in our lifetimes did we expect this to happen. It feels like anything is now possible."



In Harlem, New York, hundreds had gathered to watch election returns on a large screen in a plaza near the Apollo Theater. Many cheered or started making calls to relatives and friends when Obama's victory was announced.



Many there said they couldn't believe an African-American had been elected president in their lifetimes.  People were celebrating in the streets into the night in other cities, including San Francisco, California and Seattle, Washington. iReport.com: Obama win celebrated in Antarctica



In Atlanta, the Rev. Bernice King, youngest daughter of civil rights leader Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., hailed the first African-American president-elect. When asked what Obama's victory meant to her, she said it meant "that the work that my mother and father sacrificed for was not in vain."



"I was very touched tonight and moved to tears when I heard the announcement, and I know that this is something that my father would be proud of America for," King said. "He would be proud of the many young people who turned out at the polls to make this possible, and it's a new dawning ... in America."



Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton, Obama's main rival for the Democratic nomination for president, said Obama's win is a "historic victory for the American people."  See what people are saying about Obama's victory »



"In quiet, solitary acts of citizenship, American voters gave voice to their hopes and their values, voted for change, and refused to be invisible any longer," she said.



Sen. Edward Kennedy, D-Massachusetts, said "Americans spoke loud and clear and demanded change by electing Barack Obama as our next president."



"They understood his vision of a fairer and more just America and embraced it," Kennedy said. "They heard his call for a new generation of Americans to participate in government and were inspired. They believed that change is possible and voted to be part of America's future.



"Barack Obama is my friend and tonight, I'm very proud to call him my president. I look forward to working with him and Joe Biden on the many challenges facing our country here at home and

***

(CNN) -- The Cannes Film Festival entrusted its opening to a Pixar film, and the animation studio did not disappoint.



An adventurous boy and a cranky man travel by unusual means in the new Pixar film "Up."



Pixar, which has produced such gems as "Toy Story," "The Incredibles" and "WALL-E," introduced its latest feature, "Up," on Wednesday night at the French movie celebration.



By critics' reckonings, Pixar has never released a bad film, and those who saw "Up," its 10th feature, say the studio's perfect record is still intact.



The film is a "captivating odd-couple adventure that becomes funnier and more exciting as it flies along," wrote Variety's Todd McCarthy. "The two leading men are 78 and 8 years old, and the age range of those who will appreciate the picture is even a bit wider than that."  Gallery: Pixar in pictures »



"It's a terrific family adventure," wrote Peter Bradshaw of Britain's The Guardian. "The 3-D presentation gives it a real boost, but this film is airborne because of the traditional strengths: story, characterization and inventive animation with the old-fashioned values of clarity and simplicity."  See the excitement of Cannes' opening »



"Up" concerns Carl Fredericksen, a balloon seller voiced by Ed Asner. Faced with eviction after his wife dies, Fredericksen decides to uproot himself -- literally -- by attaching hundreds of balloons to his house and flying it to South America.



However, it turns out he's not alone. A stowaway -- a Junior Wilderness Explorer named Russell (voiced by Jordan Nagai) -- is in the house as well, and the two of them become mutually dependent after landing a continent away.



The film opens May 29 in the United States.



Cannes audiences are notoriously vocal. They'll whistle if they're unhappy -- a French version of a boo -- and a movie that doesn't meet the audience's high standards will be treated to the repeated "whop" sounds of theater seats banging shut as patrons leave.



"Up," on the other hand, received little but cheers. CNN's Natasha Curry, who's at the festival, reports a morning screening concluded with applause.



It's an unlikely film to be opening Cannes. Not only is it animated, it's animated by computer -- and, in some theaters, it will be shown in 3-D. Those are all firsts for a Cannes curtain raiser.



But the Los Angeles Times' Kenneth Turan told CNN that "Up" fits in with Cannes' aspirations.



"Cannes likes to be seen as innovative, likes to be seen as embracing something new," Turan observed. "But really the reason 'Up' is opening the festival is not because it's animated, not because it's 3-D, it's ... because it's a wonderful film. [Festival organizers] saw that, and I'm sure they liked the fact that they could do something avant-garde in terms of technique, but really it's a wonderful story, it's a terrific film and that's why it's opening."



Turan said he sees Pixar's work, and its recognition by Cannes, as another sign that animated features are among the best films being produced right now.



"The Pixar films, the Hayao Miyazaki films from Japan, the Wallace and Gromit films from Britain -- we're really living in the golden age of animation, one of the great ages of animation in the whole history of film," he said. "And Cannes is happy to be part of that. Cannes is happy to recognize that."



CNN's Matthew Carey contributed to this report.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- The decision to make "Che" was an easy one, Benicio Del Toro says. Filming the movie was anything but.



Benicio Del Toro stars as Latin American revolutionary Ernesto "Che" Guevara.



"I have to say it probably is the most difficult movie I've ever made, and I've made a few," Del Toro says of his starring role in director Steven Soderbergh's Spanish-language biopic.



One of Hollywood's most bankable stars, Del Toro has made a name for himself playing dark and brooding characters in movies like "21 Grams," "The Usual Suspects," and "Traffic," for which he won an Oscar.



He now adds to that list the role of revolutionary Ernesto "Che" Guevara, an Argentine doctor whose role in the Cuban Revolution in the 1950s vaulted him to cult status where he remains today.



To play the Latin American revolutionary, Del Toro says he had to start with the man himself rather than invent a character. He read what Che wrote and interviewed a range of people, including those who knew him when he was a child, as well as those who were there in his last days.



And then there were the countless photos of the iconic and controversial leader which he pored over. Looking at the pictures, seeing the attitude that he had in the photographs," he says, "I learned a lot from the photographs."



The meticulous study pays off on screen. Del Toro delivers a soulful performance that has earned him accolades. He won the Best Actor award at Cannes this year and he is being hotly tipped for another Oscar nod. Which films and actors do you think are contenders for this year's Oscars? Share your picks in the SoundOff below.



Che's life "is what movies are made of," Del Toro told CNN. The incredible story, along with the opportunity to work with Soderbergh, who directed him in 2000's "Traffic," for a second time drew him to the project.



The 41-year-old bilingual actor was born in Puerto Rico but grew up in Pennsylvania. It wasn't until he was in his early 20s and wandered into a bookstore in Mexico City that he discovered Che.



"I bought a compilation of his letters that he had written to his family and I read that book. I didn't know anything about this guy, so that started my journey," he recalls.  See how the movie was received in Cuba »



"Che" is split into two parts -- "The Argentine" and "Guerrilla." When shown in its entirety, the movie clocks in at a staggering 257 minutes. Part one charts Che's rise from young idealist to revolutionary hero during the Cuban Revolution. Part two depicts his efforts to bring change to all of Latin America and focuses on his campaign in Bolivia, where he died.



Shot in various locations ranging from the jungles of Bolivia to Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula, filming was grueling. "In this film, we went pretty fast," Del Toro says. "We went really fast."



Soderbergh wanted to film using only natural light, and production moved rapidly. On some days, Del Toro recounts, they only had 15 or 30 minutes to capture a scene.



One day of filming felt like a whole week of work, he says. "The way I felt on a Monday in this movie is the equivalent to how I felt at the end of the week of another movie."



Del Toro, who also co-produced the movie, isn't complaining though. He speaks with pride about the effort the cast and crew put in to the moviemaking process, which he describes as "hit and run."



"Che" is being released in two parts, but the epic is best viewed in its entirety, Del Toro says. "You'll get the full experience of what we went through, of the two movies together as one."



The full-length version of "Che" will have a limited opening in

***

NEW YORK (CNN)  -- The British are coming, the British are coming -- to Brooklyn? By subway?



Barclays has paid $300 million for the naming rights to the New Jersey Nets arena.



New York's struggling Metropolitan Transportation Authority has sold the naming rights to the second-busiest subway stop in Brooklyn. The Atlantic Avenue-Pacific Street Station will now have the name of a British bank, Barclays, added to it.



Several subway riders are outraged that Barclays has purchased the naming rights to this subway stop, which sees about 10 million people go through it each day.



One straphanger said, "A London Bank shouldn't be the name of this train station; it's something that belongs to the public domain."



Another said, "It's just everywhere we go, everything we do, it's just branding, branding, branding. It's America now."



Renaming the Atlantic-Pacific Station is tied to the construction of Barclays Center, the new sports arena for the National Basketball Association's New Jersey Nets.



Barclays is paying developer Forest City Ratner $300 million for naming rights to this arena. Ratner, in a separate deal, will be paying the Metropolitan Transportation Authority $200,000 a year for the next 20 years to rename this commuter hub.



Authority Press Secretary Jeremy Soffin said, "Like transit systems all over the U.S. and around the world, we are facing budget deficits."



In an effort to bridge the authority's $1 billion deficit, the transit giant that oversees the operation of the city's subways, buses and rail lines wants to follow the Barclays example with stations throughout the system.



Though the Atlantic-Pacific subway station is the first in New York for which naming rights have been sold, across the country, there have been several cases of public transportation systems using naming rights to increase revenue.



In 2003, the Las Vegas monorail system signed a 12-year, $50 million deal with Nextel to put its name on the station in the Las Vegas Convention Center. The Cleveland Bus System sold station names to two hospitals for $1.1 million a year.



Internationally, Dubai's Roads and Transport Authority has been selling the naming rights of 23 metro stations.



However, not all naming rights deals are successful. In 2001, the Massachusetts Bay Transit Authority tried to raise $22 million by auctioning the naming rights to four historic "T" stations. It received no bids.



Reassuring the public that there are certain lines they won't cross when it comes to renaming stations of historical value, Soffin said, "It's a very clear line there, and we want to be as open as possible, but we're not sort of selling the shop here."

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Without seeing the water, the weather, or even his own boat, Dick Lancaster  steered a 25-foot yacht to a silver medal at a sailing world championships this month.





Crews from Italy and Australia do battle in the recent Blind Sailing World Championships in New Zealand.





Lancaster's remarkable feat came at the recent Blind Sailing World Championships on Lake Rotorua, New Zealand. His silver medal added to two golds he has won at previous championships.





The New Zealander, who gradually lost sight until he became completely blind in the last couple of years, is also the chairman of Blind Sailing New Zealand.





Lancaster told CNN that sailing for the blind and visually-impaired is growing around the world. There is also hope that the sport may get its own category at the Paralympics.





"This year's event was as big as it has ever been. We had ten countries represented and most countries sent three teams."





Attendance would have been stronger had it not been for the challenging financial climate, which had prevented some nations from traveling to New Zealand for the event, he said.





Since the inaugural world championships in 1992, events have been held in Australia, the U.S., the United Kingdom, Italy and New Zealand.





At this world championships Lancaster was sailing in the "B1" class which is for the blind, while the "B2" and "B3" classes have lesser levels of visual impairment.





So, how exactly do blind and visually-impaired people manage to sail a large racing boat?





Lancaster explained that it is not as difficult as it may sound.





"We sail with a four man crew. There is a blind person at the helm and another blind person on the mainsheet. There is also a sighted tactician, who's not allowed to touch anything, and a fourth sighted crew member.





"The most challenging thing for me has been the last few years when I have gone from B2 to B1 (blind). You have to rely on your feel a lot more now,"he said.





Even though he is unable to see, Lancaster says it's not impossible.





"There are plenty of people who sail at night-time -- so it's not too difficult."





Contrary what many may presume, Lancaster said there were not too many crashes during races, though some areas of the course were challenging.





"At the start line and when you're going around a mark it gets pretty exciting at times. There's inevitably a few prangs on the water -- but I don't know if there's any more than in other sailing."





New Zealand won the overall team trophy at the event.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- The Central Intelligence Agency hired the private security firm Blackwater USA in 2004 to work on a covert program aimed at targeting and potentially killing top al Qaeda leaders, according to a source familiar with the program.



CIA Director Leon Panetta canceled the covert program this year when he learned of its full scope.



The existence of the program, which began in 2001, came to light earlier this year when CIA Director Leon Panetta canceled the effort, but it is only now that Blackwater's involvement has become known.



That development was first reported Thursday in The New York Times.



The program was part of a broader effort inside the CIA to develop the capacity to conduct training, surveillance and possible covert operations overseas, according to the source. The program was outsourced to contractors to "put some distance" between the effort and the U.S. government.



By mid-2006, Blackwater's involvement in the program had ended, according to a U.S. official. Other contractors were brought in for other parts of the program, another source said.



The total program cost "millions," a U.S. official said. It is not known how much Blackwater was paid. The company -- now known as Xe -- did not return CNN's calls seeking comment.



"The program ebbed and flowed. There were different phases to it. There may have been different folks involved," the source said.



U.S. officials have previously acknowledged that Panetta canceled the entire program this year when he learned of its full scope. At the time of the cancellation, officials said, renewal of the program was being considered. At that point, it had been brought to the new CIA director's attention.



Panetta canceled the effort in part because Congress had not been notified about it, officials said. Also, some in the intelligence community were worried there could be a diplomatic disaster if contractors were caught performing such work in foreign countries.



Former CIA Director Michael Hayden, who ran the agency from 2006 to 2009, downplayed the program during a speaking engagement in Washington.



"This was not a very prominent thing during my time as director," Hayden said. "What you had were three separate efforts under three different directors to deal with an issue that everyone understood was a problem in a capacity that everyone agreed we should have."



A spokesman for the CIA would not comment on the details of the still-classified program.



"Director Panetta thought this effort should be briefed to Congress, and he did so," spokesman George Little said. "He also knew it hadn't been successful, so he ended it. Neither decision was difficult. This was clear and straightforward.



"Director Panetta did not tell the committees that the agency had misled the Congress or had broken the law. He decided that the time had come to brief Congress on a counterterrorism effort."



Blackwater's extensive involvement in U.S. operations overseas, particularly in Iraq, has been controversial. The Iraqi government says that in a shooting in September 2007, Blackwater security guards killed 17 Iraqi civilians. Blackwater says its employees were returning fire after they were attacked by armed insurgents, but an Iraqi investigation concluded that the guards randomly fired at civilians without provocation.



The incident led to the Iraqi government's refusal to renew the firm's operating license in the country when it expired in May.



Although it lost the Iraq contract, the company, which changed its name to Xe earlier this year, continued to get multimillion-dollar contracts from the U.S. government for work in Afghanistan.

***

BAGHDAD, Iraq (CNN) -- Iraq's most powerful Sunni Arab political party on Monday said a U.S. soldier's desecration of the Quran, the Muslim holy book, requires the "severest of punishments," not just an apology and a military reassignment.



Maj. Gen. Jeffery Hammond apologizes after a U.S. soldier admitted using the Quran for target practice.



The Iraqi Islamic Party, the movement of Iraqi Vice President Tariq al-Hashimi, condemned what it said was a "blatant assault on the sanctities of Muslims all over the world."



An American staff sergeant who was a sniper section leader used a Quran for target practice on May 9.



The U.S. commander in Baghdad on Saturday issued a formal apology and read a letter of apology from the shooter.



The sergeant has been relieved of duty as a section leader "with prejudice," officially reprimanded by his commanding general, dismissed from his regiment and redeployed -- reassigned to the United States.



But the Iraqi Islamic Party -- which said it reacted to the news "with deep resentment and indignation" -- wants the "severest of punishments" for the action.



"What truly concerns us is the repetition of these crimes that have happened in the past when mosques were destroyed and pages of the Holy Quran were torn and used for disgraceful acts by U.S. soldiers," al-Hashimi said.



"I have asked that first this apology be officially documented; second a guarantee from the U.S. military to inflict the maximum possible punishment on this soldier so it would be a deterrent for the rest of the soldiers in the future."



A tribal leader said "the criminal act by U.S. forces" took place at a shooting range at the Radhwaniya police station on Baghdad's western outskirts. After the shooters left, an Iraqi policeman found a target marked in the middle of the bullet-riddled Quran.  Read how the soldier could have provoked a crisis



Copies of the pictures of the Quran obtained by CNN show multiple bullet holes and an expletive scrawled on one of its pages.



On Saturday, Maj. Gen. Jeffery Hammond, commander of U.S. forces in Baghdad, appeared at an apology ceremony flanked by leaders from Radhwaniya.  Watch as the U.S. formally apologizes »



"I come before you here seeking your forgiveness," Hammond said to tribal leaders and others gathered. "In the most humble manner, I look in your eyes today, and I say please forgive me and my soldiers."



Another military official kissed a Quran and presented it as "a humble gift" to the tribal leaders.



Hammond also read from the shooter's letter: "I sincerely hope that my actions have not diminished the partnership that our two nations have developed together. ... My actions were shortsighted, very reckless and irresponsible, but in my heart [the actions] were not malicious."



Hammond said, "The actions of one soldier were nothing more than criminal behavior. I've come to this land to protect you, to support you -- not to harm you -- and the behavior of this soldier was nothing short of wrong and unacceptable."



The soldier reportedly claimed he wasn't aware the book was the Quran, but U.S. officials rejected his assertion.



Tribal leaders, dignitaries and local security officials attended the ceremony, while residents carried banners and chanted slogans, including, "Yes, yes to the Quran" and "America out, out."  Watch as villagers protest the Quran incident »



Sheikh Hamadi al-Qirtani, in a speech on behalf of all tribal sheikhs of Radhwaniya, called the shooting "aggression against the entire Islamic world."



The Association of Muslim Scholars in Iraq also condemned the shooter's actions and the U.S. military's belated acknowledgment of what happened.



"As the Association of Muslim Scholars condemns this heinous crime against God's holy book, the constitution of this nation, a source of pride and dignity," the group's statement said, "they condemned the silence by all those who are part of the occupation's agenda and holds the occupation and the current government fully responsible for this violation and reminds everyone

***

WASHINGTON (CNN)  -- The Bush administration misused intelligence to build a case for the U.S.-led invasion of Iraq in 2003, the Senate Intelligence Committee said in a report issued Thursday.



President Bush didn't request intelligence reports about the post-war situation, the Senate panel's report says.



The White House exploited its ability to declassify intelligence selectively to bolster its case for war, the committee chairman, Sen. John D. Rockefeller IV, D-West Virginia, said in the report.



Senior officials disclosed and discussed sensitive intelligence reports that supported the administration's policy objectives and kept out of public discourse information that did not, he said.



The report also found that the administration misled the American people about contacts between Saddam Hussein and al Qaeda.



"Policymakers' statements did not accurately convey the intelligence assessments" about contacts between the then-Iraqi leader and Osama bin Laden's group, "and left the impression that the contacts led to substantive Iraqi cooperation or support of al Qaeda," the report said.



"Statements and implications by the president and secretary of state suggesting that Iraq and al Qaeda had a partnership, or that Iraq had provided al Qaeda with weapons training, were not substantiated by the intelligence," according to the committee's exhaustive report on prewar intelligence.



The top Republican on the committee dismissed its findings as "partisan gamesmanship."



"It is ironic that the Democrats would knowingly distort and misrepresent the committee's findings and the intelligence in an effort to prove that the administration distorted and mischaracterized the intelligence," said Sen. Christopher Bond of Missouri.



The White House also rejected the report as old news.



"I know this is another report, and I'm sure that they put a lot of considerable thought into it, but this is a subject that has been gone over many many, many times, and I don't know of anything that's particularly new in it," said spokeswoman Dana Perino, who said she had not yet read it.



She said the White House relied on the same information as the rest of the world, admitting that it was wrong but denying that Bush had set out to mislead the country.



White House claims that Hussein was seeking weapons of mass destruction were partially backed by available intelligence, the report found, but did not reflect disputes within the intelligence community.



The CIA, among others, believed Iraq was trying to acquire nuclear weapons, but the Department of Energy disagreed, the report said.



No weapons of mass destruction were found in Iraq after the invasion.



The report also took the administration to task for its predictions about the aftermath of the invasion, including Vice President Dick Cheney's assertion that U.S. troops would be greeted as liberators.



Bush and Cheney did not request intelligence reports about the post-war situation, and their public statements did not reflect doubts and uncertainties in the intelligence community, the report said.



The report comes days after former White House press spokesman Scott McClellan published a book saying Bush decided on war with Iraq soon after the September 11, 2001, attacks.



"Bush and his advisers knew that the American people would almost certainly not support a war launched primarily for the ambitious purpose of transforming the Middle East. Rather than open this Pandora's Box, the administration chose a different path -- not employing out-and-out deception, but shading the truth," McClellan wrote in his memoir, "What Happened."



Current and former White House officials have dismissed McClellan's accusations, saying he was not in a position to know about top-level White House decision-making before the war when he was deputy press secretary.



The Senate committee chairman slammed the White House in a statement marking the release of the long-awaited report.



"Before taking the country to war, this administration owed it to the American people to give them a 100 percent accurate picture of the threat we faced," Rockefeller said Thursday.



"Unfortunately, our committee has concluded that the administration made significant claims that were not supported by the intelligence. In making the case for war,

***

(CNN) -- U.S. President Barack Obama met with his NATO allies in Strasbourg, France on Friday to talk about his plans for the war in Afghanistan, his "front line in the war on terror."

Protesters outside the White House in February have a simple idea for the controversial prison.

But the U.S. war on terror has some dark secrets and Obama hasn't really wanted to talk about them.

In Spain, a crusading judge named Baltasar Garzon is reviewing the case of several men who say they were tortured at the U.S. prison in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

In Washington, Senator Patrick Leahy has been asking similar questions that people around the world want answered:

Did the U.S. really torture prisoners, did it secretly transfer some to other countries specifically to be tortured and did senior officials authorize it?

Leahy says: "We can't turn the page unless we first read the page."

There are ample grounds to believe crimes were committed.

Individual prisoners have described being tortured in U.S. custody or being dispatched to other nations with the same terrible result.

An investigation by the International Committee of the Red Cross also reported evidence of it.

While he was in office, George W. Bush said flatly "the United States does not torture."

But the Bush administration defined 'torture' so narrowly that its use of the word has been contested as well.

The effort to find out just what happened has been moving slowly, both inside and outside the United States.

The Obama administration hasn't encouraged it.

Obama said recently that "generally speaking, I'm more interested in looking forward than looking backwards."

That's easy to understand. Millions of Americans are grateful to America's ex-president and his aides, as well as U.S. soldiers and spies, for keeping the country safe after 9/11.

Any investigations or potential prosecutions could set off a national debate complicating everything else Obama wants to accomplish.

But the U.S. has signed international treaties on torture and war crimes, suggesting it's legally obligated to prosecute any cases that come to light.

Countries in Europe, Africa and the Americas have found a way to face their secret crimes.

The United States has to decide if it wants to take its own turn.

***

(CNN) -- Caroline Kennedy, who spent most of her life looking to steer clear of the spotlight, is capping off a year of unusually public -- and political -- activity with interest in the Senate seat that would be vacated by Secretary of State-designate Hillary Clinton.

Caroline Kennedy could join her uncle Edward in the United States Senate.

And her interest in that seat could mean the continuation of a Kennedy legacy in the Senate that began 56 years ago with the election of her father, John F. Kennedy, as the junior senator from Massachusetts.

Her uncle Edward has represented Massachusetts in the Senate for more than four decades. Her uncle Robert served as junior senator from New York from 1965 until he was assassinated in 1968.

"Remember, [Clinton's] seat in the Senate was once held by Robert Kennedy," CNN Senior Political Analyst Bill Schneider said Saturday. "Her other uncle, Ted Kennedy, is ill right now. If [New York Gov. David] Paterson appoints Caroline Kennedy to the Senate, it means there could be a Kennedy staying in the Senate for quite a long time."

And a Senate appointment for Caroline Kennedy would mark a change for the woman who has rarely run into the glare of political attention.

"Apparently, she has acquired a taste for politics, having endorsed Barack Obama early this year," Schneider said. "She wants to be part of this new regime in America, clearly playing a key role in the Senate if she gets that appointment."  Watch CNN's Bill Schnieder discuss Caroline Kennedy's prospects Â»

Widely described as extraordinarily shy, self-deprecating and down-to-earth, Kennedy has tended to limit her forays into the public sphere to nonpartisan activity, penning books on civil liberties and serving as the de facto guardian of her father's legacy.

But in January, she backed a political candidate for the first time, announcing her endorsement of Obama during the Democratic primary season with an opinion piece in the New York Times that drew days of the kind of media attention she has spent her life avoiding.

"I have never had a president who inspired me the way people tell me that my father inspired them," she wrote. "But for the first time, I believe I have found the man who could be that president -- not just for me, but for a new generation of Americans."

Kennedy willingly lingered in the spotlight, serving on Obama's vice presidential search team, speaking at the Democratic National Convention and stumping for him through the primary and general election seasons.

In a campaign ad that featured video images of her father followed by images of Obama, Kennedy said, "People always tell me how my father inspired them. I feel that same excitement now."

There are a slew of high-profile candidates for Clinton's Senate seat -- including Attorney General Andrew Cuomo, whose last name carries some star power of its own in the Empire State -- but their odds grew just a bit steeper when stacked against the wattage of a storied Democratic dynasty.

Robert Kennedy was elected to the Senate with few ties to his adopted home state, but his niece's New York roots run deep.

Jacqueline Kennedy relocated to New York City after her husband's assassination in 1963, with children Caroline and John F. Kennedy Jr.

Caroline Kennedy has spent most of her life in the city, working there after graduating from Harvard, meeting her husband, Edwin Schlossberg, on the job at the Metropolitan Museum of Art and attending Columbia Law School there.

Her most prominent public roles to date involved overseeing her father's presidential library and presenting the annual Profiles in Courage Award.

She's also edited several books, from a volume of children's poetry and an updated edition of her father's book "Profiles in Courage" to a collection of patriotic verse ("A Patriot's Handbook: Songs, Poems, Stories, and Speeches Celebrating the Land We Love.")

Most of her leadership positions have been based in the arts: hosting the annual nationally televised Kennedy Center Honors in Washington and

***

Smokers with high levels of a carcinogen byproduct (NNAL) are at higher risk of developing lung cancer.



Smoking is a lot like Russian roulette: You never know who will end up developing lung cancer and who won't. But Dr. Jian-Min Yuan, as well as other researchers from the University of Minnesota, say they are one step closer to determining a smoker's risk for developing the disease. In a study, they tracked the carcinogen and nicotine levels in nearly 500 smokers through a simple urine test and discovered a link between the level of a specific carcinogen and lung cancer. Their findings were presented at the American Association for Cancer Research conference.



Why did researchers track only  the levels of one carcinogen?



We all know that tobacco smoke is bad: It's loaded with 60 different carcinogens, which cause all sorts of health risks. There is one carcinogen in particular that researchers suspected for years contributed to human lung cancer. But there were never any scientific human studies showing this relationship. This carcinogen is known as NNK. It releases into your body when you inhale smoke, quickly passes through the liver, gets metabolized and releases NNAL, a byproduct of NNK, into the bloodstream. University of Minnesota researchers were tracking the NNAL levels via urine samples.  Watch Dr. Gupta explain the findings »



How much did a person have to smoke to develop high levels of NNAL?



The exact amount is a little tricky to determine because a lot depends on how honest a person is about how many cigarettes he or she smoked per day. Additionally, the type of cigarette and how deeply a person inhales could affect the amount of carcinogens in the body. Researchers say a person with high levels of NNAL and high levels of nicotine (equivalent to smoking about a pack of cigarettes a day) is 8.5 times more likely to develop lung cancer compared with a smoker with lower levels. While the researchers point out that not everyone who has a high level of NNAL is going to develop lung cancer, it does help assign a number to a risk that was hard to quantify before.



Isn't smoking bad for you regardless? What is the benefit of having this type of information?



There is nothing healthy about smoking. Even if this test pegs you at low risk of developing lung cancer, it doesn't mean you won't develop a dozen other cancers commonly cause by smoking. If you smoke, the No. 1 thing you should do is quit. But that is easier said than done. If it were easy, 23 percent of adults in the United States would not smoke regularly. One benefit of knowing whether a smoker is at increased risk for lung cancer is for his or her doctor to screen the person regularly for abnormalities, in the hopes of catching the cancer early.



Lung cancer is but one consequence of smoking, so this type of testing is not going to fix everything. But as far as lung cancer goes, it may give people a better idea of when and how often to get screened.



Reported by CNN's Danielle Dellorto

***

(CNN) -- Fourteen alleged members of the Gambino crime family have been indicted on charges including murder, racketeering, prostitution of minors and trying to locate and intimidate a sequestered jury, the U.S. attorney for the Southern District of Manhattan, New York, said Tuesday.





"Today, the Gambino family has lost one of its leaders, and many of its rising stars have now fallen," U.S. Attorney Preet Bharara said. "We will continue to work with our partners at the FBI to eradicate the mafia and to keep organized crime from victimizing the businesses and the people of this city."





Twelve people, including Daniel Marino, named by the U.S. attorney as the current boss of the Gambino crime family, were arrested Tuesday morning. One was arrested last week, and another was at large Tuesday afternoon, Bharara's office said.





Marino has been charged with murder in various cases, including the 1989 killing of Thomas Spinelli, a member of the family who testified before a federal grand jury about the mafia's members and activities.





The other defendants, who authorities say include some high-ranking members of the Gambino crime family, also have serious charges brought against them.





Onofrio Modica is charged with jury tampering, which stems from 1992, when then-boss John J. Gotti was on trial on federal racketeering and murder charges. According to the U.S. attorney, Modica and other members of the Gambino family tried to locate the anonymous, sequestered jurors sitting on the trial. Modica was able to penetrate security measures and locate the hotel where the jury was sequestered, but the plan was called off after Gotti decided that the jury would not convict him, authorities allege.





The U.S. attorney alleges several of the defendants also operated a prostitution business from 2008 to 2009, where young women and girls as young as 15 allegedly were recruited to be prostitutes and advertised on websites such as Craigslist. According to Bharara, the defendants drove the women to their appointments and kept approximately half the money paid to them. The women allegedly were made available for sex to gamblers at weekly high-stakes poker games that authorities say were run by the defendants.





Read how rare it is for women and children to be involved





A press release from Bharara's office detailed the other charges against the defendants, including extortion; assault; trafficking of narcotics, such as cocaine, OxyContin and marijuana; wire fraud, which includes the alleged defrauding of several high-end New York restaurants by inflating invoice costs; loansharking; and gambling.





"This case shows that it's still about making money illegally, by whatever means," FBI Special Agent-in-Charge George Venizelos said. "No crime seemed too depraved to be exploited if it was a money-maker, including the sexual exploitation of a 15-year-old."





According to the U.S. attorney's office, the fourteen defendants are Marino, Modica, Thomas Orefice, Dominick DiFiore, Anthony Manzella, Michael Scotto, Michael Scarpaci, Thomas Scarpaci, David Eisler, Salvatore Borgia, Steve Maiurro, Keith Dellitalia, Suzanne Porcelli and Anthony Vecchione.





Maiurro remains at large. The 13 defendants all entered not guilty pleas on Tuesday, according to the U.S. attorney's office, and they are expected to appear Wednesday before a federal judge who has been appointed to the case.

***

BAGHDAD, Iraq (CNN)  -- The remains of two U.S. contractors who were kidnapped in Iraq have been found, FBI officials said Monday.



The bureau identified the two as Ronald Withrow of Roaring Springs, Texas, abducted on January 5, 2007, and John Roy Young of Kansas City, Missouri, who was captured on November 16, 2006.



Withrow worked for Las Vegas, Nevada-based JPI Worldwide Inc., and Young worked for Crescent Security Group.



The FBI said it had notified the families of the contractors.



Meanwhile, four U.S. soldiers died Sunday night in a roadside bombing in Iraq, military officials reported, bringing the American toll in the 5-year-old war to 4,000 deaths.



The four were killed when a homemade bomb hit their vehicle as they patrolled in a southern Baghdad neighborhood, the U.S. military headquarters in Iraq said. A fifth soldier was wounded.



The grim milestone comes less than a week after the fifth anniversary of the start of the war.



"No casualty is more or less significant than another; each soldier, Marine, airman and sailor is equally precious and their loss equally tragic," said Rear Adm. Gregory Smith, the U.S. military's chief spokesman in Iraq.



"Every single loss of a soldier, sailor, airman or Marine is keenly felt by military commanders, families and friends both in theater and at home."



Of the 4,000 U.S. military personnel killed in the war, 3,263 have died in attacks and fighting and 737 in nonhostile incidents, such as traffic accidents and suicides. Eight of those killed were civilians working for the Pentagon. The numbers are based on Pentagon data counted by CNN.  Check out a company that makes headstones for fallen U.S. troops »



President Bush made remarks about lives lost in Iraq at the State Department on Monday.



"One day, people will look back at this moment in history and say, 'Thank God there were courageous people willing to serve, because they laid the foundations for peace for generations to come,' " he said. "I have vowed in the past and I will vow so long as I'm president to make sure that those lives were not lost in vain; that, in fact, there's an outcome that will merit the sacrifice that civilian and military alike have made."



Also Sunday, at least 35 Iraqis died as the result of suicide bombings, mortar fire and the work of gunmen in cars who opened fire on a crowded outdoor market. Nearly 100 were wounded in the violence.



Estimates of the Iraqi death toll since the war began range from about 80,000 to the hundreds of thousands.  Watch an Iraqi family talk about faith in a war zone »



Another 2 million Iraqis have been forced to leave the country, and 2.5 million have been displaced from their homes within Iraq, according to the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees.



Many of the Iraqis and U.S. troops killed over the years, like the four soldiers slain Sunday in Baghdad, have been targeted by improvised explosive devices -- the roadside bombs that have come to symbolize Iraq's tenacious insurgency.  Watch how the bombs have become a deadly staple »



The Pentagon's Joint Improvised Explosive Device Defeat Organization has been developed to counter the threat of roadside bombs in Iraq as well as Afghanistan. The group calls such bombs the "weapon of choice for adaptive and resilient networks of insurgents and terrorists."



Nearly 160,000 U.S. troops remain in Iraq, and the war has cost U.S. taxpayers about $600 billion, according to the House Budget Committee.



Senior U.S. military officials are preparing to recommend to Bush a four- to six-week pause in additional troop withdrawals from Iraq after the last of the so-called surge brigades leaves in July, CNN learned last week from U.S. military officials familiar with the recommendations but not authorized to talk about them.



The return of all five brigades added to the Iraq contingent last year could reduce troop levels by up to 30,000 but still leave about 130,000 or more troops in Iraq.



Also Monday, the U.S. military said six people killed in a weekend attack were "terrorists

***

(CNN) -- The blog "Stuff White People Like" is wildly popular with fans who've embraced the hilarious, satirical sendup of the white middle class that -- according to the list -- have an ongoing love affair with things such as coffee (No. 1), organic food (No. 6), yoga (15) and the Toyota Prius (60).

Blogger-turned-author Christian Lander is the force behind "Stuff White People Like."

The site also has spurred an outpouring from those who view it as offensive and racist.

Now devotees and detractors alike have more to discuss with the release of the book "Stuff White People Like: A Definitive Guide to the Unique Taste of Millions" by the blog's creator, Christian Lander.

Filled with photos and some content from the blog, the guide includes new entries exclusive to the book.

Lander also worked with a designer to create things such as flow charts on "How to Name a White Child" and "White Career Trajectories" as well as a test of the reader's "whiteness."

As befitting the genius behind such a site and book, Lander is a bit of a ham (actually, make that Canadian bacon since he hails from Toronto, Ontario).  Watch Lander talk about what he likes »

The origins of "Stuff" date from January 2008, he said, because of an instant messenger conversation between him and his friend Miles about the HBO drama "The Wire." Miles, who is Filipino, tossed off that he didn't trust any white person who didn't watch the series.

That exchange started a back-and-forth between the two about what white people were doing instead of watching the show.

"We said, 'Oh, they are going to plays, they're doing yoga, they're getting divorced,' " recalled Lander, who couldn't pass up the gold mine of ideas and started blogging. "The goal was to literally make Miles and a few of my friends laugh, and it just took off."

Within six weeks, Random House came calling, and a book deal was finalized.

CNN talked to the blogger-turned-author about his "whiteness," whether he is like Stephen Colbert but instead mocks earnest, left-wing types, and why "Stuff White People Like" will never make the list of "Stuff White People Like."

CNN: Where do you get your ideas?

Christian Lander: Farmers' markets.

CNN: How do you get your ideas at farmers' markets?

Lander: Keeping my eyes open. I just see what people are up to. And the mirror is another good place to look for inspiration. I really make fun of myself.

CNN: So what makes you an authority on white people?

Lander: Look at me [laughing]. I mean, I have liberal arts degrees; I look like this. I'm on the inside.

CNN: Do you ever worry about offending people?

Lander: No. I'm glad when I offend people with this because it's not offensive. What's been great about it is the title draws people in, and right away they are like, "What is this? Am I going to get offended by this?" Then they read it, and it's not what they expect. People see the title and they expect "Stuff White People Like" to be entries like mayonnaise, or dancing poorly, these old stereotypes that are really outdated and aren't even funny anymore.

You're sort of expecting it to be the lame white guy stuff and you go, "Oh my God, this is all the stuff I actually like." It's playing off white stereotypes, but it's not stereotypes in a demeaning way.

CNN: If those are old stereotypes, could your stuff be considered "new stereotypes"?

Lander: No, because they're true [laughing]. I consider these valid observations. It's an update on this idea of a yuppie.

***

CAMP VICTORY, Iraq -- Stephen Colbert left no doubt about his solidarity with American troops when he taped the first of four Comedy Central shows he'll produce in Iraq this week.



Stephen Colbert high-fives a serviceman after submitting to a military-style haircut in Iraq on Sunday.



Colbert, wearing a business suit made of the same camouflaged material used for soldiers' desert uniforms, submitted to a regulation military haircut as hundreds of U.S. troops cheered wildly Sunday.



The comedian, who satirizes conservative TV pundits on his "Colbert Report," began his "Operation Iraqi Stephen: Going Commando" USO tour Sunday in the Baghdad headquarters of the U.S.-led military coalition in Iraq.



"It must be nice in Iraq, because some of you keep coming back again and again," Colbert said, joking about the multiple tours many troops have had in Iraq since the 2003 invasion. Some troops had accumulated enough frequent flyer miles to earn them a free ticket to Afghanistan, he joked.



Colbert told his guest, Gen. Ray Odierno, he felt "a little intimidated" by him, not because he was he top U.S. commander in Iraq, but because it felt like he was "interviewing Shrek." Odierno is an imposing bald figure at 6-feet, 5-inches tall.



Odierno said the military is "not yet ready to declare victory" in Iraq and that there was a little more work to be done for long-term stability.



"I, Stephen Colbert, by the power invested in me by basic cable, officially declare we won the Iraq war," Colbert said, as his audience broke out into applause.



The interview was interrupted when President Obama appeared on large television screens. The commander-in-chief told his general it was time to "cut that man's hair."



With white electric hair clippers in his hand, Odierno stood up and began shaving Colbert's trademark thick dark hair. The troops stood and cheered as a female member of Colbert's staff finished the job.



After the haircut, Colbert ran through the audience, high-fiving the troops as he showed off his new military look.



One Army major said that "shaving of the hair is an amazing show of support" that was "very touching."



Former Republican presidential nominee Sen. John McCain also made a pre-taped appearance on the show, jokingly reminding the troops to "take time to clean your muskets."



Lt. Col. Debra Shoemaker, a native of Colbert's hometown of Charleston, South Carolina, said the show was a "nice break" from the monotony of service in Iraq.



USO Senior Vice President John Hanson said the shows are an important diversion for the troops.



Colbert's USO tour is unusual because it's the first time a show taped in a combat zone has been edited and aired so quickly. The Sunday show will be televised on the Comedy Central network Monday night.

***

(CNN) -- The Arctic as we know it may soon be a thing of the past.



Musk ox in the Arctic check the spread of shrubs to the High Arctic, but promote grass growth.



That's the message from Eric Post, lead scientist of a new report into the effects of climate change on life in the Arctic.



Published in "Science" magazine, Post and his team of international scientist conducted the study during the fourth International Polar Year that ended in 2008.



"It seems no matter where you look -- on the ground, in the air, or in the water -- we're seeing signs of rapid change," said Post in a press statement.



The report found that flora and fauna of the Arctic are responding in various ways to the region's changes in climate over the last 150 years, and more recently the 20 to 30 years where seasonal minimal sea ice coverage has declined by 45,000 square kilometers per year.



With the decline in sea ice and snow, animals usually seen at lower latitudes are being found in more northerly regions, including red foxes that have been displacing native Arctic foxes.  View the gallery of Arctic life affected by climate change »



The report found that some native Arctic species have also benefited from climate change, including wild reindeer on the Norwegian archipelago of Svalbard.



With less snow cover and a longer growing season, these non-migratory reindeer have taken advantage of the increased plant abundance, with the result that reindeer populations and their ability to reproduce are up, while mortality is down.



But other animals are not adapting well to rising temperatures and the effect on delicate ecosystems.



Migratory caribou in low Arctic Greenland and elsewhere are declining in number as they have not been able to keep their calving season in synch with changes in plant growth.



With the decline in caribou comes a knock-on effect to native Inuit hunters, according to the report's authors. Hotter summers could result in more insects and parasites that prey on the caribou, which could then also reduce the annual caribou harvest by local indigenous peoples.



"Inuit hunters at my study site in Greenland have all but given up on hunting caribou there. What will be the next component to disappear from their traditional lifestyle, a lifestyle that has worked for thousands of years?" said Post.



Iconic Arctic animals dependent sea ice, including Pacific walrus, ringed seal, hooded seal, ivory gull, narwhal and polar bear, are faring especially badly, said the report.



The researchers found that polar bears and ringed seals, both of which give birth in lairs or caves under the snow, lose many newborn pups when the lairs collapse in unusually early spring rains. These species may be headed for extinction, said the report.

***

Los Angeles (CNN)  -- Keep debating whether video games are art if you wish. At E3, the world's biggest gaming expo, it's a closed question. Here, video games are definitely art -- and a gallery-style exhibit aims to prove it to as many people as care to look.





"Into the Pixel," a juried art show now in its eighth year, opened on Tuesday, showcasing work that supporters say is finally receiving its just due in the sometimes-cloistered art world.





"There actually is no line at all between the video-game artist and the fine-art world," said Nora Dolan, an independent curator who has worked at galleries including the Ansel Adams Museum in San Francisco and the Whitney Museum in New York and was one of the jurors for the show.





"There's no difference to me. This is as high-quality an exhibit as could be."





Seventeen images were selected for the show out of hundreds of submissions. After showing at the Electronic Entertainment Expo, the exhibit will spend the next year traveling to festivals and conventions around the world.





As may be expected, there were dragons and spaceships, creepy monsters and brave heroes depicted in the show. But other pieces might not be pegged as video-game images at all if not for the setting.





"Oktonok Cay Cannery," by David Guertin from the game "Ratchet & Clank: All 4 One," is a rendering of a highly abstracted shipyard that wouldn't look out of place next to work by Salvador Dali.





"The Pelican," by Andrew Kim from "Uncharted 3: Drake's Deception," is a detailed look at the interior of an empty and vaguely ominous East End London pub.





The prints on display at the opening in the Los Angeles Convention Center were created for video games that range from massive hits from major companies to small, independent games. Some were touched up slightly for their gallery debut, but many are directly lifted from gameplay.





Tyler Breon's entry, "Cronos Battle," from last year's "God of War III," depicts an enormous monster hulking over the game's main character, peering down at him with a look hovering somewhere between perplexed and annoyed.





Breon, a senior character artist for Sony, had his first gallery showing at "Into the Pixel." Video-game art, like other emerging art forms, needed time to earn wider acceptance, he said.





"You look at all kinds of media that were new -- anything that's new, people aren't really comfortable with initially," he said, citing the way comic-book art is now taken seriously, but only after decades of scorn. "I think the longer they're exposed to it, they come to be more comfortable with it."





The past year may have been a turning point in the art world's comfort with video games. The Smithsonian Institution announced that, in 2012, it will be opening "The Art of Video Games," an exhibition spanning four decades of gaming images.





And, last month, the National Endowment for the Arts announced video games would join film, radio and other media that are eligible for government support.





"There are signs that this is really happening," said Martin Rae, president of the Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences which, along with the Entertainment Software Association, sponsors "Into the Pixel."





"We now have a realization within the government that what we do is art," Rae said.





Rae compares video-game art to photography. In its infancy, art communities dismissed photo-taking as a simple act of point-and-shoot, merely copying an image that already existed.





"I think we had the same thing here," he said. "But the public is catching up."





By showcasing the work in "Into the Pixel," Rae and others hope to speed that process.





"Every time traditional fine arts people look at what we have in our industry,

***

SEATTLE, Washington (CNN) -- A pathologist hired by the family of one of two women whose mysterious deaths in Thailand drew worldwide attention says her "lungs were 100 percent congested," Jill St. Onge's fiancee and brother said.



Jill St. Onge died while vacationing with her fiance at a Thailand resort.



"He said her lung tissue was gone," said her brother, Robert St. Onge.



The pathologist has not determined what caused her lungs to fail, he said, and a final report on her May 2 death may still be weeks away.



But members of St. Onge's family said they feel the pathologist's findings, though preliminary, are enough to contradict public statements made by Thai investigators that St. Onge was the victim of food poisoning.



"I am 99.9 percent sure she did not die of food poisoning," said Ryan Kells, St. Onge's fiancee, who was with her when she died. "She suffocated to death. I am not a doctor, but I know when someone can't breathe."



Kells and St. Onge, both artists from Seattle, were on a three-month vacation through Southeast Asia when they arrived on Thailand's Phi Phi Island.



They had gotten engaged while on the trip and were keeping friends and family up to date with their adventures.



"Having a blast," Jill St. Onge, 27, wrote about the surroundings in a blog dedicated to the couple's travels. "Food, drink, sun and warm waters ... what else do ya need?"



The couple's vacation ended tragically when Kells found his fiancee in their hotel room vomiting and unable to breathe. He rushed her to a hospital where she died.



St. Onge was healthy and there was no obvious explanation for her sudden death, her brother said.



Just hours after St. Onge fell ill, Julie Bergheim, a Norwegian tourist who was staying in a room next to St. Onge's at the Laleena Guesthouse, came down with similar symptoms. She also died.



According to Thai media reports, police there are focusing on food poisoning as the cause of the women's deaths. On Monday, the Phuket Gazette quoted a police commander as saying blood samples from both women indicated possible food poisoning from seafood.



Still, the commander said, those results were only preliminary. "I don't know when the official results will be released," Maj. Gen. Pasin Nokasul told the newspaper. "The lab work [is being] expedited because the embassies of the two tourists want to know the cause of death as soon as possible."



Kells response to Nokasul's statement was harsh.



"That she died of food poisoning is a ridiculous statement to make," he said, adding it is unlikely they would have been "the only ones affected."



Dr. William Hurley, medical director for the Washington Poison Center, is also skeptical that food poisoning could have been responsible. In food poisoning cases, he said, "usually what kills you is the dehydration, not the toxin."



He added, "Food poisoning is not something that typically kills someone this quickly. It takes days."



Ingestion of a variety of chemicals could have caused Onge and Bergheim's sudden deaths, Hurley said, and could be consistent with the condition of Onge's lungs. But without further information, he said, it is impossible to say what killed the two women.



Kells said he thinks something in the hotel where they were where staying made Jill sick. He remembers a "chemical smell" in the room and thinks he avoided becoming ill because he spent less time in the room.



On Saturday, the Phuket Wan newspaper reported that investigators visited the Laleena Guesthouse, taking samples and removing filters from the air conditioning units in the rooms where both victims had stayed.



Rat Chuped, the owner of the hotel, told the newspaper her property was not to blame. "There is no problem with my guesthouse," she said.

***

Tehran, Iran (CNN) -- International officials arrived in Iran on Sunday to inspect a newly disclosed nuclear facility near the city of Qom, state media reported.



Inspectors from the United Nations' nuclear watchdog -- the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) -- will visit the installation to make sure it is being used for peaceful purposes, said Ali Akbar Salehi, the head of Atomic Energy Organization of Iran, according to the Islamic Republic News Agency.



The three-day visit comes after Iran said Friday that it needs more time to decide whether to sign onto a deal that could help end the international showdown over its nuclear activities.



That proposal calls for low-enriched uranium produced in Iran to be sent abroad for further enrichment and then returned for use in medical research and treatment.



Tehran is studying the draft proposal and will have an answer next week, Iranian diplomat Ali Asghar Soltanieh said on state-run Press TV.



Iran informed IAEA Director General Mohamed ElBaradei that it is "considering the proposal in depth and in a favorable light, but it needs until the middle of next week to provide a response," according to an IAEA statement.



Delegations from Iran, France, Russia, the United States and the IAEA met in Vienna this week to work out details of the tentative deal reached in early October. And France, Russia and the United States indicated their approval of the arrangement.



"The Director General hopes that Iran's response will equally be positive, since approval of this agreement will signal a new era of cooperation," the IAEA statement said.



Tehran sent shock waves through the international community by revealing in a letter to the IAEA the existence of a second nuclear enrichment facility near Qom.



"It is important for us to send out inspectors to do comprehensive verification ... to assure ourselves that it is ... fit for peaceful purposes," ElBaradei said earlier this month.



After the inspection, but before the end of the month, Iranian officials are expected to meet with the five permanent members of the U.N. Security Council -- Britain, China, France, Russia and the United States -- plus Germany to further discuss Tehran's nuclear program.



Iran's leaders maintain that their nation's nuclear program is intended solely for peaceful purposes, but many in the West believe Iran is pursuing nuclear weapons capabilities.



Low-enriched nuclear fuel can be further enriched into weapons-grade material.

***

(CNN) -- A series of U.S. diplomatic cables from early this year directly accused Syria of supplying advanced weaponry, including SCUD ballistic missiles, to the Shiite militia Hezbollah in Lebanon.





U.S. protests to Damascus met with persistent denials, according to the cables, which were published by the WikiLeaks website.





At a meeting in February, according to one cable, a senior U.S. diplomat stressed Washington's concerns directly with Syrian President Bashar Asad, "who bluntly stated that he knew of no new weapons systems going to Hezbollah."





But just a week later, an urgent note from U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton to the U.S. Embassy in Damascus said the United States had learned of Syrian plans to supply Hezbollah with SCUD-D ballistic missiles, which would magnify its threat to Israel.





Clinton wrote: "I must stress that this activity is of deep concern to my government, and we strongly caution you (Syria) against such a serious escalation." To reinforce the point, the cable continues: "Your interest in avoiding war should require you to exert maximum restraint, including restraining Hezbollah and preventing the group's acquisition of such lethal, long-range weapons."





Within 24 hours, the senior U.S. diplomat in Damascus met with the vice foreign minister, Faisal al-Miqdad, to convey Clinton's message. The cables described him as "clearly surprised" by the allegations.





"Flatly denying any Syrian role in the supply of weapons to Hezbollah, Miqdad contended Damascus supported Lebanese independence," a cable says, quoting Miqdad as saying: "You may hear about weapons going to Hezbollah, but they are absolutely not coming through Syria."





Miqdad then went on the offensive, according to the cable, asking: "The most sophisticated weapons are coming to Israel, to be used against whom?"





But the U.S. diplomat in Damascus commented: "Even a seasoned diplomat like Miqdad could not restrain a raised eyebrow at our mention of the transfer of ballistic missiles to Hezbollah."





The following day another cable from the secretary of state's office asked U.S. diplomats to rally support from allies for Washington's position.





It said: "We want France, Britain, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Jordan, and Qatar to make a renewed push to echo our concerns with Syria." Allies should be told that Washington believed "Syria has provided or will provide guided short-range ballistic missiles to Hezbollah that could target two-thirds of Israel, including Tel Aviv, from launch sites north of the Litani." The Litani is a river in southern Lebanon.





"Our information also indicates that Syria has made advanced surface-to-air missile systems available to Hezbollah and has probably provided training on these systems to Hezbollah personnel," the cable continued.





In April this year, Israeli officials alleged that the transfer of SCUD-D missiles had gone ahead. At the time, State Department spokesman P.J. Crowley said: "If such an action has been taken, and we continue to analyze this issue, clearly it potentially puts Lebanon at significant risk."





So why would Syria provide Hezbollah with weapons that could destabilize an already volatile region? Another cable tries to answer that question. "Syrian leaders appear convinced that arming Hezbollah will increase Syria's leverage in bringing Israel to the negotiating table," it says.





But the top U.S. diplomat in Damascus suggests in a cable that is misguided. "Syria's actions have created a situation in which miscalculation or provocative behavior by Hizballah could prove disastrous for Syria and the broader region," he writes.





The U.S. assessment is that Hezbollah is far better-armed than it was in 2006, when it fought a one-month cross-border war against Israel. Referring to its missile and rocket armories, a cable from November 2009 says: "This capability, if fully used, would represent a quantum leap over the damage and psychological terror Hezbollah rockets caused in northern Israel during the 2006 war."





Regional analysts believe that Hezbollah has some 40,000 rockets as well as up to a dozen SCUD-Ds from Syria.

***

Fort Lauderdale, Florida (CNN) -- She walked to the cameras and could barely look up. With her lip quivering, Sherry Jarvis apologized to the family of 15-year-old Michael Brewer, who is clinging to life in a hospital burn unit.





Jarvis is the mother of two boys who, along with three other youths, are accused in the burning of Brewer. Detectives say witnesses saw Brewer, consumed in flames, run about a hundred yards, tear off his shirt and jump into a swimming pool.





Brewer's screams can be heard on a 911 call from the October 12 incident. Doctors say he was burned on about 65 percent of his body.





"I'd just like to express how horribly sorry we are," Jarvis said in a public statement she and her family made Wednesday. Accompanied by her husband and two daughters, Jarvis spoke slowly as she addressed a gathering of reporters.





"This is a horrible incident that should have never had occurred." said Jarvis, her voice full of sorrow and shock. Her sons, ages 13 and 15, face charges that could send them to prison for a long time.





Authorities in Broward County, Florida, believe that Brewer was attacked in a chain of events that began when he did not pay one of the five boys $40 for a video game. That boy stole Brewer's father's bicycle, and when Brewer told police, the youth was arrested, then released, authorities said.





The next day, the group of five teens allegedly surrounded Brewer and, according to eyewitnesses, yelled, "He's a snitch. He's a snitch" before one of them poured alcohol over him, another sparked a lighter, and Brewer was ablaze.





All of the boys had been friends since elementary school, authorities said. They did sleepovers at one another's homes, and their families knew each other.





"We pray for Michael's recovery every day, that he gets stronger, which we know in our hearts that he will," Sherry Jarvis said.





But doctors are unsure about his recovery.





Brewer remains on a ventilator. A machine is breathing for him. Each day, a team of doctors spends about four hours changing his bandages.





He remains heavily sedated and is going through a very difficult period right now, according to doctors.





"The swelling has come way down, and you can recognize facial expressions now," said Dr. Nicholas Namias, medical director of the University of Miami/Jackson Memorial Hospital Burn Center in Miami.





"We're still dealing with the respiratory failure. We're dealing with infection now and the need to supply the massive amount of nutrition that this person needs to survive," Namias told CNN.





"People are writing horror stories ... but people just can't imagine the kind of sickness we're talking about. He is by no means well ... but the expectation is survival," he said.





Because he is sedated and on the ventilator, Brewer has been unable to communicate with detectives.





Earlier this week, prosecutors were granted extra time to build their cases against the five teens, four 15-year-olds and the 13-year-old. Prosecutors have until November 12 to charge the five as adults, or they will be charged as juveniles and released pending trial later.





The 13-year-old cannot face adult charges under Florida law, but that would change if Brewer died.





Prosecutors want to interview Brewer about the incident, but doctors say that is unlikely to happen before next week.





Brewer's family was not represented at the Jarvis family's public apology. The victim's parents could not be reached for comment.





After making her apology, Jarvis said the family would not take questions from the gathered reporters.





"I don't have the words to express any more. I can't answer any more questions because of the criminal case that's still pending," she said.





The Jarvis family has received death threats, according to family members and their attorney. They haven't stayed at their home since the incident, they

***

(AOL Autos)  -- Price of gas got you crying at the pump? Is it eating into your household budget? Well, get used to it.



Gas in California, the second worst state, hits $4.59 per gallon for regular unleaded in this July 14 photo.



That's the word on the streets as the price of a gallon of gasoline soars to record highs.



With regional differentials pushing the price much higher in some places, drivers and small-business owners are finding it hard to cope.



But which states' motorists get the best deal, and in which states do drivers pay the most to fill-up?



Here come the numbers



Alaska has the highest gas prices in the nation, with a gallon of regular gasoline at $4.623, followed by California at $4.583 as of June 30. Hawaii, Connecticut and Washington make up the top five states with highest prices, with New York and D.C. not far behind at $4.292 and $4.160 respectively.



Best states to buy gas? Missouri comes out top at $3.862 for a gallon of regular, followed by Oklahoma at $3.866, South Carolina, Mississippi and Arkansas. Iowa, Kansas and Alabama are next in line. AOL Autos: Cars with 30+ MPG for $300 or less per month



Past prices



We use the term 'best states to buy gas' with this caveat: Back in June 2004, gas hovered at around $1.74 a gallon, according to figures from gasbuddy.com.



Geoff Sundstrom, AAA's fuel price analyst, said the primary reasons for rising fuel prices are an increase in demand for petroleum products across the globe and a need for investment in refining infrastructure.



"Right now, it is almost impossible to know where oil and gas prices will be in six months to a year," he said. "It's easy to assume that the world economy will continue to grow, we are very clearly at risk of an economic downturn and perhaps a severe economic downturn which could influence the demand side to the point where oil and gas prices may drop.



"In 10 to 20 years out, oil and gasoline will continue to be more expensive. But given what's happening in the markets right now, there is some potential that [the] demands side of the equation could fall off a cliff." AOL Autos: Consumer Reports on best fuel-efficient used cars



Why so expensive in California?



Marie Montgomery, spokeswoman for the Automobile Club of Southern California, says the primary reason behind the high price of gas in California is "market segmentation," a marketing term that basically means California (along with many other states) has developed a "boutique blend" of fuel in a bid to uphold environmental or ecological standards. In California's case, this blend helps clear the state's notorious smog.



"We can't use gas they made for Iowa. We use a special blend with additives in it, an ethanol mix," Montgomery said. "When you do that, you can only use refineries that make that gas [mix]. The refineries in California are a major supplier, but, when prices are high and there's not another supplier, we have to go where they make that mix."



She pointed out that refineries in Oregon and Washington produce the gas product, and there is a pipeline to Alaska, but that the only other options are shipping in the blend from elsewhere in the nation or Asia, which is not cost-efficient.



"People have to figure out how to deal with this on a long-term basis. We've been telling motorists to carpool and here we are in summer, and prices have barely come down," she said. "Usually we're about a month into a downturn, it's cyclical: Prices go up in spring and spike in May, which isn't happening this year. Prices may not come down a lot."



Less misery in Missouri



Michael Right, vice president of public affairs for AAA Missouri, said his state is usually among the top three in terms of

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN) -- The A&E network quickly backed away from an earlier assurance that Michael Jackson's three children "are not part of" a reality show it is taping with four of the pop star's brothers.



Before their father's death, Michael Jackson's children, Paris, Prince and "Blanket" were not often seen in public.



The network said late Wednesday it was "entirely possible" that "other members of the Jackson family" could appear on the show, but it is too soon to know.



US Weekly magazine quoted an unidentified source as saying that  despite a sharp division in the Jackson family over the matter, Prince, 12, Paris, 11, and Blanket, 7, would be included in the show.



"The Jacksons: A Family Dynasty," which focuses on the lives of four of the Jackson brothers -- Jackie, Jermaine, Tito and Marlon -- was in the works before the singer's June 25 death.



"Filming is taking place right now," A&E said in the late Wednesday statement. "As production moves forward, it is entirely possible that the brothers' paths will intersect with other members of the Jackson family, who may or may not be included in the finished series. However, we cannot at this point definitively know who else may make an appearance in the series."



Earlier Wednesday, however, the network had seemed to rule out their appearance, saying, "They are not part of the series."



Jackson went to great lengths for years to keep his children out of the public eye, including covering their faces with masks and scarves.



It was only at the public memorial service for Jackson that the world got a close look at them -- and began learning about their personalities.



The magazine's source is quoted as saying that the oldest Jackson sister, Rebbie, "feels Michael would spin in his grave if he knew his kids would be on this show."



The public relations firm hired by the Jackson family soon after Michael Jackson's death issued a short statement Wednesday morning that did not dispute the US Weekly report.



"We are not going to comment," the statement said.



The decision would be left to Katherine Jackson, Michael's mother, according to the lawyer appointed in August to represent the children in the probate of their father's will.  Katherine Jackson was given guardianship over the children by a Los Angeles judge.



The reality show is tentatively set to begin airing in December.



CNN's Marc Balinsky contributed to this report.

***

SPRING HILL, Tennessee (CNN)  -- The town that Saturn put on the map is worried about its future and its residents hope the auto plant and jobs won't go the way of its most famous product.



The move to shut down Saturn has left some in Spring Hill, Tennessee, disappointed and perplexed.



General Motors announced this week that it would close its Saturn line after its sale to Penske Automotive Group fell through.



At the end of "Saturn Parkway" in Spring Hill, Tennessee, sits the huge plant where -- as the ads touted -- "a different kind of car company" produced a "different kind of car."



The first Saturn, a red S-Series, rolled off the line in 1990 and it's still on display at the factory. The factory, along with the town, have played a major role in the company's image and advertisements, even hosting tours and "reunions" for Saturn car owners.



At City Hall, the walls are decorated with old photos of the small town Spring Hill was before Saturn came to town and what it's grown into.



"I think people are very proud an American-made car was made here," area resident Barbara Williams said.



Mayor Mike Dinwiddie credits most of the town's growth to the Saturn plant. "GM, back in the mid 80's, is the reason this town began to grow in the first place," he said.



Eventually, GM decided to move production elsewhere. The last Saturn made in Tennessee rolled off the line in 2007. After retooling, GM started building the Chevrolet Traverse in Spring Hill, but that production is now on its way out too.



In November, it will be moved to a plant in Michigan, leaving Spring Hill's plant idle.



The move to shut down Saturn has left some in town disappointed and perplexed.



"It's been a great car," remarked Keith Slep who runs an auto repair shop a few miles from the factory. Slep said he hoped Penske would have been able to keep the brand viable.



"He has a track record that won't quit of being a great business man and a good leader. I don't know what happened," Slep said.



Williams said she was also stunned about the end of Saturn.



"I'm like everyone else, 'How can this happen?' GM has been a forerunner in the automobile industry, and it's just a really sad indictment on what is happening," she said.



"We are kind of curious as to why the decisions have been made that have been made," Dinwiddie said. "I do know that what GM is trying to do now as a company -- as far as how they are trying to operate and what they are saying the improvements they need to make -- almost mirror what Saturn was 20 years ago."



Resident Joyce Avello puts the blame squarely on the federal government.



"It's an abomination what the government is doing to the automotive industry ... Get it out of the government's hands. They don't know how to do cars. They can hardly do the government."



As for the future of Spring Hill, Dinwiddie is optimistic.



"I have to believe the plant is going to come back. It all depends on the overall economy," he said. "I hope that Americans start buying American products and start supporting the American auto manufacturing industry and if that happens, we'll get a product in this plant."



Dinwiddie said he has been working with General Motors on a daily basis, and has invited President Obama and the auto recovery czar to come and tour the plant.



"I don't think they understand what this plant is capable of doing and once they see that, I think that they will be well aware of the situation, and I think they could probably give us some help," he said.



At 94, G.W. Bowman has lived in Spring Hill most of his life and remembers stories of his grandfather collecting the mail

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- The beautifully ornate Catholic church in the nation's capital has seen its share of history and controversy.



Cardinal Theodore McCarrick and Chief Justice John Roberts attend Red Mass in 2005.



In 1963, the Cathedral of St. Matthew the Apostle was the site of John F. Kennedy's funeral. After the service, on the steps outside, the slain president's young son famously saluted his father's memory.



But the church is also the site of an annual Mass that has drawn criticism for what many see as an unhealthy mix of politics, the law and religion.



Washington's annual Red Mass, which celebrates the legal profession, will be held this year on Sunday, October 4 -- the day before the Supreme Court begins its new term. Several justices traditionally attend, along with congressional leaders, diplomats, cabinet secretaries and other dignitaries.



Past presidents have also attended, though there is no word yet on whether President Obama will appear.



It is a Catholic service, but power brokers of other faiths are asked to attend the invitation-only event. Justice Stephen Breyer, who is Jewish, is a regular.



The Mass "takes its name from the color of the vestments. ... [It] goes back centuries, to Rome, to France to England," Washington Archbishop Donald Wuerl said.



"There was the idea [to] bring all the people who are involved in the law ... once a year so that together, they can simply pray for the wisdom of God."



The church, built starting in the 19th century, is considered one of Washington's hidden gems. Tucked between modern office buildings a few blocks from the White House, it is a mix of architectural styles, a hint of ancient Roman style, a splash from the Italian Renaissance and a definite Byzantine flavor.



St. Matthew, noted Monsignor Ronald Jameson, was the patron saint of civil servants, appropriate in a city where the federal government dominates the workforce.



Five justices attended last year's Red Mass, which was similar in tone to other recent gatherings. Cardinal John Patrick Foley, who has held several prominent positions in the Catholic Church, noted many parts of the Bible "sound very much like American ideals" and reminded the members of the high court to build a society "of justice, of peace and of love."



Critics of the service, however, find the attendance of leading decision-makers, including members of the highest court in the land, to be inappropriate.



"The truth is, this was set up as a way to basically lecture and give information to the justices," said the Rev. Barry Lynn, president of Americans United for Separation of Church and State. "There is no other institution that has this special way to talk to the justices on the Supreme Court."



The Red Mass was started in Washington in 1952 by the John Carroll Society, a lay Catholic group of prominent lawyers and professionals. Chief Justice John Roberts' wife, Jane, is an officer of the group.



Lynn, an ordained minister with the United Church of Christ, noted the Mass was begun after several high court decisions that were disapproved of by the archdiocese.



"They figured if they got all the justices together and chatted them up in a worship service, they might be able to convince them to see the law their way," he said.



In 1989, a top church official used the occasion of the Mass to call for a return to "religiously based moral values" and lament the "inviolable, impenetrable and towering wall" between church and state.



In 1986, Washington Cardinal James Hickey attacked the Supreme Court's Roe v. Wade ruling legalizing abortion.



Among those in attendance that year were then-Chief Justice William Rehnquist and Justices Antonin Scalia and William Brennan, both Catholics.



One member of the court who no longer attends is Ruth Bader Ginsburg who, like Breyer, is Jewish. Ginsberg said she grew tired of being lectured to by Catholic officials.



"I went one year, and I will never go again,

***

NAPLES, Florida (CNN)  -- At least seven possible tornadoes were reported Tuesday in eastern Florida as  Tropical Storm Fay battered parts of the state with high winds and heavy rain, the National Hurricane Center said.



Fay tore through Barefoot Bay, Florida, south of Melbourne Tuesday.



Fay could strengthen into a hurricane when it swings over Florida again Thursday, according to the center.



"This storm is going to be with us for a while," said Florida Gov. Charlie Crist. "Looks like it could be a boomerang storm."



A hurricane watch has been issued for Florida's east coast, from north of Flagler Beach to Altamaha Sound.



At 5 p.m., the center of the storm was about 60 miles southwest of Melbourne, the hurricane center said. Fay was traveling north-northeast at 8 mph.



Florida Power & Light reported more than 93,000 customers without power in 20 counties. Most of the outages -- 34,000 -- were in Collier County, where Fay came ashore earlier in the day.



As many as 9,700 residents in Brevard County were without power Tuesday evening, according to David Waters, the county Emergency Operations Center spokesman.



A Brevard County tornado that hit about 1:45 p.m. damaged more than 50 homes, leaving nine uninhabitable, according to the emergency operations center. Three people suffered minor injuries, officials said.



Fay's maximum sustained winds remained near 65 mph, with higher gusts, forecasters said. A storm tracker in Moore Haven, near the west bank of Lake Okeechobee, reported winds up to 81 mph in the afternoon.



"Some fluctuations in intensity are likely this afternoon and tonight as Fay moves inland over Florida. Some strengthening is expected when Fay moves over the Atlantic Ocean on Wednesday," according to the hurricane center.



The storm was earlier buffeting Lake Okeechobee with high winds as it moved north and northeast through Florida, leaving a trail of flooding, broken trees and power outages.



At midday, the hurricane center issued two tornado warnings -- for St. Lucie and Indian River counties, and tornado watches were in effect for several areas, most of them ending at 4 p.m.



A possible twister hit Wellington in Palm Beach County, where the violent weather ripped a small barn off its foundation and left a horse standing unhurt on a concrete slab, authorities said.



Dr. Bob Smith, an associate veterinarian at the Palm Beach Equine Clinic, said an 8-year-old quarterhorse named Onyx was in a stall, untied, when the suspected tornado hit about 2 a.m. It destroyed the structure "and left the horse standing there unscathed," Smith said. iReport.com: Flooding, beached whale as Fay hits



When he came to work several hours later, a technician had rescued the horse, who was not visibly rattled, Smith said.



"She's just calm and cool," he said. "She's fine."



Smith said roof tiles flew off the veterinary clinic and broke car windows in a nearby parking lot. The storm also picked up a horse trailer and smashed it into another horse trailer, he said.



A tropical storm warning remained in effect along Florida's east coast from north of Ocean Reef to Flagler Beach, including Lake Okeechobee. A tropical storm watch covered that coast north of Flagler Beach to Fernandina Beach.



Fay is expected to produce 5 to 10 inches of rain over southern and east-central Florida, with possible maximum amounts of 15 inches. Three to 5 inches of rain were possible in the northwestern Bahamas.



Steve Delai, deputy chief of Fire and Rescue for Palm Beach County, said he could not confirm a tornado had hit the southeast county, but the damage was "consistent with a tornado."



"It's clear that the damage was in a very linear fashion," he said.



Crist said 31 schools were closed in the region Tuesday as a precaution. All but four, including Brevard County, will be open Wednesday.



"Floridians should continue to monitor local news reports, stay calm and exercise common sense," he advised. "Please remember to be cautious when testing generators and other

***

(CNN) -- More than 100 countries attending a conference in Dublin, Ireland formally adopted a treaty Friday to ban cluster bombs -- a large, unreliable and inaccurate weapon that often affects civilians long after the end of armed conflict.



Cluster bombs are usually air-dropped shells that eject multiple small bomblets to kill enemy soldiers.



A document released by Ireland's Department of Foreign Affairs says the countries agreed never to use cluster munitions or the explosive bomblets they contain. The countries also agreed never to develop, acquire, retain or transfer cluster munitions.



Countries attending the 11-day conference agreed to the treaty Wednesday but formally signed it Friday.



The accord calls for a total, immediate ban of the weapons, strong standards to protect those injured by them, contaminated areas to be cleaned up as quickly as possible and for the weapons to be immediately destroyed, he said.



Thomas Nash, coordinator of the CMC campaigning organization, said Wednesday: "This is a great achievement for everyone who has been working hard to see the end of 40 years of suffering from these weapons."



Though some of the biggest makers of cluster bombs, including the United States, Russia, China and Israel, were not involved in the talks and have not signed the accord, organizers predicted that those nations would nevertheless be pressured into compliance.



"Take the United States," Nash said. "Almost all of its allies are here. They've decided to ban these weapons. That's going to make it extremely difficult, if not impossible, for the United States to ever use these weapons again, either on its own or in joint operations."



The agreement requires the destruction of stockpiles of the weapons within eight years, he said.



Cluster munitions, which break apart in flight to scatter hundreds of smaller bomblets, are what the International Committee of the Red Cross calls a "persistent humanitarian problem."



Most of a cluster bomb's bomblets are meant to explode on impact, but many do not. Estimates show the weapons fail to explode on impact between 10 and 40 percent of the time, the Red Cross says.



That means unexploded bomblets lie scattered across a target area, often exploding only when handled or disturbed -- posing a serious risk to civilians.



Last week, Acting Assistant Secretary for Political-Military Affairs Stephen D. Mull called it "an absolute moral obligation" to rid a battlefield of unexploded ordnance after the battle.



But he also predicted that the United States would not agree to any ban.



"We think that it is going to be impossible to ban cluster munitions... because these are weapons that have a certain military utility and are of use," Mull said. "The United States relies on them as an important part of our own defense strategy."



Instead, he urged that the weapons be regulated "to take humanitarian considerations into account" and that "technological fixes" be pursued that would render them harmless after a battle.



During the 34-day war in Lebanon in 2006, the United Nations estimated that Israel dropped 4 million bomblets, 1 million of which may not have exploded, according to the International Committee of the Red Cross.



More than 250 civilians and bomb-disposal operators have been killed or injured by them in southern Lebanon since the war ended.



Cluster bombs were also used in the 1999 war in Kosovo. Lt. Col. Jim Burke, a military adviser to the Irish Defense Forces said they quickly became a major killer of civilians.



In more than 20 countries, according to the ICRC, cluster bombs have created lasting "no-go" areas, rendering them as dangerous as minefields.



Laos is the most affected country. Millions of bomblets dropped during the Vietnam War continue to kill civilians more than three decades later.



Still, militaries consider cluster bombs important for use against multiple targets dispersed over a wide area, such as tanks or military personnel moving across the landscape. A single bomb containing hundreds of submunitions can cover more than 18 square miles.



CNN's Jacqueline Clyne contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Authorities on Saturday released the names of three more victims found last week in or around the home of a registered sex offender in Cleveland, Ohio.



The Cuyahoga County Coroner's Office identified the bodies of Amelda Hunter, 47; Crystal Dozier, 38; and Michelle Mason, 45, all of Cleveland.



Anthony Sowell, who served 15 years after pleading guilty to attempted rape in a 1989 case, was arrested last week, two days after police discovered the first bodies at his home.



He faces five counts of aggravated murder, rape, felonious assault and kidnapping, police said, and was denied bond at a hearing Wednesday.



Police have discovered the bodies of 10 people and skull of an 11th victim at or near Sowell's home. Authorities have identified seven of the victims.



Remains of six victims were found inside the home. police said, and five outside. The skull was wrapped in a paper bag and stuffed into a bucket in the basement, police said.



Hunter was not reported as a missing person at the time of the discovery of the victim's bodies at Sowell's residence, according to the Cleveland Police Department. Her family reported her missing on November 3, telling police that she was last seen on or about April 18.



Dozier also was never reported missing to police. She was reportedly last seen in October 2007, police said.



Mason was reported missing on October 12, 2008. She was last seen earlier that month, according to police. At the time, it was reported that Mason suffered from bipolar disorder and was not taking her prescribed medications, police said.



Sowell has been placed on a suicide watch at the request of his attorney, according to his public defender, Kathleen DeMetz.



A psychiatric evaluation has been ordered but it's unlikely to happen until after a grand jury files an indictment, she said.



Sowell is being held in a solitary cell in the Cuyahoga County jail, wearing a white paper gown, County Jail Warden Kevin McDonough told CNN. Every 10 minutes, a guard checks on him to make sure he doesn't hurt himself.



Occasionally, Sowell is allowed out of his cell under escort to shower and use a dayroom with books and magazines, but no television, McDonough said.



He gets three meals a day. Lights are out at 10 p.m.



"He's been quiet and compliant," McDonough said. "He understands what incarceration is like."



Sowell was released from jail in 2005.



According to court documents, Sowell completed several programs while in jail, including "Living Without Violence," "Positive Personal Change" and "Cage your Rage."



In another court document filed shortly before his release and obtained by CNN, handwritten notes state Sowell "would be likely to re-offend because he still denies the rape."



Previously, the coroner's office said it had identified the bodies of Nancy Cobbs, 43; Tonia Carmichael, 52; Telacia Fortson, 31; and Tishana Culver, 31.



Police initially went to Sowell's home last week to follow up on a rape accusation. Last month, neighbors reported seeing a naked woman fall from the second floor, but no charges were filed.



Neighbors called 911 after the October 20 incident. Firefighters and paramedics responded, and later notified police. The woman told officers that she was at the home and "partying," when she fell off the roof.



"They were doing coke, drugs, getting high," Cleveland Police Chief Michael McGrath said. A man described as her boyfriend -- Sowell -- told police the same story.



CNN's Susan Candiotti and Ross Levitt contributed to this report.

***

Washington (CNN) -- The United States hopes cool, careful language will keep the North Korean crisis from boiling over.





The United States has been vocal in condemning North Korea for what it calls an act of aggression and provocation in the March 26 sinking of a South Korean warship that killed 46 sailors.





But you won't hear American officials call this "an act of war." In fact, from President Obama on down the chain of command in this latest Korean crisis, the word "war" is missing in action.





Obama set the tone, offering support and condolences to the South Koreans in March. Once an international investigation concluded last week that the patrol ship Cheonan was sunk by a North Korean torpedo, a White House statement called the ship sinking "an act of aggression ... one more instance of North Korea's unacceptable behavior and defiance of international law."





Secretary of State Hillary Clinton hit the same notes during her trip to China.





"We are working hard to avoid an escalation, belligerence and provocation," Clinton said Monday. "This is a highly precarious situation that the North Koreans have caused in the region and it is one that every country that neighbors or is in proximity to North Korea understands must be contained."





Washington is standing with South Korea's decision to halt trade agreements with North Korea. The United States also is emphasizing -- in both words and deeds -- its military ties to South Korea, including an announcement Monday at the Pentagon that the U.S. and South Korean militaries would conduct joint anti-submarine exercises.





And the administration is holding its South Korean ally close. Clinton will be in Seoul on Wednesday, and Defense Secretary Robert Gates will meet his counterpart in coming weeks, while Obama will see South Korean President Lee Myung-bak at the Group of 20 conference of developed countries in Canada in June.





But while White House press secretary Robert Gibbs said Monday that U.S. support for the defense of South Korea is "unequivocal," he didn't mention war.





"Specifically, we endorse President Lee's demand that North Korea immediately apologize and punish those responsible for the attack, and, most importantly, stop its belligerent and threatening behavior," Gibbs said in a prepared statement.





North Korea has denied it was responsible for the March 26 sinking and has threatened to back out of a nonaggression pact between the two Koreas. Despite that pact and the 1953 armistice that ended the Korean War, the North and South technically remain at war.





And North Korea has a huge standing army; it bristles with missiles and has tested nuclear weapons twice, in 2006 and 2009.





State Department spokesman P.J. Crowley said last week the sinking of the ship was a violation of the armistice, but he chose the phrase "act of aggression."





"As we've made clear, this was a clear and compelling violation of the existing armistice. It was without doubt a hostile act. It was provocative. It was unwarranted. I think our characterizations are broadly consistent," Crowley said.





Over at the Pentagon, Gates and Adm. Michael Mullen, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, both sidestepped questions about whether what North Korea did constitutes an act of war.





"Well, first of all, we certainly support the findings of the Korean -- the South Korean investigation," Gates said last week.





"We obviously are in close consultation with the Koreans. The attack was against one of their ships. And we will -- naturally they would have the lead in determining the path forward. They've laid out some paths forward, and we will be consulting very closely with them as we move ahead."





Mullen was equally evasive.





"Certainly we're concerned about it. We've supported them. We've helped them in the investigation, and we agree with the conclusion. They're a great friend and great ally, and we'll continue to do that," Mullen said.





Nicholas Szechenyi, a fellow at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, told CNN, "If you respond to bombastic rhetoric with equally hot rhetoric

***

NEW YORK (CNN)  -- Celebrity photographer Annie Leibovitz could lose the right to her entire portfolio of world-famous photographs if she doesn't meet a Tuesday deadline to pay back a $24 million loan she is alleged to owe.



Annie Leibovitz appears before her photo of Demi Moore during an exhibition of her work in June in Madrid, Spain.



Leibovitz, who has photographed everyone from the Rolling Stones to Queen Elizabeth II, put her art, intellectual property and even real estate assets up for collateral last year when she consolidated her massive debts.



Art Capital Group, which restructured the debts, says Leibovitz agreed "to make Art Capital her 'irrevocable exclusive agent'" of the assets "in exchange for a reduced interest rate on the loan."



Now the company is suing Leibovitz for breach of contract, saying she has "refused to cooperate in the sale of those assets," according to a question-and-answer sheet on the lawsuit issued by Art Capital. It also says she has "refused to pay to Art Capital hundreds of thousands of dollars she owed as part of the same agreement."



Asked by CNN for comment, Leibovitz's attorney, Steven Brawer, said, "I don't have anything I can tell you." They have until October 1 to respond to the lawsuit.



In the question-and-answer sheet, Art Capital says Leibovitz "acknowledged that in order to repay the loan she would sell her fine art, intellectual property and real estate assets. She authorized Art Capital to act as agent in the sale of those assets through which Art Capital could recoup its decrease in interest rate. She would have realized a significant gain from that sale."



It says the loan agreement gave Art Capital "the right to sell the collateral before the loan came due on September 8 and for a two-year period thereafter."



One of Leibovitz's best known photos is of John Lennon with his wife, Yoko Ono, shortly before the Beatles star was assassinated in 1980.



She is no stranger to controversy.



In 1991, Leibovitz photographed a nude and extremely pregnant Demi Moore for the cover of Vanity Fair. The issue, considered scandalous at the time, was sold in many places nationwide with a sheath of white paper.



Last year, Leibovitz photographed Disney star Miley Cyrus wrapped in a bedsheet, eliciting claims that the photographer pressured the teen queen into poses that were too provocative for her young age.



In July, Art Capital filed a complaint with the New York Supreme Court, asking it to uphold the sales agreement it signed with Leibovitz, including its right to sell her art and real estate.



If the court agrees with Art Capital, it means Leibovitz could end up owing far more than she did originally. Art Capital has asked for an unspecified amount of damages in addition to the money it says the photographer originally borrowed.



Art Capital -- through its affiliate, American Photography -- provides financial and consulting services to artists, galleries and art owners, and offers loans based on their intellectual property and fine art assets.

***

(CNN) -- Doctor James Braude leads a group medical practice in an elegant Atlanta, Georgia, office decorated with designer furnishings. It doesn't look like a charity asking for handouts. But it is asking.



Obama, pictured July 1 in Virginia, has been touring the states to promote his plan to voters.



"On some days we've counted up to 30 patients a day who've lost their jobs and their health insurance," Braude said.



So Braude and his colleagues offer as much free care as they can afford. The doctors have also begun discreetly inviting paying patients to contribute to a fund, helping more people get care they haven't got the money for.



"We're doctors. We're addicted to helping people. And when we can't, we go through withdrawal."



Millions of Americans have always gone without the kind of routine medical care that is seen as a basic right in many countries. The U.S. economic downturn -- meaning people lose health insurance when they lose their job -- and the election of President Barack Obama have coincided to increase both the need and the opportunity to address the plight of uninsured America.



Obama's ambition is to provide insurance for the estimated 50 million Americans without coverage.  Watch why many in rural U.S. have concerns »



The insurance is expected to cover doctors, hospital care and prescription drugs. But just about every detail is still being negotiated so it's not certain who would be covered, what they would be covered for or whether people who don't want insurance would be forced to have it and pay for it.



The plans that emerge could become the Obama administration's most ambitious domestic program and potentially a big, early test of his presidency.



American medical care needs attention



Even though nearly 50 million of its roughly 300 million people have no routine health care, the United States spends more going to the doctor than any other industrialized nation in the world. Fully one-sixth of the economy is devoted to it.



Under the current hybrid system, the U.S. Government pays for health care for ex-military, the extremely poor and the elderly.



But the vast majority of Americans have to pay for their own health care and most do it where they work; many employers arrange health insurance and partly subsidize the premiums.



The rapidly rising cost is crushing all kinds of businesses, from car companies to family farms. At the same time, hospitals and doctors say they are falling behind because the payments they receive from insurance companies aren't keeping up with their costs.



"Within a decade we will be spending one out of every five dollars we earn on health care," Obama said recently. "In 30 years, it will be one out of every three. That is untenable, that is unacceptable, and I will not allow it as president of the United States."



The politics: Deep disagreement



There is a lot of disagreement about what to do. Congress has the job of actually turning the push for change into a functioning government program. Democratic lawmakers don't all support the president's plan or agree on how to pay for it.



Republicans are split in a different way. Some lawmakers are trying to influence the Democrats' plans and others are proposing entirely different alternatives.



"If you look at their plan, it really is a big government-run plan that will take control of the delivery of health care in America," said Republican congressional leader John Boehner. His suggestion: "Improve the current system so it works better."



The most profound disagreement centers on whether Washington should create its own new health-insurance concern to compete with the private companies that provide insurance now. Obama and many Democrats favor it; Republicans are dead set against it.



Part of the problem is that insurance companies fear the government will put them out of business, by favoring or subsidizing its own scheme.



The other part of the problem is more basic and ideological. The U.S. government already runs enormous health-insurance programs for the poor, the elderly and military veterans -- but many

***

(CNN) -- Deposed Honduran President Jose Manuel Zelaya will not be reinstated as head of state, an overwhelming majority of the Honduran congress voted Wednesday.



In an hours-long process, 111 lawmakers voted in favor of a motion not to return Zelaya to office. A majority of 65 votes in the 128-member body was required to reject his reinstatement.



Zelaya was removed from office in a military-led coup on June 28 and replaced by congressional leader Roberto Micheletti.



On Wednesday, lawmakers voted one by one and addressed the chamber as they cast their vote, making for a slow process.



The vote was a key part of a U.S.-brokered pact that representatives for Zelaya and Micheletti signed October 29, giving Congress the power to decide Zelaya's fate.



The United States expressed disappointment Thursday over the latest rebuff to its diplomatic efforts to end the political crisis in Honduras.



U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for Western Hemisphere Affairs Arturo Valenzuela continued to call on the Honduran government to allow Zelaya's return and to create a unity government in the interim period before the new president takes office next month.



"We are disappointed by this decision since the United States had hoped the [Honduran] Congress would have approved his return," Valenzuela said in a conference call with journalists in Washington. "Our policy since June 28 has been consistently principled. It has condemned the coup d'etat and continued to accept President Zelaya as the democratically elected and legitimate leader of Honduras throughout this political crisis."



The United States continues to call for Honduras to engage in national reconciliation and creation of a truth commission to investigate the crisis, in addition to the unity government.



"The absence of democratic, constitutional order is the unacceptable status quo," a senior U.S. administration official said on the conference call, remaining anonymous under the ground rules of the call and because of the sensitivity of the situation. "The election is a step toward a day where Honduras will have an electorally legitimate government in place."



Zelaya, who says he does not recognize the election, also has said he would not accept the post even if Congress voted him back in. Accepting the job, he said, would legitimize the coup.



Many nations said before the Sunday's election they would withhold recognition if Zelaya were not returned to power.



Some countries, such as the United States, Colombia and Costa Rica, have said they will recognize Lobo. Others, such as Argentina, Brazil and Spain, have said they will not.



Despite the diplomatic pressure from abroad, lawmakers were voting the will of the people, Congressman Juan Angel Rivera Tabora said.



"History will judge us, and I'm certain it will judge us positively," he said. "Congress didn't make this problem. The problem came to us."



Those voting against Zelaya echoed those sentiments. After the coup, the same body voted to install Micheletti as interim president. Wednesday vote only happened because the agreement between the two sides called for it, many lawmakers repeated.



Zelaya's supporters argued that the coup was an illegal act that only restitution could heal.



Congress sought opinions from the nation's Supreme Court and other bodies before holding the vote. The court ruled last week that Zelaya cannot return to office without facing trial on charges that he acted unconstitutionally when he tried to hold a vote that could have led to the removal of presidential term limits. The Supreme Court ruled before the coup that the vote was illegal and Congress had forbidden it.



The coup came on the day the term-limits vote was to have been held.



Micheletti and his supporters have insisted that Zelaya's removal was a constitutional transfer of power, not a coup.



But the United Nations, the Organization of American States, the European Union and most nations -- including the United States -- condemned the coup and demanded that Zelaya be reinstated immediately. He wasn't.



Zelaya, who was flown out of the country while still in his pajamas on the day of the coup, has been staying at the Brazilian Embassy in Honduras' capital since secretly returning to the

***

PARIS, France (CNN) -- Police evacuated a major department store in central Paris Tuesday after finding five sticks of dynamite inside, French police told CNN.

Paris's Printemps department store, which has been hit by a security alert, pictured last month.

CNN affiliate BFM-TV reported the dynamite was not rigged to explode, but police did not immediately confirm the report.

French news agency AFP said it received a letter in the mail Tuesday morning, claiming to be from an Afghan revolutionary group and saying that a bomb was at the renowned Printemps department store. The news agency alerted the police, who evacuated the store, AFP told CNN.

The letter specified three locations where explosives had been placed, and urged the news agency to contact the police "quickly or you will have blood on your hands," according to a copy of the letter obtained by CNN which AFP confirmed was accurate. "I assure you that this is not a prank," the letter said.

The bomb squad found the dynamite around 11 a.m. (5 a.m. ET), police said. It is not clear if the explosives were found where the letter said they would be.  See where Printemps is located in Paris »

AFP said the letter was signed by a group called "Front Revolutionaires Afghan," or Afghan Revolutionary Front. BFM-TV reported the group is calling for the withdrawal of French troops from Afghanistan by the end of February 2009.

"Make sure the message is relayed to your president of the republic that he withdraw his troops from our country (Afghanistan) before the end of February 2009 or we will strike again your capitalist department stores but without warning," the letter said.

It is the second time in a week that AFP has received a warning about the store. The agency said it received a phone call from a similar Afghan group a few days ago regarding the store, but at the time, police chose not to evacuate.

Printemps, one of France's most renowned stores, is popular with tourists and locals alike and located on the Boulevard Haussman. Most of the store reopened later in the day, although the area where the dynamite was found remained closed.

Jim Bittermann, CNN's senior European correspondent based in Paris, said: "These kind of stores at this time of year are absolutely packed with shoppers."

He added that France has a considerable number of troops in Afghanistan. In  August, 10 French soldiers were killed in fighting near the Afghan capital Kabul.

French President Nicolas Sarkozy said earlier this year that his government was willing to commit more troops to the war in Afghanistan.

"We cannot afford to see the Taliban and al Qaeda returning to Kabul," Sarkozy said during a state visit to the UK in March. "Whatever the cost, however difficult the victory, we cannot afford it. We must win."

Paula Newton, CNN's international security correspondent, said that the group involved was previously unheard of. "This may be termed a hoax attack but it will cause real anxiety on the ground."

CNN's Jim Bittermann and Niki Cook contributed to this report

***

Editor's note: A gunman killed 10 people and himself Tuesday in southern Alabama. It's the most recent example of mass killing sprees that have traumatized communities over the years. Here's how one city responded.



In the worst mass shooting in the U.S. at the time, a gunman killed 23 customers in a Texas cafeteria in 1991.



(CNN) -- On October 16, 1991, 35-year-old George Hennard drove a pickup truck into Luby's cafeteria in Killeen, Texas, and fatally shot 23 people and wounded more than 20 before killing himself.



For more than 15 years, the city next to the sprawling Fort Hood military base had the dubious distinction of being the site of the deadliest mass shooting in the United States -- until a student killed 32 people and himself at Virginia Tech in 2007.



"You can never prepare for an incident like this," says Killeen city councilman Fred Latham, who was mayor pro tem of the city, which had a population of about 66,000 at the time of the shooting. But Killeen's experience shows a city can survive the grief, pain and stigma of such an incident.



About 80 people were in the cafeteria, many of them taking their bosses to lunch for National Bosses Day when Hennard arrived. He methodically chose his victims, most of whom were women, before he was wounded by police and shot himself.



Latham, who is 60 and a real estate broker, has been on the city council off and on for 16 years. He spoke to CNN.com Wednesday.



CNN: What are your memories of that day in October?



Latham: It was a tragic day in our history, Many of the people who were killed or injured I personally knew. It was just a big shock that anything like that could ever happen in our community.



CNN: Where were you when it happened?



Latham: I was with the mayor and the Waco city engineer, looking at potential road improvements and we just happened to be driving near where Luby's was, and we saw some roadblocks being set up and we knew something terrible had happened. There were police cars and barricades and you had the sense that something was wrong.



CNN: What are your memories of the days after the shooting?



Latham: The community came together as far as trying to help resolve the issues with the people who were victims or their families who were trying to get through it. There were a lot of human resource agencies that came, American Red Cross, a lot of counselors. It was just overwhelming. I think the phones into Killeen were jammed from people all over the country trying to check on their family members.



Luby's was the kind of place that would attract any kind of person. That was Bosses Day that particular day, so you had a lot of extra business there, I'm sure. And many of the people were in our school district. Our school district is one of the biggest employers in the region. So when you had administrators or people in that administration office killed, they're going to be known by many, many people.



The commanding general at Fort Hood sent in helicopters and all kinds of extra assistance that might be needed. ...Fort Hood is the major employer in the area. At that time there were some 42,000 assigned troops there and some soldiers were actually killed.



You can never prepare for an incident like this from somebody that just goes off. How they pick a destination you don't know. This person drove all the way from Belton, which is about 16 miles to our east. He wasn't a Killeen resident, so how he picked Luby's you don't know. He actually drove through the front window and the people that were in the restaurant thought maybe he had an accident where you try to apply the brakes and hit the gas pedal. .... When he came out shooting, the people were kind of trapped.



I was proud of our community as to how they handled the situation and overcame all the adversity. Everybody was concerned about the welfare of the families and the

***

(CNN) -- The Episcopal Church has moved decisively closer to full acceptance of gay men and lesbians, taking steps toward recognizing same-sex marriage and gay bishops.



Gene Robinson is the Episcopal Church's first -- and so far only -- openly gay bishop.



A key committee voted overwhelmingly Monday to start putting together blessings to be used in same-sex marriages, the church's official newspaper reported.



Separately, the House of Bishops voted by a wide margin to allow gays and lesbians to become bishops, Episcopal Life reported.



Both measures must be approved by the church's General Convention before taking effect, but expert Mark Silk said there is "little reason" to think the changes will not "sail through."



"They basically decided to move forward on all fronts with regularizing the status of gays and lesbians within the church," said Silk, director of the Leonard E. Greenberg Center for the Study of Religion in Public Life at Trinity College in Connecticut.



A leading campaigner for gay rights within the Episcopal Church welcomed the vote on bishops.



"There is no question that today's vote in the House of Bishops was an historic move forward and a great day for all who support the full inclusion of all the baptized in the Body of Christ," said Susan Russell, president of Integrity USA.



The vote shows the Episcopal Church "striving to actually become the church former Presiding Bishop Edmond Browning called us to be nearly 20 years ago now ... a church where there are no outcasts," she said in a statement on the group's Web site.



The Episcopal Church created controversy in 2003 with its decision to ordain Gene Robinson, who is openly gay, as a bishop. The move raised the possibility of a split within the worldwide Anglican Church, the third-largest Christian denomination, with about 70 million members around the world.



The Episcopal Church, the U.S. branch of the Anglican Church, has not ordained another openly gay bishop since Robinson.



"The decision has been to kind of chill out on a bunch of things," Silk said.



But Monday's vote ends what had been, in effect, a moratorium, he said.



It was the Episcopal Church saying that "this wasn't an anomaly when we elected Gene Robinson. We affirm that partnered gay people do have callings [to be clergy], and we have to recognize them."



"It is bringing the church's position in line with the civil society's," Silk said.



The head of the Church of England, Archbishop of Canterbury Rowan Williams, declined Tuesday through a spokesman to comment on Monday's moves.



But on Monday, he expressed "regret" at the vote on gay and lesbian bishops, according to Episcopal Life.



"I regret the fact that the will to observe a moratorium is not the will of such a significant part of the church in North America," the paper quoted him as saying.



A number of Episcopal dioceses have broken with the official church structure over gay and lesbian issues, forming the breakaway Anglican Church in North America.



They say the mainstream Episcopal Church and the aligned Anglican Church in Canada "have increasingly accommodated and incorporated un-Biblical, un-Anglican practices and teaching."

***

Editor's note: Joy Behar's new nightly show debuts Tuesday, September 29 on HLN at 9 PM ET.



Joy Behar says Ukranian officials are wrong to try to block Elton John from adopting a 14-month-old boy.



NEW YORK (CNN) -- On a recent tour of a Ukrainian orphanage, Elton John and his partner met Lev, a 14-month old HIV-positive boy.



They immediately fell in love with the child, but their possible bid to adopt the adorable tiny dancer was rejected by Yuriy Pavlenko, Ukraine's Family, Youth and Sports Minister.



Mr. Pavlenko, here are some tips about family, youth and sports. Family doesn't mean a huddle of orphans sharing a few soiled mattresses, it's not youth if you die of AIDS before you reach kindergarten, and wrestling over dinner scraps is not a sport.



But that could be Lev's fate now, because the Ukrainian government said Elton and his beau David Furnish are too old to adopt the boy. It sounds like the real reason is they're too gay.



John and Furnish tied the knot in 2005, becoming one of Britain's first gay civil unions, but Ukraine doesn't recognize gay unions.



Ukrainian Orthodox Church spokesman Father Georgy Gulyaev called Elton John a sinner and said, "thank God it's impossible under Ukrainian law for [him] to adopt a child." Apparently in the Ukraine, God's No. 1 priority is preventing gay couples from giving sick kids a better life. God would never want something like that to happen.



Father Gulyaev said homosexuality "represents the dead end of human development." That's odd, I thought the dead end of human development was represented by 14th century thinking like his. This guy's head is stuck in the Dark Ages. He hasn't even progressed to the Middle Ages yet.



Some conservative religious leaders like to harp about the "damage" to families done by gay marriage, as if traditional marriage is so perfect. Since many of them have taken vows of celibacy, they've never witnessed firsthand the damage dinner with the in-laws can cause (one of the few advantages of the celibate life, I guess).



There are even a few married Bible-thumpers spending their time trying to keep sex out of our lives -- yet they talk about sex more than anyone! Sex is usually the first and only factor they consider when judging -- I mean, when "dispensing enlightenment upon" -- others.  Watch Joy Behar speak about adoption »



Sure, Elton John may be gay, but he's also a renowned musician, a celebrated humanitarian, and has been knighted by the Queen of England. In fact, for some people he is the Queen of England.



Plus, there's no downside to gay adoption. In the United States, organizations like the National Adoption Center, the American Psychological Association, and the American Academy of Pediatrics all agree that having homosexual parents does not negatively affect children.



But you know what does negatively affect children? Growing up with no parents. So now 14-month-old Lev is stuck in some depressing orphanage that makes Guantanamo Bay look like the presidential suite at the Waldorf.



He'll likely end up in foster homes and -- if he lives long enough -- maybe he can turn into a bitter, vodka-swilling drunk. All because the Ukrainian government won't let him be adopted by two loving gay parents who are fabulously rich and want to give him a home with the best healthcare available, dressed in Versace jammies and cashmere Huggies. Not to mention all the play dates with Brangelina's kids.



Let's hope Sir Elton finds a different, more tolerant country willing to let him be a poor child's loving father.



The opinions expressed in this commentary are solely those of Joy Behar.

***

(CNN) -- Sebastian Vettel is on track to become Formula One's youngest double world champion after topping the qualifying timesheets for Sunday's Singapore Grand Prix.





The 24-year-old headed off Red Bull teammate Mark Webber to claim his 11th pole position this season as he seeks a ninth victory from 14 races.





That would give him another championship crown -- the first was clinched at the last race of 2010, but this one would be with five to go as he seeks to build on his 112-point lead in the night event.





Vettel can beat the mark of second-placed Fernando Alonso, who was 25 when he won his second title with Renault in 2006.





But the Spaniard could delay Vettel's celebrations if he finishes fourth on a testing Marina Bay Street Circuit where he led from the start to win last year from Vettel and Webber -- and also triumphed with Renault in 2008.





How the F1 title can be won: Vettel on the verge





Alonso will have to improve on Saturday's qualifying, where he was fifth fastest ahead of Ferrari teammate Felipe Massa.





Red Bull team boss Christian Horner downplayed chances of the title being decided this weekend.





"The moon and stars have got to line up. We haven't booked anything for a party should we win. We're focused on the race," he told reporters in quotes carried by AFP.





Vettel set the pace in the first two sessions before clocking an unbeatable one minute 44.381 seconds in his only run of Q3 to give Red Bull a perfect record in qualifying this season.





Vettel fastest in Singapore practice





"I decided to abort my second run when I made a mistake because it is very easy to damage the car so I went wide," he said.





"I was quite happy with my first lap. I think the circuit ramped up at the end and I think it was possible to go faster, but I'm very happy. It's a very difficult track with such a long lap to get everything right. I think we learned from our mistakes that we made last year."





Webber then surged into second with 1:44.732 to push past McLaren's former world champions Jenson Button (1:44.804) and Lewis Hamilton (1:44.809).





Hamilton was unable to make a second run due to a fuel problem, and watched from the pits as his time was beaten.





Alonso timed 1:44.874 to be well clear of Massa (1:45.800) and the Mercedes of Nico Rosberg -- whose legendary teammate Michael Schumacher failed to set a time along with Force India's Adrian Sutil and Paul di Resta -- who both opted to conserve tires.