(CNN)  -- With his hands and feet shackled and his face obscured by his long hair, Chester Arthur Stiles made his initial court appearance in Las Vegas, Nevada, on Wednesday morning on charges stemming from the videotaped rape of a 2-year-old girl.

Chester Stiles appears Wednesday in a Las Vegas, Nevada, courtroom.

Stiles, 37, was taken into custody Monday night after a Henderson, Nevada, police officer pulled over the white Buick Century he was driving.

Prosecutors added a couple more charges before Wednesday's hearing, bringing the total to 23 felony counts, including a charge of lewdness with a minor, sexual assault and the use of a child in the production of pornography, according to a statement issued by the Clark County, Nevada, court.

One of the lewdness charges stems from a 2004 incident, while the others are related to the videotape, the court said.

Judge Deborah Lippis set November 19 as the date for the preliminary hearing.

After the hearing, Stiles' court-appointed attorney said his client was overwhelmed by the public opinion in the case.

"I think he's a little out of it," public defender Jeff Banks said.

Jerry T. Donohue, the attorney for the girl's mother, told CNN that the child on the videotape was younger than 3 when the abuse occurred. The girl, who is now 7, was found last month after a nationwide search.

The girl's mother said on "The Dr. Phil Show" Wednesday that she was "relieved" about Stiles' arrest, although it would have been "better if they found him dead."

The woman said she will testify against Stiles if the case goes to court.

She told Phil McGraw that her daughter remembers nothing about the videotaped assault and that she recently had a conversation with the girl about inappropriate touching.

She said her daughter told her that if someone touched her inappropriately, the girl would scream and tell her mother.

But, she told McGraw, "I don't trust anybody now."

Although she is in a relationship with a man her daughter calls "Dad," she said, "I don't feel comfortable leaving her with him, nor with anybody else. ... I just cry and blame it on myself."

Eight-and-a-half months pregnant, she said the incident has placed a lot of strain on her.

Asked if she would rather not have known about the assault, she said, "Yes, I could have lived without knowing it."

A former girlfriend of Stiles' said that, before the arrest, she lived in fear after going to police to identify the suspect after seeing enhanced photos from the videotape on the local news.

"I've had my share of nightmares," Elaine Thomas told CNN's Nancy Grace.

Thomas said she screamed when she recognized the photos on television and had no choice but to contact police about the man she had thought was a "weapons enthusiast" with only a minor criminal record.  Watch Thomas say how she felt when she saw the photos »

"How could I not tell them who that man was? That little girl suffered unimaginable things, and I knew for a fact it was him," Thomas said.

Another former girlfriend of Stiles', Tina Allen, said this month she thinks she is the reason Stiles came in contact with the girl and is "mortified" by the allegations against him.

"He said he'd been in the Navy and, you know, I was looking for a strong guy to represent to my sons what I thought they needed to be," Allen said.

Allen said she took Stiles to a crowded apartment where her son and daughter lived.

Also living in the apartment were a family friend and her daughter, the alleged assault victim. Todd Allen, Tina Allen's son, said he recognized his old apartment from scenes in the video.  E-mail to a friend

CNN's Ed Payne and Ted Rowlands contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- A third minute goal from Gonzalo Higuain gave Real Madrid a 1-0 victory over Valencia, coach Juande Ramos' first Primera Liga win since taking charge of the Spanish champions.



Gonzalo Higuain is congratulated after scoring Real Madrid's only goal against Valencia.



The win ended Madrid's run of three straight league defeats and moved them up to 29 points, nine behind leaders Barcelona -- who visit Villarreal on Sunday.



With captain Raul Gonzalez only on the bench befcause of the flu, Higuain played alone in attack, and he soon made his mark with the early goal -- the Argentine collecting Arjen Robben's pass to fire home his 11th goal of the season.



Valencia almost fell two goals behind in the 16th minute when Rafael van der Vaart struck the post with a curling drive.



Higuain had a chance to double Madrid's tally in the second-half, but his close-range shot struck the bar.



The visitors' hopes were effectively ended when captain Carlos Marchena was sent off  after picking up his second yellow card, for a foul on Robben.



The defeat, only Valencia's second of the season after also going down to Barcelona, leaves them on 30 points, just one above Madrid.

***

(CNN) -- Actor Sean Penn helped play a role in securing this week's release of two U.S. hikers imprisoned in Iran for more than two years, his representative confirmed Friday.





The report was first published by the Reuters news agency, which cited a source close to the release process as saying that Penn flew to Venezuela months ago to speak about the hikers' plight with President Hugo Chavez, an ally of Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad.





Mara Buxbaum, a rep for Penn, confirmed the Reuters report but declined to provide additional details.





Venezuelan state media reported Friday that Chavez was part of the mediation process that resulted in the release of Josh Fattal and Shane Bauer on Wednesday.





Upon their release, the men were flown to Muscat, Oman, where their families greeted them with elation.





"We're so happy we are free and so relieved we are free," Fattal said. "Our deepest gratitude goes toward His Majesty Sultan Qaboos of Oman for obtaining our release. We're sincerely grateful for the government of Oman for hosting us and our families."





Bauer said, "Two years in prison is too long, and we sincerely hope for the freedom of other political prisoners and other unjustly imprisoned people in America and Iran."

***

(CNN)  -- Ukraine's Security Service launched a raid on the country's state-run gas company Wednesday, searching for documents related to a gas deal with Russia, a spokesman for the company said.



Ukrainian security service agents let employees leave a room at Naftogaz's headquarters.



A group of about 30 gunmen wearing masks and carrying machine guns entered the offices of Naftogaz and took control of every floor of the company's building in the capital of Kiev, Naftogaz spokesman Valentyn Zemlyansky said.



Operatives from the security service then began a search for various company documents, including those pertaining to the Russia-Ukraine gas deal signed in January to end a weeks-long gas dispute, Zemlyansky told journalists, according to Russia's Interfax news agency.



The Security Service opened a criminal case on Monday into alleged misappropriation of 6.3 billion cubic meters of transit gas worth over 7.4 billion hryvnia ($880 million) by a group of Naftogaz officers, Interfax reported.



Taras Shepitko, a deputy chief of an Energy Regional Customs division under the State Customs Service, was detained as part of the case.



Ukrainian Security Service operatives confirmed to Interfax that the operation was related to that criminal case.



The armed troops were there simply to protect the investigators, the service told Interfax, citing attempts to hinder the investigation.



Naftogaz called police when the armed men stormed in but the police retreated soon after they arrived, Zemlyansky said.



CNN's Maxim Tkachenko in Moscow, Russia, contributed to this report.

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN) -- The Beastie Boys canceled all scheduled concerts and delayed their next album release while member Adam "MCA" Yauch is treated for a cancerous tumor in a salivary gland, Yauch says in a video statement to fans.





The Beastie Boys' Adam Yauch will be treated for a cancerous tumor in a salivary gland.





"The good news is that they did scans of my whole body and it's only localized in this one area and it's not in a place that affects my voice," Yauch says. "So, that's nice. That's convenient."





The cancer is in his left parotid gland and "also in a lymph node right in that area," he says.





He will probably have surgery next week and radiation treatments afterward, he says.





With band mate Adam "Ad-Rock" Horovitz sitting next to him, Yauch tells fans how he found out he had cancer.





"About two months ago, I started feeling this little lump in my throat, like you would feel if you have swollen glands or something like that, like you'd feel if you have a cold, so I didn't really think it was anything," he says.





His doctor sent him to a specialist who diagnosed the cancer, he says.





Yauch does not estimate how long the tour will be delayed, but he apologizes to "anyone who's made plans" to come to the shows.





The illness will also delay the release of the band's next album, "Hot Sauce Committee Part 1," he says.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Ryanair on Monday rejected strong criticism from Britain's top business regulator, who accused Europe's largest airline of "puerile" tactics in the way it adds credit card fees on to advertised fares.



John Fingleton, head of the UK's Office of Fair Trading watchdog, said the no-frills carrier was playing a "funny game" by imposing fees for anyone not using an obscure credit card.



Fingleton, speaking to the UK's Independent newspaper, expressed dismay that the airline was able to advertise credit card fees as "optional" through its acceptance of a pre-paid MasterCard.



"Ryanair has this funny game where they have found some low frequency payment mechanism and say: 'Well, because you can pay with that [the charge is optional]'," he said.



"It's almost like taunting consumers and pointing out: 'Oh well, we know this is completely outside the spirit of the law, but we think it's within the narrow letter of the law'."



Ryanair, which outlines its credit chard charges on its Web site, rejected Fingleton's comments, accusing the business regulator of trying to detract from its failure to tackle other issues facing the country's aviation industry.



"Ryanair fails to understand why it was singled out for these inaccurate criticisms by Mr. Fingleton, when its charges policies are copied by high fare UK airlines," it said in a statement.

***

(CNN) -- Cleanup efforts unfolded Monday in Pakistan's largest city, Karachi, after torrential monsoon rain over the weekend killed dozens, cut power to 15 million and broke a 32-year record.



Pakistanis push a stranded auto-rickshaw along a flooded street  in Karachi on Sunday.



Officials combed the city looking for bodies. The health department confirmed 32 deaths and said it received reports of more.



"Most of them are either from drowning or they were deaths when the walls or roofs of their houses collapses," said Dr. A.D. Sajnani of the health department.



"The entire city is disrupted," said Muhammad Aly Balagamwala, a Karachi businessman. "Most places lost power for 28 to 30 hours, and some are still without power. The rain flooded offices. We lost water. Everything is shut down."



Many residents took to the streets to protest the massive power outage in the southern city. They threw rocks at the offices of the power company and burned tires.



"I guess there comes a point you just snap and you can't take it anymore," Balagamwala said. "To the credit of the government, a lot of cleanup work has been done since last night."



The rain began Friday night, and by Sunday the city had received almost 9 inches (22.9 cm), the most since 1977, said Mayor Syed Mustafa Kamal.



Storm drains overflowed, water-logging streets and alleyways.



Monsoon rains sweep across the subcontinent from June to September. While they bring much-needed relief to often-parched farmlands, they also leave a trail of landslides, home collapses and floods that sometimes claim dozens of lives.

***

PARIS, France (CNN) -- Three French journalists charged in an alleged plot to kidnap African children for adoption in Europe arrived in Paris on Sunday, hours after French President Nicolas Sarkozy held emergency talks in Chad.

But 14 other people remained in custody in the African nation, some facing serious charges that could send them to jail for up to 20 years.

The journalists were among seven Europeans a Chadian judge released Sunday, including a Spanish flight crew, whom Sarkozy dropped off in a brief stop in Madrid on his way back from Chad.

All were arrested last week after workers from Zoe's Ark -- a French-based charity group -- were accused of trying to fly 103 children out of Chad in a kidnapping and adoption operation.  Watch a report on how the events unfolded »

Some of the children may never return to their families because it is too difficult to determine their backgrounds, Red Cross spokeswoman Inah Kaloga told CNN on Friday.

Those who remain under arrest in Chad are six members of the French charity, four Chadians and four remaining members of the flight crew. Some face kidnapping and fraud charges.

Zoe's Ark leader Eric Breteau testified Saturday to a court in the Chadian capital that the three journalists and the flight crew of seven Spaniards and a Belgian were not involved in the alleged plot, court witnesses told CNN.

At least some of the flight crew are scheduled to testify before a judge on Monday.

The three journalists initially had been charged with complicity in the alleged kidnapping attempt. It's not clear if the charges against them have been dropped.  Watch the freed Europeans leave Chad »

In a joint news conference with Spanish Prime Minister Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero on Sunday at Madrid's Torrejon Air Force Base, Sarkozy expressed satisfaction that some of those detained had been released.

At the same time, however, he told reporters, "We should respect the sovereignty of Chad."

Zapatero thanked Sarkozy for dropping the four Spanish flight crew members off in their home country, and thanked Chadian President Idriss Deby for allowing them to return.

After his emergency talks in Chad, Sarkozy stressed the scandal would not affect the strong relations between the two countries or affect the planned deployment of a European force to protect refugees from Sudan's Darfur region who have fled to Chad and the neighboring Central African Republic.

Sarkozy also said he hoped the six remaining French nationals -- all from Zoe's Ark -- would face trial in France.

The charity says that the children were orphans from the Darfur region -- where the United Nations estimates 200,000 people have been killed in four years of conflict -- and that the group was taking them to host families in France.

But after preliminary interviews with the children, aid agencies said Thursday it appeared most of them probably are not orphans and not from Sudan, but instead come from villages on the Chadian side of the border with Sudan.

The children are staying in an Abeche orphanage while aid agencies and government officials try to find out where they came from -- a challenge hindered by the number of children, their youth, and the volatile situation in the region.

A father of three of the children allegedly kidnapped told a French newspaper he put his children into the charity's care after he was told they would be educated at a school under construction in a nearby town.

The Chadian man, who gave his name as Arbab, told Le Parisien on Sunday that workers from Zoe's Ark had visited his village three times.

"They never said they would take away our children," he told the newspaper. E-mail to a friend

CNN's Nic Robertson and Al Goodman contributed to this report.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN)  -- The confirmation of Michael Mukasey as attorney general was all but assured Friday when two key Democratic senators said they will vote in favor of the nominee despite questions about his views on "waterboarding" and the president's power to order electronic surveillance.

Sens. Dianne Feinstein of California and Charles Schumer of New York announced they would support the retired federal judge from New York just hours after the chairman of the Judiciary Committee announced his opposition to the nominee.

Feinstein and Schumer are members of the Senate Judiciary Committee, which is scheduled to vote on the Mukasey nomination Tuesday.

If all the Republican members of the committee also vote for Mukasey, which is expected, his nomination will go before the full Senate. A leading Democrat, speaking on condition of anonymity, said Wednesday Mukasey is likely to be confirmed if his nomination passes the Judiciary Committee.

Schumer had praised the nomination of Mukasey as a consensus candidate when the president announced Mukasey as his choice to replace former Attorney General Alberto Gonzales. Gonzales gave up the post in September.

"This is an extremely difficult decision," Schumer said.

"When an administration so political, so out of touch with the realities of governing and so contemptuous of the rule of law is in charge, we are never left with an ideal choice. Judge Mukasey is not my ideal choice. However, Judge Mukasey, whose integrity and independence is respected even by those who oppose him, is far better than anyone could expect from this administration."

A number of Democratic senators, however, have said they will oppose Mukasey because of questions about his views on the interrogation technique called "waterboarding" and the president's power to order electronic surveillance.

Waterboarding involves restraining a suspect and using water to produce the sensation of drowning.

Mukasey told senators this week that he finds waterboarding "repugnant," but he could not answer whether the technique amounts to torture.

While saying "serious questions have been raised about Judge Mukasey's views on torture and on separation of powers," Feinstein said she would support the nominee because the Justice Department needed fresh leadership.

"First and foremost, Michael Mukasey is not Alberto Gonzales. Rather, he has forged an independent life path as a practitioner of the law and a federal judge in the Southern District of New York.

"I believe that Judge Mukasey is the best we will get and voting him down would only perpetuate acting and recess appointments, allowing the administration to avoid the transparency that confirmation hearings provide and diminish effective oversight by Congress."

Just hours before Feinstein and Schumer announced their decisions, Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Sen. Patrick Leahy, D-Vermont, announced he would vote against the Mukasey nomination.  Watch Sen. Leahy explain why he can't support the Mukasey nomination »

"No American should need a classified briefing to determine whether waterboarding is torture," Leahy said. "Waterboarding was used at least as long ago as the Spanish Inquisition. We prosecuted Japanese war criminals for waterboarding after World War II.

"I am eager to restore strong leadership and independence to the Department of Justice. I like Michael Mukasey. I wish that I could support his nomination. But I cannot. America needs to be certain and confident of the bedrock principle -- deeply embedded in our laws and our values -- that no one, not even the president, is above the law."

President Bush demanded the Senate confirm Mukasey during a speech Thursday at the Heritage Foundation, an influential conservative think tank.

"In a time of war, it's vital for the president to have a full national security team in place," the president said.

The president has equated asking Mukasey about his opinion of waterboarding with asking him about the CIA-run interrogation program, whose details are classified.

Bush said the program does not violate U.S. bans on torture, but added that Mukasey "does not want an uninformed opinion to be taken by our professional interrogators in the field as placing them in legal jeopardy."

But Leahy said "Judge Mukasey was not asked to evaluate any secret 'facts and circumstances

***

(CNN)  -- Yes, she is 28. Yes, she is a Sunday school teacher, and yes, her name is Melissa Huckaby.

Melissa Huckaby of Manteca, California, is also a 28-year-old Sunday school teacher.

But the woman from Manteca, California, said she wants people to know that she is not that Melissa Huckaby.

This Melissa Huckaby lives about 14 miles from Tracy, California, where the other one was arrested and accused of raping and killing 8-year-old Sandra Cantu.

That hasn't stopped national talk shows from calling her and people from threatening her, forcing her friends to bring guns to church in an effort to protect her.

Her MySpace page has been mistaken so many times for the one of the murder suspect that she has had to shut it down, Huckaby said.

"They hear the name, and a lot of people think it's me," Huckaby told CNN affiliate KOVR-TV. "I was getting hate mail."

Even Melissa Huckaby of Manteca has noticed the similarities with her namesake in nearby Tracy.  Watch how the Manteca woman deals with the confusion »

Not only are they the same age and both teach Sunday school, the two women resemble each other slightly.

Melissa Huckaby of Tracy is accused of killing an 8-year-old playmate of her 5-year-old daughter.

Melissa Huckaby of Manteca has two daughters -- 8 and 5.

But that's where the similarities end, the Manteca woman said, noting that she's never even received a speeding ticket.

***

PARIS, France (CNN) -- French Internet users who download files illegally could have their service cut off under a new law enacted by the French government.



French filmmaker Luc Besson attended the vote passing the new law into action.



The "three strikes and you're out" law will see violators getting up to two warnings before their Internet service providers could be allowed to cut service for as long as a year.



The tough new legislation sailed through the French Senate this week, even as opponents promised to continue to fight it in the courts.



The law sets up a special government anti-piracy agency to monitor "internauts," as French Internet users are called. It will ensure users are paying for movies and music that they download.



While there are countries with stricter penalties such as jail time, in France opponents of the law are angry that the new government agency will be outside the judicial process. That means it can disconnect Internet service without oversight.



Opponents of the law worry the government agency could be packed with over zealous enforcers who will side with filmmakers and the recording industry, or even invade the privacy of Internet users.



The legislation has split France's political opposition, which protested against the new law.



The political left -- traditionally supported by performers and artists -- found that on this issue the creative types were on the government's side, seeing the legislation as a way to protect the intellectual rights that are the foundation of their livelihood.



Though the new law still faces a court test and may not be compatible with European legislation, the government plans to have the agency up and running by next year.

***

(CNN) -- Peru declared a state of emergency in parts of the country after weeks of protests against a mining project, the Andina news agency reported.





The state of emergency, which begins Monday, which will last for 60 days in four areas of Cajamarca department, according to Andina. President Ollanta Humala Tasso announced the decision, described as an attempt to re-establish peace in the area, Andina reported.





The announcement Sunday came after protests against the construction of a $4.8 billion gold mining project called Conga. The decision came as union leaders refused to stop ongoing protests, Andina reported.





Eighteen people were hurt, several by gunshots, following protests on Wednesday, the department's director of health said.





The protests took place despite an announcement Tuesday by U.S.-based Newmont Mining Corp. that work on the project would be suspended.





Newmont, which is based in Denver, Colorado, and describes itself as one of the world's largest oil companies, said it had suspended construction on the project "for the safety of employees and community members."





It noted that operations there and at the nearby Yanacocha mine "have experienced intermittent work stoppages as a result of ongoing protests in the region."





The protests began when anti-mining activists expressed concern about the possible impact of the project on the local water supply, the company said in a statement on its website. "The Conga Environmental Impact Assessment was approved in 2010 after extensive review by the Peruvian government, which included significant engagement and consultation with local communities," it said.





Critics say the mining project would adversely affect the area's ecosystem and would leave cattle in the zone without access to water.





CNN's Helena DeMoura and journalist Maria Belaunde contributed to this report.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN)  -- After a town hall meeting on health-care reform in Belgrade, Montana, President Obama will escape to Big Sky country on Friday evening where he'll spend time with family and go fly-fishing for the first time.



White House Chief of Staff Rahm Emanuel carries fly-fishing tackle  to Marine One on Friday.



Fly-fishing requires a singular focus, much like golf. Having newly discovered the sport myself, it occurred to me as I watched Marine One lift off the South Lawn on Friday that there are probably some lessons on the river that could apply to Obama's presidency.



Thinking like a producer, I called an expert -- fly-fishing instructor Tony Derosier, who described the evolution most fishermen go through.



"Usually, when you first go fishing, all you want to do is catch a fish, and then all you want to do is catch a lot of fish, and then you just want to catch the larger fish. After you've caught a lot of large fish, you kind of go back to square one and catch just one fish," said Derosier, manager at Taylor Creek Fly Shop in Aspen, Colorado. "You basically just want to go fishing -- the numbers, the size, it doesn't matter any more."



Obama is in the "big fish" stage of his presidency: He's trying to get health-care reform legislation passed hook, line, and sinker. If he's successful, anything else he gets passed will be icing on the cake.



Learning the fundamentals of fly-fishing can serve as a metaphor for health care reform. Obama just needs to look at hooking and landing Blue Dog Democrats and Republicans like he would trout.



The first step -- learn how to cast. "Fly-casting is all about maximizing the energy you put in your rod and you lose energy if you wait too long," Derosier said. "And conversely, if you don't wait long enough, your line will crack like a whip." Obama has to strike the right balance between rushing things through and losing momentum; and maintaining support while bringing others over to his side.



The second step -- reading the water: "Instead of blindly casting anywhere in the river you want to understand where you might find fish," Derosier explained. Obama zeroed in on a fairly conservative state, Montana, where he faces a land full of skeptics about his health care reform plan.



Third -- hook and land the fish: Derosier said once you hook the fish you have to know how to play the fish, which is a delicate balance between applying pressure but not so much that the line breaks -- much like the delicate balance of Obama's courting members of Congress.



"The ultimate goal is to gain an advantage over the fish so that you can land him," he said. "It's the hardest thing to teach when it comes to fly-fishing," he said.



Out in Montana, the game is catch-and-release trout. But in Washington, Obama is trying to hook Congress and take home health care reform, or risk it being the big one that got away.

***

(CNN) -- The name "Vampire Weekend" describes the band perfectly: distinctive and eccentric.



Vampire Weekend has earned a following for its upbeat, surf-laden songs.



Made up of four guys who attended Columbia University, the band's sound is distinguishable from other bands competing for attention in the indie pop arena with its percussive use of drums, shakers and guitars, as well as upbeat, surf-inflected melodies.



The group -- Ezra Koenig, Rostam Batmanglij, Chris Tomson and Chris Baio -- earned generally favorable reviews for its first, self-titled CD release in 2008, which landed on many year-end best-of lists. Among its songs: "Cape Cod Kwassa Kwassa" and "A-Punk."



The band is working on a new album, scheduled out early 2010.



And what about that name? It comes from a film Koenig was making in his backyard, which was in turn inspired by the 1987 film "The Lost Boys." In Koenig's version, a character had to go to Cape Cod and fight vampires on the way there.  Watch Koenig talk about the source of "Vampire Weekend" »



The band was originally going to be called simply "Weekend," but opted for the slightly longer version. "It feels right," Koenig said.



So does their sound, though it's not likely to earn them any No. 1 singles in the current musical environment.



"Ultimately we wanted to make music we listen to, and like most people we listen to a lot of music outside of rock and roll," Koenig said.



The members talked to CNN about the band's origins, the forthcoming album and maintaining Facebook accounts.

***

BELGRADE, Serbia (CNN) -- The U.S. Embassy in Belgrade is evacuating all nonessential personnel following Thursday's attack on the building by a crowd of protesters, a spokesman for the embassy told CNN Friday.



Serbian riot police stand in front of the damaged U.S. Embassy in Belgrade on Friday.



The U.S. ambassador, Cameron Munter, is staying, officials said.



The embassy was closed Friday, and a handful of riot police holding shields stood outside the building, its outer walls blackened from fires set the night before and some of its windows smashed.



It will remain closed until Monday or Tuesday so officials can assess the damage, said Bill Wanlund, the embassy's spokesman.



He said embassy staff were still in a heightened state of alert but there were no specific threats against any staff members.



The United States has warned the Serbian government that it has a responsibility to protect its assets.



A top U.S. diplomat was asked during an interview on CNN if the Serbian government "gets" the warning.



"They'd better get it, because they have a fundamental responsibility to protect our diplomats and our embassy and to protect American citizens," said Undersecretary of State for Political Affairs R. Nicholas Burns. "What happened yesterday in Belgrade was absolutely reprehensible."  Watch Burns' angry comments on Belgrade attack »



Thursday's violence erupted after demonstrations by thousands of Serbs against Kosovo's declaration of independence. The anger directed against the United States and other countries for recognizing the breakaway province as a nation sparked attacks on Western embassies and shops by hundreds of people.



Burns said there was an "insufficient" number of security people guarding the U.S. Embassy at a demonstration everyone knew would take place. He said security "melted away" as "the mob attacked our embassy."



"This kind of thing should not happen in a civilized country. It doesn't happen in the United States of America. It doesn't happen in most world capitals. So the Serb government needs to reflect seriously about the responsibility it has under the Vienna Convention," he said.



Burns, the third highest ranking diplomat in the State Department, said he told the Serbian prime minister, Vojislav Kostunica, and his government that the U.S. "would hold them personally responsible for the safety of our people."



"They assured me that they would have adequate security on the ground today and for every day to come. We will hold them to that commitment," Burns said.



Demonstrators only managed to break into one U.S. embassy building, which Wanlund said was rarely used by staff. He said the protesters didn't manage to get any documents or embassy materials.



Only Marines and security guards were present at the embassy when the angry mob of about 100 approached the walls.



In addition to the U.S. Embassy, the protesters attacked other Western interests including the embassies of Britain and Germany, as well as a McDonald's restaurant and a Nike shop.



"One might understand the emotion, but not the violence, and that's what the Serb government needs to remember," Burns said.



Burns, who is stepping down in March, has long been involved in trying to resolve tensions in the former Yugoslavia. The situation was complicated by Sunday's unilateral declaration of independence by Serbia's predominantly Albanian region of Kosovo.  Kosovo is revered historically by Orthodox Christian Serbs but also is claimed as separate and distinct by its ethnic Muslim Albanians.



The wisdom of recognizing Kosovo independence has been questioned by many observers, who say the United States won't recognize other unilateral declarations of independence.



Some opponents of Kosovo's independence say recognition is a bad precedent if it's unilateral and not done in a bilateral, diplomatic setting. They say it will give others the incentive to stage their own breakaway nations.



Burns said every situation has its unique set of circumstances, as does Kosovo, which was the victim of ethnic cleansing policies by the Slobodan Milosevic regime in 1999.



NATO troops fought Serbia in an air war then and pushed Serbian forces out of the region. Since then Kosovo has been run by the United Nations and

***

(CNN) -- World champion Casey Stoner won the Valencia MotoGP, the final race of the season, after a thrilling battle with American Ben Spies all the way to the line.





Stoner led for most of the 30-lap race before Spies overtook him with three laps remaining. However, the Australian regained the lead to win by just one hundredth of a second and secure his 10th victory of a dominant season.





Spies, who won his first ever MotoGP at Assen in June, had to settle for second place with Italian Andrea Dovizioso third.





Briton Cal Crutchlow, Spain's Dani Pedrosa and Katsuyuki Nakasuga of Japan completed the top six.





Spies told reporters: "We tried to just be careful on the last lap as it had started to rain quite heavily.





"Casey took a couple more risks in the last couple of corners and had a bit more motor than me down the straight," he added.





Stoner, who had already sealed his second world championship triumph prior to Sunday's race, said: "It was the last lap of the last race of the year so I thought, 'Let's just go for it' -- and I got it. It was one of the hairiest races of my career."





The win ensured the Honda rider finished on 350 points, 90 points ahead of 2010 world champion Jorge Lorenzo, who was forced to miss the final race because of a finger injury.





Dovizioso's third place ensured he claimed third in the overall standings with 228 points, ahead of Pedrosa on 219 points and Spies on 176.





The race was the first since the tragic death of Marco Simoncelli in a crash in Malaysia a fortnight ago and, prior to racing, riders from the MotoGP, Moto2 and 125cc categories united to perform a lap of honor to remember the late Italian.

***

(CNN) -- The pastor of a non-denominational church in Argyle, Texas, passed around the collection plate to his congregants earlier this year -- and asked them to take money from it.



Donations at the Cross Timbers Community Church had slumped because of the economic downturn. Pastor Toby Slough thought that his congregants had to be hurting, too.



His gesture, instead, was met with an unexpected response: The church had its highest offering ever.



It was a eureka moment for Slough: Give away money to those who need it, knowing his church members will help fill the need.



"In these economic times, we can't be so into church business that we forget what our business is, and that is to help people," Slough told CNN television affiliate KDAF in Dallas-Forth Worth, Texas.



In the past two months, the 9-year-old church has done just that: handed out a half-million dollars to members and non-members who are struggling.  Watch pastor on rip off concerns »



"We've taken $200,000 and spread it out to organizations -- four local, two missions that are feeding and clothing people in these tough times," Slough said. "We've paid utility bills for members of our church that are unemployed or under-employed."



His favorite giveaway came three weeks ago. The church gave 1,400 families $50 each and told them to hand it out to someone else.



One of the recipients was Katie Lewis.



"I've been alone so long. Just to be thought of and to be remembered, to be welcomed -- it's amazing," she said, crying.



Church members are pleasantly surprised.



"You don't hear about a church giving money away," Amy Sullivan said.



Slough said he is not concerned if people try to take advantage of the church's generosity.



"I told my church a couple weeks ago, if I'm not being taken advantage of, I'm not being like Jesus," he said.



The church has now formed a group to look into the best ways to give out money. And, Slough said, it plans on doing so as long as there is a need in the community.

***

(CNN) -- Yahoo! announced Monday that the search is on for the Internet giant's next CEO.

Jerry Yang, Yahoo! co-founder, speaks at an electronics show in Las Vegas in January.

The new CEO will replace Yahoo! co-founder, Jerry Yang, who assumed the position in June 2007 and has since come under fire for failing to turn around the company.

Yang will step down when a replacement is selected.

Just two weeks ago at the Web 2.0 Summit, Yang was asked if he was the right guy to lead the battered portal.

Yang dodged the question by defending his passion for the company he co-founded 13 years ago.

"I didn't make the decision of being the CEO lightly," he said. "I wanted to make a change at Yahoo! that I believe I can make ... That's a dream that I felt I could achieve by being CEO and that's still the dream today."

Now, Yang plans to return to his former role as "Chief Yahoo" and will still have a seat on the board, Yahoo! said.

During his short tenure, Yahoo! has had two major rounds of layoffs and has seen its search market share shrink significantly while a series of reorganizations led to the departure of senior executives.

Wall Street and shareholders criticized Yang for falling short of reaching an agreement to sell the company to Microsoft.

Yang also was taken to task when Google pulled out of a controversial ad agreement earlier this month that would have boosted Yahoo's revenues by hundreds of millions of dollars.

Yahoo! said the search for a new CEO will encompass both internal and external candidates.

"Over the past year and a half, despite extraordinary challenges and distractions, Jerry Yang has led the repositioning of Yahoo! on an open platform model as well as the improved alignment of costs and revenues," said Chairman Roy Bostock.

"Jerry and the Board have had an ongoing dialogue about succession timing, and we all agree that now is the right time to make the transition to a new CEO who can take the company to the next level."

***

(CNN) -- An additional 440,000 Honda vehicles are being added to a recall initially announced in November to repair a potential defect in airbag inflation systems, American Honda Motor Co. said Friday.



The 2001 Honda Civic is among the vehicles covered by the recall.



The recall involves driver-side airbags in certain 2001-02 Honda Accords, 2001 Civics and 2002-03 Acura TLs, the company said in a news release.



The affected vehicles will require the replacement of the steering-wheel-mounted airbag inflator.



"In some vehicles, airbag inflators can produce over-pressurization of the driver's [front] airbag inflator mechanism during airbag deployment," the release said. "If an affected inflator deploys, the increased internal pressure may cause the inflator casing to rupture. Metal fragments could pass through the cloth airbag cushion material, possibly causing an injury or fatality to vehicle occupants."



Honda spokesman Chris Noughtan said the potential defect has resulted in six known injuries and one known death.



The company will send a recall notice in the mail over the next few months, the release said. Owners may check their car's recall status by visiting the Honda "Owner Link" Web site at www.owners.honda.com/recalls or the Acura "My Acura" Web site at www.owners.acura.com/recalls.



"Only certain vehicles are affected, and concerned owners of 2001-2002 Accords, 2001 Civics and 2002-2003 Acura TLs are encouraged to wait to receive a recall notice in the mail before scheduling an appointment with their local dealer," the company said.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- All 18 people aboard a helicopter that crashed off the coast of Scotland have been recovered alive, a Royal Air Force officer told CNN.

A Super Puma helicopter, similar to the one in this file photo, went down about 120 miles east of Aberdeen.

The Super Puma ditched about 120 miles east of Aberdeen while approaching an offshore platform.

"Everyone has been recovered from the water," said James Lyon, assistant controller of the RAF's aeronautical rescue coordination center at RAF Kinloss, Scotland. "We don't know their condition, but we believe there are no major injuries."

Five helicopters were scrambled when the Super Puma helicopter ditched.

"Some were recovered by helicopter and some by boat from the platform," Lyon told CNN.

The RAF was providing helicopter assistance to the Aberdeen Coast Guard in the rescue.

Lyon said earlier that rescuers had been picking up emergency signal beacons  from the lifejackets of the 18 people.

He did not know if the pilot transmitted a mayday before the aircraft ditched.  View a map of the crash site Â»

"We believe it was quite close to the platform it was supposed to be landing on," he added.

The area is home to a number of offshore oil rigs. Lyon said he did not know which one the helicopter was heading to or where it was coming from.

The RAF received its first report of the crash at 6:43 p.m. (1:43 p.m. Eastern time).

Lyon said the Super Puma is regularly used to transport people to and from oil platforms in the North Sea and as far as he was aware it has a good safety record.

Weather at the crash site is relatively good, though slight fog is hampering visibility, he said.

A spokesman for BP told the UK's Press Association: "The 16 passengers and two crew who were on board have been accounted for and have been rescued. Three people are on the ETAP Platform and a further 15 are on the Caledonian Victory rescue vessel.

"The priority of the company is the safety of all personnel involved in this incident and we have implemented our full emergency response procedures."

***

London, England (CNN) -- A British court has granted Tiger Woods an injunction prohibiting the publication of pictures of him taken or obtained in certain circumstances.





The order prevents CNN saying what those circumstances are.





The High Court in London issued the injunction Thursday afternoon, said the Schillings law firm, which is representing Woods.





"For the avoidance of doubt, this order is not to be taken as an admission that any such photographs exist," Schillings said in a letter sent to legal departments of British publications.





"Our client is not aware of any images and in any event he would not have consented to any such photographs being taken, nor would he have consented to the dissemination or exploitation of the same."





The court document says anyone who violates the order may be held in contempt of court and may be fined, imprisoned or have assets seized.





The 33-year-old golfer, who tops the sport's world rankings, has been mired in controversy since he crashed his car outside his Florida mansion last month. The crash prompted authorities to cite him for careless driving and fine him $164.





Woods was not required to talk to police about the wreck and declined to speak with investigators on several occasions.





In the week after the crash, Woods apologized for "transgressions" that let his family down. On the same day, gossip magazine US Weekly published a report alleging that Woods had an affair with a 24-year-old cocktail waitress named Jaimee Grubbs.





"I have let my family down, and I regret those transgressions with all of my heart. I have not been true to my values and the behavior my family deserves," he said in a December 3 statement on his official Web site.





US Weekly's report followed a National Enquirer article before the crash that the athlete was having an affair with a New York nightclub hostess -- an assertion the hostess vigorously denied, according to The New York Post.

***

New York (CNN) -- A pretrial hearing is scheduled for Friday in the case of a former Rutgers University student who allegedly used a web cam to stream footage of his roommate's sexual encounter with another man.





Dharun Ravi faces a 15-count indictment, which includes hate crime charges, in connection with the death of his roommate , Tyler Clementi. Clementi killed himself after the incident, jumping from the George Washington Bridge between New York and New Jersey.





Last month, Ravi turned down a plea deal that would have allowed him to avoid jail time.





"You want to know why he's rejected the plea?" his attorney, Steven Altman, said in December. "Simple principle of law, simple principle of life -- he's innocent. He's not guilty."Ravi is a citizen of India who was studying in the U.S. legally.





The deal offered by Middlesex County prosecutors would have required Ravi, 19, to undergo 600 hours of community service, counseling and to dispose of any information that could identify the man that Clementi was with.





Prosecutors also offered to help Ravi avoid deportation, though they said they could not guarantee it.





A second student charged in the scandal, Molly Wei, 19, reached a plea deal and that requires her testify against Ravi. In May, Wei pleaded not guilty to two counts of invasion of privacy, according to a statement from the Middlesex County Prosecutor's Office.





Less than a month after Clementi's suicide, President Barack Obama released a taped video message condemning bullying.

***

(CNN) -- Police are examining grainy hotel surveillance video and following up on new leads, including a reported sighting, in the case of a 17-year-old girl who traveled to Myrtle Beach, South Carolina, for spring break last week and then disappeared.



Brittanee Marie Drexel's mother says she thought her daughter was at a beach in New York, not South Carolina.



The possible sighting of Brittanee Drexel was on a bus Wednesday morning in the Myrtle Beach area, according to police, who later showed photos of her to passengers.



As investigators try to build a timeline of the events leading to Brittanee's disappearance Saturday night, they are also scrutinizing hotel security video for signs of a young woman in distress, or other clues.



Brittanee's mother, Dawn Drexel, told HLN's Nancy Grace that she had forbidden the Rochester, New York, high school junior from going to Myrtle Beach, a popular destination for high school and college students on spring break.



Although they stayed in touch by phone and spoke on Saturday, Drexel said she believed the girl was in Rochester when she actually was in Myrtle Beach.



"I didn't have any idea that she was going to do this," Drexel said. "I do trust my daughter, and she needed to cool down a little bit because she was upset that I wasn't going to let her go."



Drexel said her daughter rode there in a car with several friends. She thinks Brittanee used money she had earned and borrowed to finance her trip.

***

(CNN) -- Floyd Mayweather Jr will have to pay Juan Manuel Marquez a reported $600,000 after weighing in two pounds too heavy ahead of Saturday night's welterweight showdown in Las Vegas.



Floyd Mayweather Jr, left, faces off with Juan Manuel Marquez ahead of Saturday night's fight.



Fight promoters Golden Boy confirmed after Friday's weigh-in that there had been a contractually agreed weight of 144 pounds for Mayweather's comeback bout, and that the American would pay a stipulated -- but undisclosed -- amount for every pound over that amount.



As it was, Mayweather tipped the scales at 146 pounds and Mexican Marquez, whose usual weight is around 135 pounds, was weighed at 142 as he stepped up from lightweight for the fight. The maximum for a welterweight is 147 pounds.



"The fight was contracted as a welterweight fight with an agreed upon weight of 144 pounds. However, there were pre-negotiated weight penalties built in," Golden Boy CEO Richard Schaefer told ESPN.com.



The website also reported sources who stated that each extra pound would cost Mayweather $300,000, thus giving Marquez an additional $600,000 on top of his $3.2 million guarantee for the fight at the MGM Grand Garden Arena.



The 32-year-old Mayweather, who returns to the boxing ring for the first time since December 2007 when he beat Ricky Hatton to retain his WBC world welterweight championship, has a reported minimum guarantee of $10 million before pay-per-view TV revenues are added.



Mayweather is undefeated with a career record of 39-0, while the 36-year-old Marquez, who holds the WBA and WBO world lightweight belts, has 50 victories from 55 fights, 37 by knockout.



Meanwhile, Nikolai Valuev will defend his WBA heavyweight title against British boxer David Haye in Germany on November 7.



The fight, originally announced in July, had been in doubt as American John Ruiz lodged a legal challenge claiming that he was the giant Russian's mandatory challenger.



However, the 36-year-old's promoters have clinched a deal with Ruiz, meaning the bout can go ahead as planned at Nuremberg's Arena Nurnberger Versicherung, where Valuev beat Sergei Liakhovich in February 2008.



The 7' 1" Valuev, the tallest and heaviest boxing champion of all time who has a record of 50 wins from 52 fights, will dwarf the 6' 3" Haye, the former undisputed cruiserweight champion.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- The Indian owners of car manufacturer Jaguar Land Rover (JLR) have agreed to pump "tens of millions" of dollars into the luxury car brand to prevent a cash flow crisis, it was reported Monday.





Jaguar Land Rover was bought by the Indian company Tata earlier this year for $2.3 billion.





The moves comes as the British government ponders a public-funded bailout of the West Midlands-based automaker, the Financial Times newspaper said.





Tata, which bought JLR earlier this year, warned its support for the UK subsidiary did not negate the argument that the British government should provide bridging loans and credit guarantees to help the company and the car sector as a whole through the current financial difficulties, the FT said.





Last week, the ailing "big three" automakers in the U.S. were given a boost when the Bush administration agreed a $13.4 billion loan package. Now British Business Secretary Lord Mandelson has come under pressure to come up with a similar package for UK manufacturers.





JLR employs 15,000 workers in Britain and is seen as a vital contributor to the West Midlands regional economy in particular.





However, the business secretary at the weekend reiterated that the state had to be a "lender of last resort," only after Tata has looked to its own resources, the FT reported. Any state support would be conditional on the due diligence on the Indian parent company being conducted by the government's City advisers, according to officials.





A spokesman for Lord Mandelson's Department for Business, Enterprise and Regulatory Reform told the British Press Association: "The Government doesn't have an open cheque-book to bail out ailing companies, but we are doing all we can to help businesses overcome the current challenges.





"Jaguar Land Rover have owners who are well resourced and have the first responsibility to sustain the companies they own."





According to the FT, accountancy firm KPMG and investment bank NM Rothschild have been called in to advise the UK government on the Indian group's complex finances and to assess demands from the car sector.

***

(CNN) -- Brooke Shields is upset with a tabloid reporter over an incident involving the actress' elderly mother.



Brooke Shields moved her mother to a different residence after last week's incident, Shields' lawyer says.



Shields accused a reporter and photographer from the National Enquirer of taking her 75-year-old mother -- Teri Shields, who suffers from dementia -- out of a New Jersey nursing home last week, People magazine reported.



It was "reprehensible and disgusting," Shields told People.



The reporter, "looking for a tabloid story," signed her mother out of a senior living facility in Old Tappan, New Jersey, by falsely claiming to be her friend, Shields said.  Watch why Shields is upset »



The National Enquirer said the reporter has known Teri Shields for a decade.



"Teri asked the reporter to take her out to lunch and run some errands," the tabloid said.



"The freelance reporter then got permission from the facility to do so. ... At no point did the facility, which had given its permission for the outing, contend that there had been any wrongdoing."



Old Tappan police told People they are investigating.



Brooke Shields' lawyer, Gerald Lefcourt, said the actress has not filed charges, but was exploring her options.



Shields moved her mother to another facility, Lefcourt said.



CNN's Marc Balinsky contributed to this report.

***

ROME, Italy (CNN) -- A U.N. report says hunger is on the rise globally and blames higher food prices.



Populations within conflict zones such as the Democratic Republic of Congo are particularly vulnerable.



The Food and Agriculture Organization has issued preliminary estimates classifying 963 million people as undernourished -- an increase of 40 million people over the past year.



"One out of seven people -- about 15 percent -- suffer chronically of not having enough to eat," said Mark Smulders, an FAO economist.



The hunger report -- titled "The State of Food Insecurity in the World 2008" -- said the world's financial and economic problems could throw more people into poverty.



The number of hungry had been increasing over the years before the rise in food prices, with warfare and political instability continuing to be among the factors causing poverty.



The preliminary estimates lack a firm country breakdown, but last year's figures are an accurate measure of where the problems are.



About 907 out of 923 million undernourished people in 2007, or 65 percent of the hungry, live in India, China, the war-wracked Democratic Republic of Congo, Bangladesh, Indonesia, Pakistan and Ethiopia.



Smulders said about 27 percent of the world's hungry live in India and 15 percent in China. The other countries each represent 4 to 5 percent of the world's total.



There has been progress in fighting hunger in the Asian nations of Thailand and Vietnam, and in the sub-Saharan African nations of Ghana, Republic of Congo, Nigeria, Mozambique and Malawi, the report said.



Food prices have declined from their peak earlier in the year, but they are staying high compared to other years, the agency said. The Food and Agriculture Organization's food price index was 28 percent higher in October than it was two years before.



"Prices of major cereals have fallen by over 50 percent from their peaks earlier in 2008 but they remain high compared to previous years," the FAO said.



The agency said the "rural and urban poor, landless farmers and female-headed households are the worst hit by high food prices."



-- CNN's Joe Sterling contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Ousted Honduran President Jose Manuel Zelaya will be granted safe passage to the Dominican Republic as a guest, resolving a diplomatic impasse that kept him trapped in Honduras, Dominican Republic President Leonel Fernandez said Wednesday.





Zelaya, who has been staying at the Brazilian embassy in Honduras, would leave for the Dominican Republic on Tuesday, Fernandez said.





The deal was reached with Honduran President-elect Porfirio "Pepe" Lobo, with the defeated presidential candidates in last November's election signing the accord as witnesses. Lobo takes office next week.





Granting Zelaya safe conduct out of Honduras, where he is wanted on charges of abuse of power, is the first step toward re-engaging Honduras with the international community that repudiated the coup, Lobo said at a news conference Thursday.





Despite polls showing that amnesty for Zelaya remains unpopular, Lobo said that having an ex-president locked up inside an embassy is not the kind of image that will move the country forward.





The agreement will allow Zelaya, his family, and members of his inner circle to leave for the Dominican Republic as guests, rather than under political asylum, a fine point that derailed previous efforts at negotiating his exit.





"This is an exit with dignity," Fernandez said, adding that Zelaya has indicated that his final destination likely will be Mexico.





Zelaya was ousted in a June 28 coup.





After spending months in exile, Zelaya sneaked back into Honduras in September, and has not left the Brazilian embassy. His return was an effort to restart talks to negotiate his return as president.





That never happened.





An agreement was eventually signed, but its implementation has been half-hearted, and Zelaya later called the deal dead.





A previous effort for Zelaya's exit, a petition from Mexico last month, was rejected by the de facto government of Roberto Micheletti because it did not give Zelaya the status of having been granted political asylum.

***

Rio de Janeiro, Brazil (CNN) -- The death toll from flooding and mudslides in Brazil continued to climb Thursday, with official reports of at least 181 fatalities.





Thousands of people have been left homeless, said the government-run Agencia Brasil news service. The Rio de Janeiro mayor's office placed that figure at 5,000.





At least 161 people have been injured, the Rio de Janeiro state government said Thursday on its Web site.





A record 11.3 inches (287 millimeters) of rain fell in Rio within 24 hours Tuesday, Mayor Eduardo Paes said, according to the news service. The downpour continued Wednesday.





iReport: Share your photos, video, stories with CNN





More than 30 homes were destroyed in a mudslide Wednesday in metropolitan Rio, Agencia Brasil said.





About 200 people could be buried or trapped in the mud, emergency officials said.





The cities of Niteroi and Sao Goncalo are among the hardest hit, with more than 80 dead and dozens missing, the news service said.





CNN affiliate TV Record showed firefighters, military personnel and other rescuers using heavy machinery to dig for buried residents.





Brazil's minister of cities, Marcio Fortes, said that housing and sanitation problems are not new for Rio.





His department, which works directly with cities on urban development projects, said that before this week's flooding, the government already had set aside some $800 million to cities to help deal with flood waters and poor infrastructure.





Now, President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva has made available another $11 billion for drainage infrastructure across Brazil, Fortes said.





As for the project that sits before them, Fortes estimated that about 4,000 homes can be rebuilt, together with better roads, schools and health centers. These would provide a shift from the current structures in the slums of Rio, where housing is often improvised.





"You can't correct the past, but you can fix the future," Fortes said.





CNN's Marilia Brocchetto contributed to this report.

***

VATICAN CITY, Vatican (CNN) -- Pope Benedict XVI called for peace in the Middle East and an end to the exploitation of children in the homily he delivered early Thursday during the annual Christmas Eve Midnight Mass in St. Peter's Basilica.



Pope Benedict XVI calls for a "conversion of hearts" to help children.



He later delivered the traditional Christmas address in St. Peter's Square, sending Christmas greetings in languages including English, Spanish, Lithuanian, Ukrainian, Slovak and many others. The address is known as "Urbi et Orbi" -- Latin for "To the City and the World."



Benedict, 81, called for the faithful to pray for peace to come to "the land in which Jesus lived, and which he loved so deeply."



"Let us pray for mutual understanding, that hearts will be opened, so that borders can be opened," he said.



The pontiff also called for special consideration for suffering children who are homeless, forced to serve as soldiers or exploited in pornography "and every other appalling form of abuse."



"The Child of Bethlehem summons us once again to do everything in our power to put an end to the suffering of these children; to do everything possible to make the light of Bethlehem touch the heart of every man and woman," he said.  Watch Pope Benedict deliver his message during midnight Mass »



"Only through the conversion of hearts, only through a change in the depths of our hearts can the cause of all this evil be overcome."



Thousands heard the pope, in white and gold robes, speak inside the basilica at St. Peter's -- although Vatican cameras captured some sleeping children who had been unable to stay awake for the late ceremony.



Those who could not get inside watched on giant television screens outside in the square.



As Benedict was leaving down the main aisle, someone wearing red jumped the barrier. The person was swiftly tackled by security.



The pope appeared to slow his step momentarily and take a slight step back as the action took place, but he quickly resumed the processional, waving to the audience.  Watch as security steps in »



Vatican spokesperson Father Federico Lombardi told CNN she did not appear to pose any risk.

***

Paris (CNN) -- The French government backed off a claim that a certain type of silicone breast implant is linked to a rare form of cancer, but it will nonetheless pay for women to have them removed because of other risks.





Women with implants by a company called Poly Implant Prosthese (PIP) will not be required to get them removed, but they will be offered surgery to do so if concerned, the French Health Ministry said Friday.





The ministry says about 30,000 French women have PIP implants, which are not currently approved for use in the United States.





According to a news release from the British Association of Aesthetic Plastic Surgeons, PIP is now defunct. It says the company "used non-medical grade silicone believed by the manufacturers to be made for mattresses."





The Ministry of Health turned to experts after the cancer fears arose and said that the feedback they received was that there is no increased cancer risk in women with PIP implants compared to other implants.





However, the ministry said in a statement, there are other established risks such as ruptures.





The French government agency that evaluates the safety of medical products says 523 women have had them removed since a defect was discovered last year.





More than 1,000 implants have ruptured since then, the agency says.





"These experts said that there is no link between cancer and ... PIP implant breasts. However, since there is a lot of ruptures, (concerns) are growing because the nature of the implant is no good," said Jean Yves Grall, the country's director of health.





FranÃ§ois Godineau, director of social security, said it would cost the state up to 60 million euros (U.S. $73 million) if they paid for the removal of the PIP breast implants in France.





Of the 30,000 women who have the implants, 80% underwent the surgery for esthetic reasons, and 20% did so for reconstructive reasons, such as after breast cancer.





Under the state's offer, the women with the implants will be offered to have the implants removed, but it will not pay for new implants for those who had the surgery for esthetic reasons. Others would have new implants paid for.





CNN's Saskya Vandoorne contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Federal regulators announced $7.1 million in fines against American Airlines on Thursday over maintenance issues and problems with its drug- and alcohol-testing programs.



American Airlines was fined for allowing aircrafts to fly while they knew they needed repairs.



"The FAA believes the large total amount of the fine for these violations is appropriate because American Airlines was aware that appropriate repairs were needed, and instead deferred maintenance," the Federal Aviation Administration said in a statement announcing the decision. "In intentionally continuing to fly the aircraft, the carrier did not follow important safety regulations intended to protect passengers and crew."



American can still appeal the fines, the FAA said.



The FAA also found the airline maintained inadequate drug- and alcohol-testing programs and failed to inspect safety lighting on a "timely" basis.



The Fort Worth, Texas-based carrier said Thursday evening that it disagreed with the findings and called the penalties "excessive."



"In accordance with FAA procedures for handling these matters, we have requested to meet with the FAA after we have had time to thoroughly review their findings, so that we may discuss the issues," the airline said in a written statement. "Since these matters are ongoing with the FAA, we will not have any further comment at this time."



Nearly $4.5 million of the proposed fines stem from American's continued operation of two MD-83 jetliners in December 2007 after pilots reported problems with the autopilot systems, the FAA said.



The two planes were flown a combined 58 times before the problems were corrected -- and one flew 10 times after an FAA inspector notified the airline that it had wrongly deferred needed repairs.



In one incident, the autopilot disconnected during a landing on December 21, the FAA said. "American technicians did not check for the actual problem, and instead deferred maintenance using an inappropriate MEL (minimum equipment list) item. The plane flew another 36 passenger-carrying flights during December 21-31."



The problem was later traced to a piece of radio gear separate from the autopilot, the FAA said. Meanwhile, a different MD-83 flew four flights without a fully functioning autopilot after American mechanics put off repairs.  Regulators also accuse American of operating planes without timely inspections of their emergency lighting systems.



In April, American canceled more than 3,000 flights to conduct inspections of wiring bundles in wheel wells of its 300 MD-80 jets, snarling air traffic for five days.



The FAA ordered American and several other airlines to examine the wiring, which had the potential to start fires or cause landing gear to malfunction.

***

MOSCOW, Russia (CNN)  -- Any attempt to pardon Mikhail Khodorkovsky -- once Russia's richest man, now its most famous inmate -- must follow standard procedure, including an admission of guilt, the nation's president said Sunday.



Mikhail Khodorkovsky, once Russia's richest man, is imprisoned in a work camp 4,000 miles from Moscow.



"Concerning the possibility of a pardon for someone, Khodorkovsky or anyone else, the procedure has to be carried out in accordance with our country's rules," President Dmitry Medvedev said in a transcript on his Web site. "In other words, a person must appeal to the president, plead guilty to having committed a crime and seek the appropriate resolution."



The president dismissed talks of a pardon, saying, "at this point, there is nothing to discuss."



Khodorkovsky once headed the Yukos oil company, once Russia's largest oil producer. He is serving a nine-year sentence for fraud and tax evasion.



Medvedev described corruption as a "very serious Russian disease" and emphasized the need to fight it.



"To this end, we have enacted a number of measures, including new legislation on corruption and special arrangements relating to government officials, their disclosures, declarations of income and so on," he said. "We are determined to continue this work, because we believe it is extremely important."



The former oil magnate is incarcerated in a work camp near the town of Krasnokamensk, 4,000 miles (6,500 kilometers) from his native Moscow. He has been imprisoned since his arrest in 2003.



Khodorkovsky had expressed a desire to run for office at the time and funded opposition political parties. He said the trial was part of a Kremlin campaign to destroy him and take the company he built from privatization deals of the 1990s. The Kremlin denied any role in his downfall.



Yukos, which has since been crushed by a $27.5 billion back-tax bill, has been the object of a lengthy campaign by prosecutors and tax authorities.



The court also ordered Khodorkovsky and his partner to pay about $600 million in back taxes.

***

DUNN, North Carolina (CNN) -- Barack Obama's campaign announced Sunday the Democratic presidential candidate raised $150 million in donations in September, setting a new high-water mark in campaign fundraising.



Barack Obama calls a prospective voter from a headquarters in Kansas City, Missouri, on Saturday.



In a campaign video, Obama campaign manager David Plouffe said a record 632,000 new donors gave to the campaign, with the average contribution under $100. More than 3 million donors have given so far.



The Obama campaign raised $65 million in August.



Regardless of the stunning haul, Plouffe told supporters the campaign still needed more money because of "the slime that we're getting from the McCain campaign." Plouffe cited recent attack ads and automated phone calls in battleground states and said the campaign needed to have every resource to "fight back."



"Their campaign is going to descend even more into the gutter," he said.



Plouffe also said the campaign was expanding its reach to compete "aggressively" in West Virginia.



Tightening polls in Georgia and North Dakota meant more money and resources could be sent to those two states in the remaining days, he said.



"We can't afford to make any cuts. We have to execute everything we think is required to win," Plouffe said of their battleground strategy. "None of us can look back on the night of November 4 or the morning of November 5 and wished we had done something extra."



The McCain campaign accepted $85 million in federal matching funds for the last two months of the campaign.



The Obama campaign opted out of the matching funds program and is free to raise and spend as much money as it can.



CNN's Paul Steinhauser and Sasha Johnson contributed to this report.

***

LAS VEGAS, Nevada (CNN) -- Former football star O.J. Simpson walked out of jail late Wednesday after posting $250,000 bail.

O.J. Simpson leaves the Clark County Detention Center late Wednesday night.

Eighth District Judge Jackie Glass hours earlier doubled Simpson's bail to ensure his appearance at an April 7 trial. Glass said Simpson had violated terms of his previous bail.

Glass was adamant that Simpson remain in the Clark County Detention Center until 15 percent of the $250,000 is paid in full -- $37,500 -- after it was revealed in court that Simpson never paid any part of his previous $125,000 bail.

"There's no 'get-out-of-jail-free card' today," an angry Glass told Simpson's lawyers.

"I don't want him out of the jail until the 15 percent is paid in full."  Watch the scolding judge »

The judge scolded Simpson, saying he wasn't taking the matter seriously.

"I don't know if it's just arrogance. I don't know if it's ignorance," she chided.

Simpson posted bail at about 6:15 p.m. local time (9:15 p.m. ET), according to Las Vegas authorities.

Simpson returned to jail in Nevada from his home in Florida January 11 for Wednesday's hearing, after prosecutors alleged he violated the terms of his bail by attempting to contact a co-defendant.

The original bail bondsman -- Miguel Pereira of Florida-based You Ring, We Spring -- testified Wednesday that the former football player didn't put any money toward the bail that allowed him to leave jail in September.

"Not one cent," he said.

The bail bondsman himself paid the 15 percent premium and the $40 filing fee to allow Simpson to leave the detention center, although he said he had a power of attorney for Simpson's Florida home but never filed a lien on it.

When questioned by Simpson attorney Yale Galanter, Pereira admitted he had never sent Simpson a bill for the premium.

But, he said, he had an understanding with Simpson that he would be paid "after it was all over."

Glass described it as "mind-boggling" that Simpson never had to put up any collateral for his first bond and that the bail bondsman never asked for anything.

Prosecutors also produced Wednesday a recording of a profanity-laced voice mail message left on Pereira's answering machine in November from Simpson, which he told Pereira to deliver to co-defendant Clarence Stewart.

The prosecutor said the message contained "an undercurrent of a threat," and he wanted the bail to be raised to at least $1 million.

Galanter did not contest the authenticity of the recording.

As part of his bail granted September 19, Simpson was to have no contact whatsoever with victims, witnesses or co-defendants in the case.

Glass said the same goes this time.  Watch how Simpson wound up in jail »

"When I tell you, Mr. Simpson, there are conditions and there are rules, let me make sure you understand if you violate those rules ... you'll be back, locked up in the Clark County Detention Center; do you understand me?" the judge asked.

"I understand 100 percent," said Simpson, dressed in a navy blue jail jumpsuit.

"No contact [with others in case], no phone messages to third parties, no emails, no letters -- nothing," Glass added.

Galanter said his client "was truly contrite about what has occurred."

"He will abide scrupulously by whatever this court decides," the attorney said.

Simpson faces trial April 7 on 12 criminal counts, including conspiracy, kidnapping, robbery, burglary, coercion and assault with a deadly weapon. The charges stem from a September 13 incident at a Las Vegas hotel in which he allegedly stole sports memorabilia he said belonged to him from dealers Alfred Beardsley and Bruce Fromong.

According to earlier testimony, Beardsley and Fromong were offering more than 600 Simpson-related items for sale, including ties Simpson wore

***

(CNN) -- A monument to communism, the Palace of Culture and Science dominates Warsaw's skyline.





But soon the city's most prominent piece of architecture, a "gift" from Josef Stalin in the 1950s, will be joined by a building that will reflect the spirit of 21st century Poland.





Designed by Daniel Libeskind, Zlota 44 is the star architect's first project in the country of his birth.





Currently under construction the 54-story luxury apartment building that is supposed to resemble an eagle, Poland's nation symbol, is situated opposite the Palace of Culture and Science and close to one of the city's few synagogues that survived the Second World War.





Explore more with Eye on Poland





Many see it as a statement of the country's desire to continue its revival and redefine its identity.





"Now this world-recognized architect is coming back to Poland and building a symbolic structure in front of the Palace of Culture, a symbolic structure of communism," said Alicia Kosciesza of the Zlota 44 project.





Libeskind left Poland with his parents as an emigrant to the U.S. when he was 13, but he has seen his homeland transformed since his childhood.





"I grew up under the gray skies of communism, a depressed society, a totalitarian regime. A dismal period really." he said.





"I return now and it's a new country, it's a renaissance. Skies are blue, people have light in their eyes, there's energy."





Libeskind commonly accentuates the positives and transformative affects that buildings can have.





From the Jewish Museum in Berlin, to his role as Master Planner for the new World Trade Center buildings in New York, his structures have engaged and inspired many and made him one of the world's most sought-after architects.





"The re-building of Warsaw shows that despite the horrors (of the past) it's a beautiful city," he said.





"It wasn't rebuilt perfectly (after the Second World War), but it's a city that has always had the spirit of something positive."





Libeskind's Polish roots and formative years living in the U.S. as an immigrant are experiences that have shaped his attitude and were a direct inspiration for his plans for the World Trade Center.





"This is a place that needs to have a spiritual feeling, this isn't just a piece of real estate anymore," he said of the World Trade Center site.





"(When visiting 'Ground Zero') I looked South and I saw the Statute of Liberty and I saw myself arriving on that ship (when I was 13) and I thought, '"That's what America is like, that what this site is about.' It's how to connect that memory, that tragedy with the incredible city of New York."

***

BABAHOYO, Ecuador (CNN)  -- At least 10 people have died and thousands have been left homeless after torrential rains inundated large parts of Ecuador, officials said Thursday.





Authorities said the rains, which began a week ago, were the worst in a quarter century. Civil defense officials said more than 10,000 families have been affected.





Los Ríos -- north of Guayaquil -- was the hardest hit of nine provinces affected, civil defense officials said.





In Los Ríos province, five people died when an ambulance drove into a hole at the side of a street at dawn Thursday. A newborn boy, his parents, a doctor and a driver were killed.





Streets also were flooded in the capital of Quito.  Watch the scenes of devastation in Ecuador »





On Wednesday, President Rafael Correa declared a state of emergency and ordered 2,000 members of the army and the police to help rescue workers. Correa increased by $25 million the $10 million he already had allocated for the emergency efforts. He also directed another $88 million to municipalities.





Once the crisis has eased, an emergency fund will give seed and fertilizer to help farmers whose fields were washed away, Ecuador's government said. There also have been reports of livestock drowning.





Cristina Medina, a spokeswoman for the Ecuadorean Red Cross, said provinces most heavily affected were along the Pacific coast, where drinking water was often in short supply.





In some towns, high waters forced entire neighborhoods to evacuate, Medina said. E-mail to a friend

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- U.S. authorities arrested six people Wednesday on suspicion of smuggling African elephant ivory worth hundreds of thousands of dollars, law enforcement officials said.



Imports of African elephant ivory have been banned in the United States since 1976.



The defendants arranged to have ivory from Cameroon, Ivory Coast and Uganda shipped into the United States disguised as wooden snakes, guitars and statues, authorities said.



"The defendants plundered precious natural resources for personal profit," U.S. Attorney Benton J. Campbell and other officials said in a statement. "Their illegal trade threatens the continued existence of an endangered species and will not be tolerated."



Federal agents tracked at least eight shipments, including one worth an estimated $165,000.



Federal agents used surveillance and shipping, phone and bank records to track the suspect shipments. Arrests were made in New York, New Jersey, Virginia and Texas.



The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the Immigration and Customs Enforcement division of the Department of Homeland Security were involved in the law enforcement operation.



One suspect told an undercover federal agent during a purchase that it was difficult to bring ivory into the United States, but easy to sell it at high prices, the government statement said.



Two other suspects also are accused of paying a courier $15,000 to bring a shipment of ivory from Cameroon into the United States.



The U.S. banned ivory imports in 1976, and the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora effectively outlawed trade in elephant tissue in 1989.



Illegal trade in African elephant ivory is considered to be a major cause of the continuing decline of elephant populations in Africa.



The defendants are expected to appear in court in New York on Wednesday. They face jail terms of up to 20 years if convicted.

***

Washington (CNN) -- Homegrown terrorism will be part of the United States' National Security Strategy for the first time, according to President Barack Obama's chief counterterrorism adviser, who called it a new phase of the terrorist threat.





When the Obama administration unveils its National Security Strategy on Thursday, it will be the first time any president "explicitly recognizes the threat to the United States posed by individuals radicalized here at home," National Security Adviser John Brennan said Wednesday.





The strategy acts as a blueprint for how a White House administration intends to protect Americans. In the past, it has focused mostly on international threats. But a spate of terror-related plots in the United States recently prompted the Obama administration to include homegrown terrorism in the document, Brennan said.





Earlier this month, Pakistani-American Faisal Shahzad was charged with trying to detonate a car bomb in New York's bustling district of Times Square.





U.S. Army Major Nidal Malik Hasan is suspected of fatally shooting 13 people at Fort Hood in November.





Colorado resident Najibullah Zazi, an Afghan national, pleaded guilty in February for conspiring to detonate explosives in the New York subway system.





And David Headley, an American citizen from Chicago, Illinois, is accused of providing surveillance in the Mumbai, India, terrorist attacks that killed 160 people.





"We've seen an increasing number of individuals here in the United States become captivated by extremist ideology or causes," Brennan said. "We have seen individuals, including U.S. citizens armed with their U.S. passports, travel easily to extremist safe havens, return to America, their deadly plans disrupted by coordinated intelligence and law enforcement."





Brennan, who made his comments at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington, said that as the United States has strengthened its defenses against massive attacks like 9/11, al Qaeda has shown itself to be a "resilient, resourceful and determined enemy."





Brennan said al Qaeda is recruiting individuals with little training, attempting relatively unsophisticated attacks and seeking people living in the United States to launch such attacks.





"They are seeking foot soldiers who might slip through our defense," Brennan said.  "As our enemy adapts and evolves their tactics, so must we constantly adapt and evolve ours."





Brennan did not provide any specific details about the president's strategy for combating al Qaeda and its affiliates, but said it "will require a broad, sustained and integrated campaign that harnesses every tool of American power, military and civilian, kinetic and diplomatic."

***

(CNN) -- An Australian man sentenced to 500 lashes and a year in prison after his conviction on blasphemy charges in Saudi Arabia is headed home after his punishment was greatly reduced, officials said Thursday.





Mansor Almaribe was arrested and convicted in mid November in the city of Medina.





Australia had appealed for leniency after popular outcry followed his sentence.





Saudi officials responded by pardoning Almaribe from his prison term and reducing the lashing sentence to 75 lashes, the ministry said.





"His corporal punishment was also greatly reduced and administered in a way that did not cause physical harm," it said.





The ministry did not elaborate on how the lashing was carried out., though observers have suggested the punishment could be done in a largely ceremonial and non-harmful manner. It's unclear if that's what occurred.





It's also unclear what the 45-year-old Shia Muslim from Australia's Victoria state said or did to get arrested.





Australian officials said they were told Almaribe made comments "insulting to prophet Mohammed's relatives."





"I don't think my dad would even survive 50 lashes not 500," his son said last month. "He goes to the doctor every week for checks ups. He has knee injuries and back injuries from a car accident and he also has diabetes and high blood pressure."





The family spent weeks searching for the Iraqi-born father of five after he went missing in early November while performing the Hajj pilgrimage in Saudi Arabia.





Blasphemy is punishable by up to a death sentence under the strict Muslim law in Saudi Arabia.

***

(CNN) -- Hold on to the audacity of hope but shun the arrogance of over-promising.



A scholar says President Obama could learn from Lyndon Johnson's Great Society mistakes.



That's the message from a scholar who says President Obama can learn much from the success and mistakes of another ambitious attempt to remake America.



Robert Weisbrot, co-author of "The Liberal Hour: Washington and the Politics of Change in the 1960s,'' says the Great Society revolution was "tremendously liberating" for members of the most vulnerable groups in America.



The Great Society was President Lyndon Johnson's sprawling legislative attempts in the mid-1960s to lift Americans out of poverty, erase racial injustice and clean up the environment.



But historical circumstances won't permit Obama to push through his own Great Society, Weisbrot says.



"Obama is living in a different age," Weisbrot said. "The circumstances won't permit him to be another Lyndon Johnson."



Obama came to office with the nation's economic institutions verging on collapse. He also has to contend with bitter partisanship and a public that's suspicious of big government programs.



"Obama needs to not only learn lessons from the Great Society but keep in mind the limits of what he can draw from a fundamentally different age," Weisbrot said.



Americans were ready for the Great Society when Johnson became president, he says.



The country was enjoying a post-World War II economic boom. The Republican and Democratic parties worked together because both had a significant number of moderates. And people had more faith in the federal government, which had led the nation out of the Great Depression and World War II and helped rebuild the European economy, Weisbrot says.



"For many Americans, the federal government could achieve anything for which there was a national mandate," Weisbrot said.



Yet that same optimism helped stain the Great Society's legacy, Weisbrot says.



He says Johnson framed the Great Society as a war to defeat poverty and racial injustice. He over-promised, particularly when the Vietnam War began to drain away resources for the Great Society.



"Lyndon Johnson dealt in hyperbole," Weisbrot said. "It works well in getting legislation through Congress, but it sets the nation up for disillusionment when the promised Utopia didn't materialize."

***

Washington (CNN) -- Nearly two years into the recession, opinion about which political party is responsible for the severe economic downturn is shifting, according to a new national poll.



A CNN/Opinion Research Corp. survey released Friday morning indicates that 38 percent of the public blames Republicans for the country's current economic problems. In May, 53 percent blamed the GOP.



According to the poll, 27 percent now blame the Democrats for the recession, up 6 points from May, and 27 percent now say both parties are responsible.



"The bad news for the Democrats is that the number of Americans who hold the GOP exclusively responsible for the recession has been steadily falling by about two to three points per month," said Keating Holland, CNN polling director. "At that rate, only a handful of voters will blame the economy on the Republicans by the time next year's midterm elections roll around.."



Thirty-six percent of people questioned said that President Obama's policies have improved economic conditions, with 28 percent feeling that the president's programs have made things worse, and 35 percent saying what he's done has had no effect on the economy.



One reason for that, Holland said, may be the growing federal budget deficit: Two-thirds say that the government should balance the budget even in a time of war and recession.



The survey indicates that only 18 percent said the economic conditions in the country today are good, down 3 points from August. Eighty-two percent said economic conditions are poor.



"Some economic indicators may suggest that the economy has turned the corner -- but try telling that to the American people," Holland said.



The number of Americans who said the economy is in good shape -- a number that grew steadily through the spring and summer -- has now stalled, with fewer than one in five expressing a positive view of current conditions. More than eight in 10 say that economic conditions are in poor shape, with 43 percent calling them very poor.



The CNN/Opinion Research Corp. poll was conducted November 13-15, with 1,014 adult Americans questioned by telephone. The survey sampling error is plus or minus 3 percentage points.



CNN Deputy Political Director Paul Steinhauser contributed to this report.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- More than 100 Romanians fled their homes Tuesday night in Belfast, Northern Ireland, following what politicians called "racist attacks and intimidation."



A Romanian woman and her child are escorted by police in Belfast on Wednesday.



"On Tuesday evening, when the Romanians saw their windows starting to be smashed, they felt the threats were very real and contacted the police," said Trish Morgan, the media relations manager at the Belfast City Church, which took them in.



A church member was advised by the police that "the situation was getting too tense," and that the group -- 113 people in all -- needed to find a safe place that could accommodate them quickly. The member contacted the church, and that's where they went, Morgan said.



The Romanians were "quite scared" upon arrival at the church but "relieved to be out of the situation," she added.



British Prime Minister Gordon Brown Wednesday condemned what one member of Parliament called "appalling racist attacks," and said he hoped the authorities would be able to "take all the action necessary to protect them."



Martin McGuinness, the deputy first minister of Northern Ireland -- a province of the United Kingdom -- visited the families on Wednesday, his party Sinn Fein announced.



"People are shocked and completely disgusted by this incident," he said in a statement "I came here this morning to show very clearly my commitment to facing up to any form of intimidation in our community, no matter where it may come from.



"I met with numerous families who are genuinely fearful for their lives and those of their families; I held a five-day-old baby girl in my arms today. She was born in Belfast and now forced to leave her home as a result of attacks by racist, criminal thugs," McGuinness said.



He was speaking at the O-Zone leisure center, where the families have moved because the space is larger than the church.



Race-hate crime in south Belfast has increased in the past six months, Sinn Fein equality and human rights expert Vincent Parker said.



The incident came only a day after violence broke out at an anti-racism rally in support of Romanians in Belfast.



Belfast Lord Mayor Naomi Long called Monday's scuffles "totally unacceptable."



"A small minority of people have sadly taken away from an event which had been organized by the local community to show solidarity for their Romanian neighbors, and to express their abhorrence at their homes being subjected to racist attacks," she said Tuesday.



CNN's Eve Bower contributed to this report.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Britain's Serious Fraud Office and London police are investigating an alleged $81 million (£56 million) fraud on the corporate banking department of Allied Irish Banks (AIB).





Allied Irish Banks has allegedly been the subject of a $81 million fraud.





The SFO said it had searched a business and two residential addresses in London and believed AIB was not the only financial institution deceived by the suspects.





It said that between 2003 and 2007 AIB, Ireland's largest bank by market value, loaned money for the purchase of UK investment properties to companies controlled by an individual who was now the main suspect.





The SFO said the main suspect operated with the assistance of others.





However, in 2008 AIB identified problems with one element of its security interests over the investment properties.





"Following an internal review it became apparent that the guarantees of certain lease payments on these properties by an investment grade counterparty (a blue chip property company) were fraudulent," the SFO said.





AIB referred the matter to the authorities and also took control of and sold the relevant properties, which resulted in a write down of the outstanding loan balances by £56m, the SFO said.





The office said the alleged fraud involved the borrowing companies creating "overriding" leases.





"These leases were generally for longer periods and at higher rents than the existing occupational tenants' leases.





"The apparent existence of these additional leases increased the values of the properties, with lease payments being a direct obligation of the investment grade counterparty," the SFO said.





AIB is considering legal action over the $81 million loss.

***

(CNN) -- A North Carolina man accused of plotting to wage holy war overseas also planned to attack the U.S. Marine base at Quantico, Virginia, according to new charges announced Thursday.



Daniel Boyd previously was charged with conspiracy to support terrorists and conspiracy to murder.



The charge is one of three counts in a new indictment against Daniel Patrick Boyd, who authorities allege is the ringleader of a group of men charged with training in North Carolina for a "violent jihad." Boyd and another man, Hysen Sherifi, are charged with conspiring to murder U.S. military personnel.



"Boyd undertook reconnaissance of the Marine Corps Base located in Quantico, Virginia, and obtained maps of the base in order to plan an attack on Quantico," the charges state.



FBI agents found weapons, thousands of rounds of ammunition and $13,000 cash in Boyd's Raleigh-area home, an FBI agent testified at an August bond hearing for the men, who were arrested in late July. The original indictment says the men practiced military tactics in a North Carolina county that borders Virginia.



The latest indictment also charges Boyd, Sherifi, and Boyd's son Zakariya with possession of weapons in furtherance of a crime of violence, while Boyd faces an additional charge of providing a rifle and ammunition to a convicted felon.



Boyd and seven others already have been charged with conspiracy to provide material support to terrorists and conspiracy to murder, kidnap, maim and injure people. One of the men is believed to have fled to Pakistan, and the remaining men are in custody.



In August, a federal judge denied bail for the seven in custody, but expressed skepticism about the charges against them. Magistrate Judge William Webb said the defendants made a number statements espousing holy war, and said the statements could be interpreted in isolation as braggadocio.



But he agreed to keep them in jail because some of them had amassed a large arsenal and engaged in firearms training.

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN) -- The former parents-in-law of a man accused of killing nine people at a Christmas Eve party were among the remains of six people identified Saturday by the Los Angeles County Coroner's Office.





Bruce Jeffrey Pardo went on a shooting rampage in a Los Angeles suburb Christmas Eve, police say.





Three other people remain listed as "missing" and "unidentified" because their remains were too badly burned in the raging house fire that followed the shootings.





Police said Bruce Jeffrey Pardo committed suicide after he went on a shooting rampage dressed as Santa Claus at the party in the Los Angeles suburb of Covina. He targeted his ex-wife, 43-year-old Sylvia Pardo, and her family, police said. He then started the fire, police said.





Authorities said Pardo also may have planned to kill his wife's divorce attorney as well as his own mother, who had planned to attend the party but did not because she was ill.





Killed at the party, according to the coroner's office, were:





The remaining three people known to be at the party -- Sylvia Pardo; her brother James "Junior" Ortega, 52; and Michael Ortiz, 17, Sylvia Pardo's nephew and Alicia Ortiz's son -- remain listed as "unidentified" in coroner's files and "missing" in police files.





"We have three unidentified bodies that came out of that location," said Lt. Larry Dietz of the coroner's office. Authorities previously said they were relying on dental records to identify the bodies.





After the shootings, Bruce Pardo left a rental car and a gasoline canister outside the home of attorney Scott Nord, who represented Sylvia Pardo in her divorce, police said. Investigators suspect that Bruce Pardo planned a similar attack at Nord's home.





Authorities described the Pardos' divorce, which was finalized December 18, as "contentious."





Another rented car that Bruce Pardo used to flee the scene was found booby-trapped after the shootings. It burned as a Covina police bomb squad attempted to disconnect an explosive device in it.





Police said Bruce Pardo had an uneasy relationship with his mother, who had sided with Sylvia Pardo in the divorce.





The shootings and fire left 10 children orphaned. Three others lost one parent. An Ortega Family Fund has been set up at Nord's law offices.





CNN's Irving Last contributed to this report.

***

NEW DELHI, India (CNN) -- The number of dead in devastating floods triggered by torrential rains in India has risen to at least 271, and about a million people have fled their homes, officials said Monday.



An aerial view of a flood-affected area in Bijapur district in North Karnataka, India.



At least 192 people have died in the southern state of Karnataka, its disaster-management secretary H.V. Parshwanath told CNN.



More than 450,000 people there have been housed in 1,330 relief camps as authorities completed rescue operations in most of the flooded zones in the state, he said.



"The focus is now mainly on relief," Parshwanath said, adding that rains have now eased in Karnataka.



In neighboring Andhra Pradesh, authorities put the death toll at 51. Some 531,000 people have been evacuated to safety, with more half of them now sheltering in relief camps, said Dinesh Kumar, the commissioner of the state's disaster-monitoring department.



India has deployed the military to help with relief and rescue in Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh.



More than a dozen teams of naval divers have been sent to the two flood-hit states, the country's defense ministry said.



Air force planes and helicopters have also been dropping food packets in the submerged regions.



The military has been able to rescue 1,336 people so far, it added.



Flood waters were now receding in two of the five worst hit districts of Andhra Pradesh, disaster official Kumar said.



But floodwaters from a local river might submerge the remaining three, he warned.



Flooding also killed at least 25 people in Maharashtra state, officials said. Three others died because of lightning strikes, said S.C. Mohanty, director of Maharashtra's disaster-management department.



About 3,000 people have been displaced because of flooding, he told CNN. Thousands of people die each year in India during seasonal monsoon rains.



More than 1,100 had been killed in monsoon-triggered flooding in different parts of the country as of last month, according to the disaster-management division of the federal home ministry.

***

(CNN) -- The number of people worldwide without access to a toilet -- no public restroom, no outhouse, no latrine, no smallest room -- is a whopping 2.6 billion. That's four out of ten people.





The bucket toilet is the only thing on offer for millions of black South Africans.





According to the World Toilet Organization, 2.2 million people, predominantly children, die every year from diarrhea -- more than from malaria, from AIDS, from TB. That number dwarfs any casualties related to violent conflict.





These figures are intrinsically related. The underestimation of fecal contamination is staggering, sobering -- and unfortunately, silencing.





Singaporean social-entrepreneur Jack Sim founded the non-profit World Toilet Organization ("the other WTO") in 2001, as a support network for all existing organizations.





It now includes 151 members from 53 countries, which meet once a year to network, discuss sanitation issues and work together toward "eliminating the toilet taboo and delivering sustainable sanitation."





Goal number one: Making sanitation speakable. "What we don't discuss, we can't improve," insists Sim.





This year, the World Toilet Summit & Expo 2008 was held from November 4-6 in Macau under the theme "Driving Sustainable Sanitation through Market-Based Initiatives."





Indeed, not only is sanitation a good idea, it's a good investment.





Biosolids can be composted into fertilizer, sewage can be processed into methane biogas, and even simple latrines in India are producing compost and fertilizer.





"Globally, if universal sanitation were achieved by 2015, it would cost $95 billion, but it would save $660 billion," writes Rose George in her newly released book "The Big Necessity."





Real-world examples follow: "When Peru had a cholera outbreak in 1991, it cost $1 billion to contain but could have been prevented with $100 million of better sanitation measures."





Or even more alarming: "Pakistan, for example, spends 47 times more on its military budget than on water and sanitation, though it loses 120,000 people to diarrhea a year."





So while 2.6 billion people have no toilet, how many millions of us simply "flush and forget"?





Eco-sanitation, or the problem of dealing efficiently and ecologically with sewer systems, wastewater, treatment and purification, is no less a serious one.





In the UK alone, the sewage system emits some 28.8 million tons of carbon dioxide a year.





As sewers become overloaded with urban development, drought strikes various regions of the earth, and potable water becomes increasingly scarce, even the flush toilet is now put into question.





Today, those who care are looking at innovative toilet and waste-disposal solutions from India, China and other parts of the developing world, where attitudes and habits are still evolving and open to change.





Don't forget, World Toilet Day is November 19.

***

Washington (CNN) -- Latino voters strongly support President Barack Obama and his Democratic Party, despite dissatisfaction with the administration's deportation policies, according to a survey released Wednesday by the Pew Hispanic Center.





The results are good news for Obama and Democrats for next year's election, as Hispanics are the fastest-growing population group in the country and comprise a major voting bloc.





According to the survey, Latino registered voters favor Obama over Republican presidential hopefuls Mitt Romney or Texas Gov. Rick Perry by margin of more than 2-to-1.





The results are similar to the presidential election in 2008, when Obama got 67% of the Latino vote compared with 31% for Republican candidate Sen. John McCain.





Hispanic voters have traditionally identified with the Democratic Party, and the Pew survey's results showed that connection continues. It said two-thirds of Hispanic registered voters identified with or leaned toward the Democratic Party, while 20% felt that way about the Republican Party.





"It is interesting that among Latino voters, the voters who are registered, there is a lot of support for the Democrats, but also for Barack Obama," Mark Hugo Lopez, executive director of the Pew Hispanic Center, said in an interview with CNN.





The survey of 1,200 Hispanic adults was conducted in English and Spanish from November 9 through December 7, and has a margin of error of 3.6%.





While showing strong Latino support for Obama and Democrats, the survey also showed Hispanics dislike immigration policies of the Obama administration, which increased deportations to 395,000 in 2009 and 387,000 in 2010.





According to the Pew survey, 59% of Latino respondents disapproved of the administration's handling of deportations, while 27% approved.





At the same time, the survey found that less than half of the Hispanic respondents -- 41% -- knew that more deportations were occurring under the Obama administration than the Bush administration that preceded it.





A strong majority -- 77% -- of Latino respondents who were aware of the increased deportations under Obama disapproved of his administration's policy, while just over half of those unaware of the increase also expressed disapproval.





Hispanics accounted for 97% of deportees in 2010, according to the U.S. Department of Homeland Security.





More than 90% of Latino respondents in the survey support the DREAM Act, a Democratic measure pushed by Obama that provides a pathway to legal residency for children of illegal immigrants who attend college or serve in the military. Republicans have blocked passage of the measure in Congress.





In the interview with CNN, the Pew Hispanic Center's Lopez said that the most important issues for Hispanic registered voters were jobs, education and health care -- the same as in past years.





CNN's Catherine Shoichet contributed to this report.

***

(CNN)  -- Former world number one Justine Henin has ruled herself out of the U.S. Open after sustaining an elbow injury in her Wimbledon exit to Belgian rival Kim Clijsters.





It is a shattering blow for Henin, who will also miss her 'Best of Belgium' clash with Clijsters in Brussels on July 8.





Henin, who made her comeback to competitive tennis at the start of the year after 18 months in retirement, picked up the injury during her fourth round defeat to Clijsters.





Clijsters wins Battle of Belgians at Wimbledon





She suffered the injury when falling early in the first set, but bravely played on in a match that lasted three sets.





Henin confirmed the news in a statement on her personal website.





"Following my fall at Wimbledon....I took several medical examinations which have revealed a ligament partial fracture at the right elbow," it read.





"There I regret to announce that I can't unfortunately play in Best of Belgium this July 8. I'll be nevertheless present for this wonderful Belgian event which is important for me.





"This injury will keep me away from the courts during a rough period of two months with the consequence the withdrawal of my U.S. round of tournaments, including the US Open."





The 28-year-old added that she will undergo further medical examinations to decide on when she returns to the WTA Tour later this season.





Aside from missing the final grand slam of the year, Henin's exhibition head to head against Clijsters was set to attract a world record crowd of 40,000 for a tennis match.





Organizers say they plan to find a replacement player for Henin, who has been beaten three times by Cljisters since her return to action.





Clijsters was later beaten by Vera Zvonareva in the quarterfinals at Wimbledon, leaving both of the Belgian stars still searching for their first grand slam title at SW19.





The U.S. Open begins on August 30 in New York, where Clijsters will be defending the crown she won in sensational fashion in her comeback year in 2009.

***

(CNN)  -- Police said they are pursuing leads in the death of 8-year-old Sandra Cantu, whose body was found Monday stuffed into a suitcase in a dairy-farm pond near her Tracy, California, home.



Sandra Cantu, 8, disappeared March 27. Her body was found at a dairy-farm pond near her Calilfornia home.



"We are heading in a direction," Tracy police Sgt. Tony Sheneman told reporters. "To comment on that would compromise the investigation, and I can't do that."



A search warrant was executed at the Tracy mobile home park where the girl lived, and a related search was to be conducted Tuesday at a nearby church, he said.



He implied more than one person may have been involved in the death of Sandra, who had been missing since March 27.



"Investigators are looking at additional information they received since yesterday and, hopefully, that will lead us to Sandra's killers," he said.



Asked if his use of the plural meant police were looking for more than one person, he responded, "We have no specific suspects, ma'am."



Sheneman also implied the killer likely was familiar with the location where the body was found.



He said he himself was unfamiliar with the location where the girl's body was found, despite having lived in the community for nearly 12 years.



"Someone would have to be familiar with that area to know to go there," he said.  Watch how the suitcase was found »



Sheneman said police had no one in custody, despite having interviewed hundreds of people regarding the case.



"Everyone that we speak to right now is being considered a person of interest," he said. "We're not eliminating anyone."



The autopsy was being conducted Tuesday, but it was not clear when the report would be available. "It's going to be some time before we hear from the coroner," Sheneman said. "I can't tell you when that's going to be."



More than 10 search warrants have been executed as part of the investigation and "a lot" of evidence has been recovered, Sheneman said.



The day Sandra was last reported seen, she returned home from school, kissed her mother and left to play with a friend who lives nearby. A short time later, wearing a pink Hello Kitty T-shirt and black leggings, she left to go to another friend's home, according to a family spokeswoman.



Police said Monday the girl's clothing helped them identify the body.

***

(CNN) -- Real Salt Lake sealed an upset win over the Los Angeles Galaxy on Sunday night with a 5-4 penalty victory, after extra-time in the Major League Soccer Cup final that ended with the score at 1-1.



Robbie Russell netted the vital spot kick after Real Salt Lake goalkeeper Nick Rimando made two saves and MLS Most Valuable Player, and LA Galaxy captain, Langdon Donovan sent his shot sailing over the crossbar.



Salt Lake's win at the Qwest Field arena in Seattle, ended David Beckham's bid to claim a third national title in as many different nations, having previously won the English Premier League with Manchester United and La Liga with Spain's Real Madrid.



The Galaxy struck first, with midfielder Mike Magee drilling a 41st-minute shot into an open net. His strike came after Beckham passed to Donovan, who set-up Magee at the far post. Seattle: America's soccer city.



Real Salt Lake hit back with 25 minutes left when Robbie Findley reacted first after Yuri Movsisyan's attempt on goal was blocked, tying the match and setting up the penalty shootout.



Beckham got the Galaxy off to a good start in the shoot out as he scored with confidence, but his team could not follow in the same manner.



Jovan Kirovski's shot was blocked by Rimando, but Saunders followed by stopping the effort of Salt Lake captain Kyle Beckerman before Donovan blazed over the crossbar to leave the score 5-4.



Galaxy came into the game as  favorites, but flattered to deceive as it was revealed Beckham had played with an injured right ankle.



"We all want to win titles and personally I'd love to be successful but I think we have been successful this year without winning tonight," Beckham told reporters after the game.



"We have quietened a few people along the way which is always nice but we couldn't finish it off.



"I wouldn't say it's tougher to lose on penalties but it's Russian roulette, that's just the way it is. It's not a nice way to lose.



"The people that step up are brave enough to step up and if you score, great and if you miss it's hard to take, but it just wasn't our night," Beckham added.



Beckham is due to return to AC Milan in January for another loan spell as he bids to secure a place in England's World Cup squad for next year's finals in South Africa.



The English midfielder's future in the U.S. had appeared in doubt earlier in the season when his commitment was called into question following a loan spell with the Italian club during which he had indicated an apparent desire to continue playing in Italy.



Beckham had earlier said that playing in Sunday's final ranked alongside winning the Primera Liga title with Real Madrid in 2003 and a trophy-laden spell at Manchester United that included six English Premier League titles and the 1999 Champions League crown.



"Anytime you reach a certain part of the season, whether it's being in a cup final or winning leagues, it's always special," Beckham said. "Being involved in finals never gets old."

***

ISLAMABAD, Pakistan (CNN) -- Security forces patrolled the streets of the eastern Pakistan city of Gojra on Sunday, one day after seven people were killed and 20 injured when Muslim demonstrators set fire to houses in a Christian enclave and fighting broke out, authorities said.



Pakistani human rights activists in Lahore protest on Saturday over the anti-Christian violence in Gojra village.



Police said Muslims were enraged over an alleged desecration of pages in the Quran at a Christian wedding last Saturday, and held a rally to protest such an act.



The Quran is the Muslim sacred text.



Shehbaz Bhatti, federal minister for minorities, told CNN that four women, two men and a child, all Christians, were either killed when their houses were burned or were shot to death.



Some 50 houses were burned down and more than 100 were looted by the protesters, Bhatti said.



The incident occurred in Gojra City, 160 kilometers or around 100 miles southwest of Lahore.



No violence was reported Sunday, Punjab Provisional Minister Rana Sana Ullah told CNN.



There was a demonstration by about a thousand Christians who refused to bury their dead until the government registered a criminal case against those they alleged to have carried out the attacks.



The government would register a criminal case, Sana Ullah said. Registering a case means a criminal investigation will be opened. Sana Ullah added that the government strongly condemned the incident. He said the attack was not a sectarian issue, but rather terrorism. He blamed the incident on attackers with ties to militants in Northwest Pakistan, where the government is carrying out an offensive against Taliban groups.



On Thursday, 15 Christian houses in the region were also torched.



Pakistan is predominantly Muslim but has a small Christian community.



Meanwhile, police in Islamabad reported the Friday arrest of an al Qaeda member thought to be involved in several attacks.



Bin Yamin, a senior police official in Islamabad, identified the militant as Rao Shakir Ali.



He is suspected of being involved in strikes on several targets, such as the Danish Embassy, police and a hotel, and is also suspected of targeting a rally for Chief Justice Iftikhar Chauhdary, authorities said.



The suspect is a resident of Sargodha, which is 165 kilometers (more than 100 miles) northwest of Lahore and has a house in Rawalpindi that has been used to facilitate insurgent acts, police said.



CNN's Tim Schwarz and Journalist Nasir Habib contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Protests over media freedom continued in Venezuela Tuesday, a day after two student protesters were killed in separate clashes.





Student leaders opposed to cable operators' decision to drop five television channels, including an opposition station, for failure to follow broadcast laws pleaded for an end to the violence at a demonstration in front of the state-run broadcaster.





Also Tuesday, the Interior Ministry designated four investigators to look into the shooting deaths of the two students in the western state of Merida.





The protests stem from the suspension of cable station Radio Caracas Television (RCTV) and five other stations over the weekend. The stations were pulled from the air because they did not broadcast a speech by President Hugo Chavez, as required by national broadcast laws.





Protesters say that the suspension of RCTV, known for its anti-Chavez slant, was provoked by the Chavez government. The Chavez government had already pushed RCTV off of public airwaves in 2007 for similar violations. Then, as now, his opponents saw politics behind the move.





The street protests this week produced confrontations with police and Chavez supporters, but have been more widespread.





Photos from a weekend national baseball series showed many fans in the crowd wearing red bandanas over their mouths in protest.





According to the preliminary investigation, a 16-year-old student was killed during an altercation in Merida Monday night, the state-run Bolivarian News Agency reported. The teen was identified as Yosinio Carrillo Torres.





In a second incident in Merida, just before midnight, another youth, Marcos Rosales Suarez, was shot when a group of unidentified gunmen fired into a crowd of protesters.





"We applied the law," Chavez said in a speech over the weekend. "If they don't follow it, they won't be allowed back on the air."





Many press freedom organizations, including the Committee to Protect Journalists, have urged Chavez to allow the stations back on the air right away.





"Pulling a television station from cable and satellite distribution because it chooses not to carry every word uttered by a politician would be laughable if this weren't Venezuela," Carlos Lauria, CPJ's senior program coordinator for the Americas, said in a statement. "The action against RCTV is a disturbing sign of the growing censorship imposed by President Hugo Chavez. The authorities must restore all stations to subscription TV immediately."





The Venezuelan embassy in the United States released a statement challenging the way the RCTV incident was being portrayed, citing "distortions in U.S. press coverage."





"Once again an administrative sanction against media outlets that have failed to comply with broadcast laws are painted as measures against the political views expressed in their programming with the goal of attacking the democratic legitimacy of the Venezuelan government," the statement said.





The cable stations were aware of the laws and chose not to follow them, the Venezuelan government said.





"This is not a discriminatory nor arbitrary measure," the statement said.





In other developments in Venezuela, the president of state-owned Banco de Venezuela, Eugenio Vazquez Orellana, announced his resignation Tuesday. The resignation follows two other high-level resignations from Chavez's upper ranks. Over the weekend, Venezuela's vice president and defense minister Ramon Carrizalez, and minister for the environment Yuviri Ortega, also resigned.

***

JAKARTA, Indonesia (CNN) --  An Indonesian court has sentenced the alleged military commander of an al Qaeda-linked terror network to 15 years in prison.



Abu Dujana is suspected of plotting attacks on the Australian Embassy and J.W. Marriott hotel in Jakarta.



Abu Dujana is the alleged leader of the military wing of Jemaah Islamiyah, a group that is thought to be linked to al Qaeda. It aims to create a Muslim "superstate" across much of Southeast Asia.



Dujana, a slight, wiry man, is accused of direct involvement in the Bali nightclub bombings of 2002 that killed more than 200, mostly Western, tourists. He is also suspected of plotting subsequent attacks on the Australian Embassy and J.W. Marriott hotel, both in the Indonesian capital, Jakarta.



Furthermore, authorities say Dujana is behind the violence in Poso, on Indonesia's eastern Sulawesi island. Fighting between Muslims and Christians periodically breaks out in the region and sometimes turns deadly.



Police have accused Jemaah Islamiyah of sending armed militants to Poso.



The court found Dujana guilty Monday of illegally possessing firearms and explosives, and of harboring suspected terrorists. His lawyers said they may appeal the sentence.



After his arrest last June following a four-year hunt, Dujana admitted to CNN that he was Jemaah Islamiyah's military chief. But he said that happened only after the attacks on Western targets.



He described Jemaah Islamiyah to CNN as "an underground organization," saying "it will continue to exist and continue to move on with its plans" to create an Islamic state under Sharia law despite his capture.



"When a part of it is cut off ...there will be a replacement, it's only natural," he said.



Dujana denied being involved in the Marriott Hotel attack. He told CNN that he helped fugitive suspect Noordin Top plan the attack, meeting him both before and after the devastating blast that killed 12 people and injured 150.



"It's true, I did have a meeting with Noordin before the Marriott bombing but that doesn't mean I was involved in the attack," he said. "In that meeting, we're just aligning our views with each other -- there was absolutely no discussion about planning any bombing."



In his CNN interview, Dujana was quick with messages of hate, calling all Westerners legitimate targets because of the actions of leaders like U.S. President George W. Bush and then-British Prime Minister Tony Blair, who he says are not giving Muslims the chance to be in power.



Dujana studied in Pakistan and fought in Afghanistan from 1988 to 1991.



He told CNN that he met al Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden in Afghanistan during the fight against Soviet occupation. At the time, bin Laden was a field commander and he was an ordinary soldier, he said.



Dujana said bin Laden was well respected then and helped him and others realize that it was permissible to kill people to defend Islam.



"I didn't read it in the Quran," he said. " It's based on the teachings of our teachers, clerics, especially what Osama bin Laden first said."



"Because of America's arrogance, many in the Muslim world know, believe, it's permissible to kill American soldiers. It's halal; it's permitted," he said.



The court declared Jemaah Islamiyah a terrorist organization Monday and ordered it to pay 10 million rupiah ($1,088).



Around the same time Dujana was captured last June, authorities also apprehended Jemaah Islamiyah's leader, known simply as Zarkasih. A verdict on his case is expected soon.



Last week, two other top Jemaah Islamiyah leaders -- Dr. Agus Purwanto and Abdur Rohim -- were brought to Indonesia following their arrest in Malaysia.



Both are being investigated for their possible role in fomenting violence in Poso.



Terrorism expert Sidney Jones says Abdur Rohim is believed to have replaced Zarkasih as Jemaah Islamiyah leader.



"It is another major blow to Jemaah Islamiyah, but difficult to tell what the impact will be," Jones told CNN via e-mail last week. "It could embolden a

***

(CNN) -- Flooding and resulting landslides killed 137 people Thursday and Friday in this nation's northern provinces, including Baguio City, Benguet Province and Mountain Province, the Office of Civil Defense in Cordillera said Friday.



A boatman transports three empty wooden coffins on the edge of Laguna Lake east of Manila on Thursday.



Another 43 people were missing and 45 were injured, it said.



Landslides blocked traffic along the Marchos Highway, Naguilian Road, Kennon Road and Ambuklao Road, cutting access to Baguio City, Benguet Province and Mountain Province, it said.



The floods were unleased by tropical depression Parma, which had been downgraded from a typhoon.



Earlier reports from Rocky Baraan, provincial administrator of Pangasinan, said flooding had inundated 32 towns and two cities, Dagupan and Urdaneta. Some 35,000 people had fled to evacuation centers, the official Philippines News Agency reported, citing the Provincial Disaster Coordinating Council.



The worst-hit areas included Bayambang, Alcala and Basista, the news agency reported.



People clambered onto rooftops as floodwaters rose, calling and texting for help. Rescue trucks were hampered by floodwaters that reach the roofs of single-story houses, Baraan said. About 16 rubber rescue boats had been deployed.



Since the rains started in central Luzon, three dams in the Pangasinan area have been releasing vast amounts of water -- up to 10 million cubic meters per hour at one dam, dam officials said.



Water passing through the three dams -- the Ambuklao, the Binga and the San Roque -- is rushing into the Agno River, which has been swollen since Thursday and affects seven towns in eastern Pangasinan, dam officials said.



Water released from the San Roque dam has contributed to the flooding in eastern Pangasinan, acknowledged Alex Palada, division manager for flood forecasting and warning of the National Power Corporation. Dam officials had no choice but to maintain safe water levels, he added, noting that he alerted Pangasinan Governor Amado Espino. The governor started to evacuate residents Thursday when the Agno River started to rise, Palada said.



In the last several days, water has become the Philippines' biggest enemy, as Parma, locally known as "Pepeng," dumped as much as 36 inches (91.4 centimeters) of rain in some parts of the nation of islands, compounding misery in areas already flooded by earlier storm Ketsana.



Parma was forecast to have winds of no greater than 39 mph (63 kph) by Friday.



The U.S. Navy was expected to join rescue operations in Pangasinan, according to the agency.



Journalist Lilibeth Frondoso and CNN's Judy Kwon contributed to this report.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Dean Still had been researching and developing cleaner, more environmentally-friendly wood-burning stoves for almost two decades when, while working for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, he spotted a coal stove for sale on a street corner near Tibet, China.



Workers at Shengzhou Stove Manufacturers prepare wood-burning stoves for firing.



He had been looking for an established manufacturer who could mass-produce the more efficient, lower-emission stoves he had been developing with the Aprovecho Research Center (ARC), a non-profit research and education center based in Oregon in the United States.



"It looked perfect. It had all the components," Still told CNN. "I knew we could change it to a wood-burning stove. There was a cell phone number on the side, so I called it."



Shen Huiyang of Shengzhou Stove Manufacturers (SSM), based over a thousand miles away, answered. The two met and a short time later, in August 2007, an agreement was signed between ARC and SSM. Shen's factory began producing the new wood-burning stoves last year.



Last week, the two companies were declared "Global Energy Champions" by the Ashden Awards for Sustainable Energy at a ceremony in London, England.



The vast majority of the 60,000 stoves they've sold since entering their partnership have gone to Envirofit International, a U.S.-based non-profit organization which markets the stoves in India, supported by the Shell Foundation. Others are sold in Argentina, Chile, the Marshall Islands, Madagascar, South Africa and Tanzania.



Shen said: "We have produced coal stoves for many years, and it is wonderful to be able to use our experience to make a wood stove that brings benefits to so many people."



The pair won $65,000 to develop the scheme which Still says will be spent on research and development, and to employ more sales people.



"What I'm doing now is talking to the U.N., to relief agencies, just anybody in the world who might have an interest in burning wood more cleanly, and using less of it," he said.



The principle behind the stove is simple. With a better insulated combustion chamber, the fire requires less wood and burns hot enough for the smoke to combust as well, which means far fewer emissions.



According to the World Health Organization, about half the world still cooks with biomass or coal, using open fires or traditional stoves. The resulting emissions cause indoor air pollution, leading to pneumonia, chronic respiratory disease and lung cancer. This indoor air pollution causes 1.6 million deaths a year, primarily among children and women.



The emissions also contribute to climate change, and the collection of firewood contributes to deforestation and erosion.



ARC say tests performed on the stoves indicate major breakthroughs for both the environment and health in the developing world. The stoves reduce the use of wood for fuel by up to 50 percent, and cut carbon monoxide emissions by up to 70 percent compared to a traditional fire.

***

KHARTOUM, Sudan (CNN) -- In an effort to shut down Khartoum's Unity High School, a disgruntled former employee alerted Sudanese officials that a British teacher had allowed her class to name a teddy bear "Mohammed," a British source and Sudanese presidential palace source told Time magazine's Sam Dealey.



An undated amateur photo shows Gillian Gibbons, who was jailed for allowing children to name a teddy bear "Mohammed".



Gillian Gibbons, 54, was convicted last week of insulting religion and sentenced to 15 days in jail and deportation. Sudan's President Omar al-Bashir pardoned her from her prison sentence on Monday and she later left on a flight for England.



The two sources said Sarah Khawad was fired as the school's secretary in November after an employment spat and threatened to shut down the school.



The sources said Khawad did not appear to have a vendetta against Gibbons, but hoped that by bringing the teddy bear incident to the education minister's attention, he would close down the school for anti-Islamic teachings.  Watch Time magazine's Sam Dealey's report on the pardon »



The private school was shut down after the controversy came to light last week. It is unclear if it will reopen.



Although there is no ban in the Quran on images of Allah or the Prophet Mohammed, Islam's founder, some Muslims consider likenesses highly offensive.



The sources said they have confirmed the account with Gibbons.



Defense attorneys confirmed that it was Khawad who launched the initial complaint against Gibbons, not a parent as originally thought. Khawad also testified at Gibbons' trial.



Before approaching Sudan's education minister, the two sources said Khawad tried to enlist two parents, who were also teachers at the school, to join in her protest against the teddy bear's name, but they declined.



Gibbons had been working at the school -- popular with wealthy Sudanese and expatriates -- since August, after leaving her position as deputy head teacher at a primary school in Liverpool this summer, said the head of Unity High School, Robert Boulos.



She had asked her class of 7-year-olds to come up with a name for the toy as part of a school project, he said.



Classmates took turns taking the teddy bear home with them, accompanied by a diary with the bear's name written in the front of it, he said.



She was taken into custody on November 25 and tried days later in a Sudanese court. She was cleared of other charges of inciting hatred and showing contempt for religious beliefs.



Gibbons had initially faced the possibility of 40 lashes and a six-month jail term for insulting Islam.



The incident sparked a diplomatic row, with British Foreign Secretary David Miliband calling on his Sudanese counterpart to dismiss the charges. Two British lawmakers, both Muslims, traveled to Khartoum to help secure her release.



It also resulted in angry protests in Khartoum, with some calling for the British woman's execution. E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- Sri Lankan officials rejected a proposed cease-fire from the Tamil Tiger rebels Sunday, warning instead that government troops intended to continue a new offensive until the group surrenders, a senior government official said.



Tamil demonstrators call for a cease-fire in Sri Lanka during a rally Saturday in Paris, France.



"The government is firm that (the rebels) lay down their arms and surrender. We do not recognize this so-called offer," said Lakshman Hulugalle, director of Sri Lanka's Media Center for National Security.



The proposed cease-fire came six days after the Sri Lankan army launched a new offensive against the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Elam (LTTE) in the country's northern area. Government troops made significant advances into rebel-held territory on Friday and Saturday, according to Sri Lankan Army sources.



A government-imposed deadline for the Tigers to surrender passed last Tuesday. Tens of thousands of displaced civilians currently remain wedged in a dwindling swath of territory controlled by the Tigers along the country's northeastern coast.



Government troops say they have rescued 39,000 civilians trapped in the area, but a U.N. refugee agency said Friday that a wave of "fresh displacement" has now exceeded 100,000 individuals.



"In the face of an unprecedented humanitarian crisis and in response to the calls made by the U.N., EU, the governments of the USA, India and others, the (LTTE) has announced an unilateral cease-fire. All of LTTE's offensive military operations will cease with immediate effect," the rebel leaders said in a written statement issued earlier Sunday.



"We welcome the attempts by the U.N. and its agencies to assist the civilian population and are ready to engage and cooperate with them to address the humanitarian needs of the population. ... We are in full agreement that the humanitarian crisis can only be overcome by declaration of an immediate cease-fire."



The Tiger leadership asked the international community to "pressure the Sri Lankan government to reciprocate" on the cease-fire offer.



The Tigers have been fighting for an independent state in Sri Lanka's northeast since 1983. As many as 70,000 people have been killed since the civil war began, and the group has been declared a terrorist organization by 32 countries, including the United States and the European Union.

***

(CNN)  -- New Zealand warmed up for their Tri-Nations decider against Australia with a 101-14 rout of Samoa in a one-off rugby union Test on Wednesday in New Plymouth, running in 15 tries.



Conrad Smith touches down for one of his two tries in the All Blacks win.



Fullback Mils Muliaina scored three tries in the first half, center Conrad Smith and winger Richard Kahui touched down twice and nine other players added their names to the New Zealand scoresheet as the All Blacks beat a weakened Samoan team by a record margin.



New Zealand led 47-7, seven tries to one, at halftime and added eight tries, including a penalty try, in the second spell to surpass their highest score against Samoa.



The All Blacks had a 26-0 lead after 16 minutes and set their record score against Samoa -- surpassing the 71-13 in 1999 -- despite being held scoreless for periods of 18 minutes in the first half and 10 minutes in the second.



It was the fifth time New Zealand had reached 100 points in a match, with the All Blacks' record being the 145-17 win over Japan at the 1995 World Cup.



Samoa was forced to pick a severely under-strength side because many of its leading and most-experienced players are involved with European club sides.



Most of the players who took the field Wednesday were young and Samoa-based and playing against the All Blacks for the first time.



Although outgunned by an All Blacks team which overwhelmingly controlled territory and possession, Samoa played with great spirit and scored a try in each half.



Flyhalf Uale Mai scored and converted his own try after 28 minutes and flanker Alafoti Faosiliva touched down off a break by Uale Mai four minutes before fulltime.



"What can you say? 100 points," Samoa captain Filipo Levi said. "It shows the All Blacks are on fire at the moment. They've showed in the Tri-Nations competition that they're a very consistent team.



"For some of our boys it was a big step up from playing club rugby in Samoa but, having said that, it was a big learning curve."



Flyhalf Daniel Carter converted six of the All Blacks' first-half tries, surpassing 2,000 points in first-class rugby, and his replacement Stephen Donald scored his first Test try and converted seven of New Zealand's eight second-half tries.



The match was scheduled to help the All Blacks bridge the three-week gap between their most recent Tri-Nations clash with South Africa and their next, against Australia, at Brisbane on September 13.



The Brisbane match will decide the outcome of the Tri-Nations tournament.

***

(CNN) -- Red Cross President and CEO Mark W. Everson has stepped down after revelations he was "engaged in a personal relationship with a subordinate employee," the organization announced Tuesday.



Mark W. Everson says he is leaving his post, effective immediately, for "personal and family reasons."



The Red Cross Board of Governors asked for and received Everson's  resignation after it "concluded that the situation reflected poor judgment on Mr. Everson's part and diminished his ability to lead the organization in the future,"  the Red Cross said in a statement on its Web site.



Everson, 53, said in a written statement that he was leaving the $500,000-per-year job "for personal and family reasons, and deeply regret it is impossible for me to continue in a job so recently undertaken."



Everson -- who is married and has two children -- joined the Red Cross as president and CEO last May.



The organization became aware of Everson's relationship with a female Red Cross employee 10 days ago, Chief Public Affairs Officer Suzy C. DeFrancis told CNN in a telephone interview.



"I think the board acted very quickly," she said, adding that the woman remains in her job.



About Everson, DeFrancis said, "We're grateful for his service."



The board of governors on Tuesday appointed Mary S. Elcano, general counsel and five-year Red Cross employee, as interim president and CEO.



Everson had worked in the Bush administration from August 2001 -- including serving as commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service -- until he was hired by the Red Cross.



"This is flabbergasting, that's all I can say. It's completely contrary to his public persona that he evidenced while he was at the IRS," said Suzanne Ross McDowell, a Washington-based attorney who served on an advisory committee to the IRS division that deals with tax-exempt organizations.



"From the standpoint of exempt organizations on the non-profit sector, it's just another news story that we would rather not see," she said.



"It's got nothing to do with the Red Cross," said Ira Milstein, a New York lawyer specializing in corporate governance who has worked with the organization and was impressed with Everson. "He was a team player and a good leader. To have him fall off a cliff like this is just sad."



A search committee has been formed to begin the process of finding Everson's permanent replacement, the organization said.



The job has been a challenging one. Marsha J. Evans resigned as president in 2005, after the Red Cross response to Hurricane Katrina came under fire.



Four years earlier, Bernadine Healy quit the post after the organization was criticized for mishandling donations intended for victims of the September 11 terrorist attacks and collecting vast quantities of blood that was not needed and ultimately thrown out.



Healy told reporters she "had no choice" about her resignation.



Meanwhile, DeFrancis acknowledged Tuesday that, 14 years after a court ordered the agency to improve its collection of blood, it has yet to meet federal safety and quality-control requirements. E-mail to a friend

***

Buenos Aires, Argentina (CNN) -- Latin America's first same-sex marriage, set to be held in Argentina on Tuesday, appeared derailed after a judge filed an injunction to stop the union until the issue can be reviewed further.



Judge Marta Gomez Alsina's ruling blocks an earlier holding by another judge that found city laws banning same-sex marriage unconstitutional, the court said in a statement.



Alex Freyre and Jose Maria di Bello had planned to make their marriage official at a civil ceremony and chose December 1 because it is World AIDS Day.



The registrar responsible for the civil marriages in Buenos Aires has been notified of the ruling, the court said.



The couple would attempt to get their wedding license anyway, the official Telam news agency reported.



"We're continuing with the preparations because we, as planners, nor the couple itself, have not been notified" of the injunction, said Maria Rachid, president of the Argentine Federation for Lesbians, Gays, Bisexuals and Transsexuals, according to the news agency.



Gomez Alsina's injunction could not overturn the earlier ruling because she is a trial-level judge and not an appellate judge, Rachid said.



The original ruling was made on November 10 by another trial-level judge, Gabriela Seijas, who responded to a petition made by Freyre and di Bello.



Seijas ruled that the ban on same-sex marriage was illegal and ordered the proper authorities to grant the couple a marriage license if they applied for one.



The court's decision applied only to Buenos Aires. Same-sex unions in most of Argentina remain illegal.



"The law should treat each person with equal respect in relation to each person's singularities without the need to understand or regulate them," Seijas said in her ruling.



Buenos Aires Mayor Mauricio Macri said after the ruling that his government would not appeal the decision.



Monday's ruling was a temporary measure to postpone the marriage until Seijas' original ruling could be reviewed in depth, presumably by an appeals court or the supreme court, the court statement said



Countries in Latin America, a region strongly identified with the Catholic Church, have recently given more attention to gay rights.



In September Uruguay became the first Latin American country to allow same-sex adoption.



Brazil, Colombia and Ecuador are also addressing the issue of same-sex civil unions.

***

(CNN) -- Actor Robert Pattinson dropped the f-bomb and singer Justin Timberlake grabbed the breasts of co-star Mila Kunis, who returned the favor by grabbing the pop singer's crotch.





And so went the 2011 edition of the MTV Movie Awards, where the outrageous and often sophomoric antics of the ceremony's featured performers tend to grab, so to speak, more attention than the awards themselves.





Between the gropes, the profanities and the off-color humor at Sunday night's 2011 version of the annual awards show, actors dispensed trophies to other actors.





"Eclipse," the third installment in the teen vampire saga "Twilight," carried the night with five awards.





That included honors for Best Picture as well as the Best Male and Female Performance awards, which went to co-stars Pattinson and Kristen Stewart. The movie also carried MTV's Best Fight and Best Kiss awards.





Meanwhile the award for best villain went to Tom Felton for his seventh outing as the churlish, bad boy wizard Draco Malfoy in "Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows."





Ellen Page claimed the dubious Best Scared-As-(expletive) Performance prize for a supporting role in "Inception," and Emma Stone took top honors in the comedy category for her role in "Easy A."





MTV gave actress Reese Witherspoon, who at 35 was likely the most senior award recipient of the bunch, a "Generation Award," in recognition of her career in movies.





However, the moment was marred or immortalized -- depending on your point of view -- by an apparent failure of impulse-control by presenter Pattinson.





Pattinson, who played Witherspoon's lover in "Water for Elephants," told the audience "I did (expletive) you," uttering a profanity broadcast over the air without a bleep.





Pattinson didn't stop there. Moments later he quipped that that Witherspoon might be "33 percent lesbian."





Witherspoon wasn't the only celebrity to get ribbed for her fictional or real-life romantic pursuits.





Awards host Jason Sudeikis told the audience that actress and singer Selena Gomez had already swallowed three of boyfriend Justin Bieber's baby teeth while kissing the teen singing star.





Bieber, by the way, won Best Jaw Dropping Moment Winner for his biopic movie, "Never Say Never."





Other awards recipients included: Chloe Grace Moretz, who took the award for Best Breakout Star Winner for her performance as a vulgar child superhero in "Kick-Ass."

***

GREENCREEK, Idaho (CNN) -- It was just 2½ years ago when Elaine Sonnen found out that her 16-year-old son, Richard, had been planning a Columbine-style attack at his high school.



Richard Sonnen spent 16 months in mental health institutions after plotting to kill his high school classmates.



It would be a fitting payback to his high school classmates who Richard said relentlessly bullied him.



"I always wanted to get back at them," Richard Sonnen said of his classmates. "I always wanted to strangle them. ... I was always mad. I was always angry and I would come home and cry to mom and dad."



Both Richard and Elaine Sonnen spoke to CNN at the 45-acre family farm.



Unlike  Columbine and recent school shootings at Northern Illinois University and Virginia Tech, Elaine Sonnen did see the warning signs in her son and was able to stop him.



Elaine and her husband, Tom, adopted Richard from a Bulgarian orphanage when he was just 4½ years old.



"I mean, we just loved him, and he was just a big sparkle of life," she said.



But only a few months after they brought him home, they began to see another side of their son. He was angry and unpredictable.



Elaine Sonnen says that at age 6, Richard told her he wanted to kill her. She said he would shake with anger to the point that he'd scream at her, telling her he wanted to destroy her.



"People thought he was just the greatest kid in the world. Very polite, well-mannered, caring," Elaine Sonnen remembered. "At home, he could be anywhere from just a really helpful kid to a monster. A terrifying monster."  Mother says son had 'two' personalities »



In junior high, he said, "evil" classmates started picking on him. Boys and girls, he said, bullied him until he couldn't take it anymore.



"I always wanted to get revenge," he said.



By the eighth grade, Richard was put on anti-psychotic medications. He had been diagnosed as bipolar and was suffering from obsessive compulsive disorder and other disorders.



In 1999, when the Columbine shootings happened, the Sonnens feared that Richard might do the same thing one day.



"We stopped and looked at each other and said, 'This could be Richard; some day this could be him,' " Elaine Sonnen said.



Years later, during his junior year in high school, they were right.



Fed up with the bullies, Richard says, he felt like an outcast and started looking for a way to get even. Secretly, he began reading books about Columbine in his school library. The shooters, Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold, became his heroes.



"They planned it out so perfectly and so meticulously ... that I just, wow, you know," he said. "They're my gods."  Watch a preview of "Campus Rage" »



He even created a hit list of the classmates he planned to kill at Prairie High School in Cottonwood, Idaho.



"My plan was to set around bombs around the school. ... I analyzed a lot of where everybody sat and where everybody did their thing," he said. "I had pinpoints of where I wanted to go, where I wanted to do it."



Harvard Medical School psychologist William Pollack, who consulted on a 2002 federal government study of school shootings, said it found that most school shooters often had feelings of anger, sadness and isolation as well as homicidal and suicidal thoughts.



"We see a young man who obviously is telling us how depressed he was, how angry he was and how much he looked up to people who we know are very disturbed and very dangerous, and how close he came to killing people," said Pollack, who watched CNN's interview with Richard.



Elaine Sonnen found out about her son's plan during a conversation with him. She ordered him to write down the names of

***

(CNN) -- The death toll from Tropical Storm Agatha continued to grow Tuesday, with 152 reported killed in Guatemala, 16 in Honduras and nine in El Salvador.





One-hundred people are missing in Guatemala and another 87 are injured, the nation's emergency agency reported Tuesday. In addition, nearly 125,000 people have been evacuated and 74,000 are living in shelters, said emergency official David de Leon.





The previously reported toll for Guatemala was 123 deaths, 90 people missing and 69 injured.





Guatemala also is feeling the effect of the Pacaya volcano, which erupted Thursday night and continued to spew ash Tuesday. Three people were killed when they were crushed by rocks strewn by the volcano.





La Aurora International Airport in Guatemala City, the nation's capital, has been closed since Friday because of falling ash but was expected to open later Tuesday.





Pacaya is located about 18 miles (30 kilometers) south of Guatemala City.





Guatemalan President Alvaro Colom declared a 15-day state of calamity after the volcano eruption. Damage from Tropical Storm Agatha added to the devastation.





Destruction from the storm has been widespread throughout the nation, with mudslides destroying homes and buildings and burying some victims. At least nine rivers had dramatically higher levels and 13 bridges collapsed, the emergency services agency said.





In the northern part of Guatemala City, the downpour created a sinkhole the size of a street intersection. Residents told CNN that a three-story building and a house fell into the hole.





Classes have been canceled this week in schools throughout the nation.





In Honduras, where 16 people have died, President Porfirio Lobo declared a state of emergency Sunday.





Nearly 12,000 people have been evacuated from their homes and about 3,200 were living in shelters, the Honduran emergency agency said Tuesday. More than 140 homes have been destroyed and another 700 have been damaged, the Permanent Commission for Emergencies reported.





The situation in El Salvador was improving, officials said Monday. The rain stopped Sunday afternoon and river levels were beginning to diminish, officials said. Classes nationwide remained canceled, however, until further notice.





Agatha was demoted from a tropical storm to a tropical depression Saturday night and lost its status as a depression Sunday evening.





It was the first named storm for the Pacific hurricane season. The Atlantic hurricane season started Tuesday.





CNN's Arthur Brice contributed to this report.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- The Senate approved a controversial nuclear deal with India on Wednesday, clearing the way for the United States to export nuclear know-how to India after a ban lasting decades.



President Bush, who supports the deal, meets with India Prime Minister Manmohan Singh last week.



Sen. Chris Dodd, a Connecticut Democrat, said the deal would not only "set the stage for a stronger U.S.-India relationship," but also would promote stability in India's troubled neighborhood.



"This agreement is indicative of a new era in Indian foreign policy, an era in which India will see all the world's powers as potential partners in efforts to address its own needs and the needs of others," Dodd said. "I believe that this new era will bring increased stability and progress in South Asia."



India and Pakistan have fought several wars since they became independent in 1947, and both countries have tested nuclear weapons.



Wednesday's vote was 86-13.



Sen. Tom Harkin, an Iowa Democrat, spoke against what he called flawed legislation before the vote.



"If we pass this legislation, we will reward India for flouting the most important arms control agreement in history, the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, and we will gravely undermine our case against hostile nations that seek to do the same," Harkin said.



Before he voted against the bill, he said Congress had not debated the legislation properly.



"It was hustled through [the House of Representatives] without any hearings and without a vote in the House Foreign Affairs Committee," he said. "Here in the Senate, the Foreign Relations Committee held just one hearing with just one witness who spoke in support of the agreement."



Presidential candidates Sen. Barack Obama and Sen. John McCain voted for the bill.



President Bush urged the Senate to pass the bill in a statement released before the vote. The bill "represents a major milestone in the transformation of our nation's important relationship with India," the statement said.



One senator had anonymously been using parliamentary rules to prevent the bill from coming to a vote, but the leaders of the Senate announced Tuesday night the vote would go ahead.



The House of Representatives passed the bill without debate on Saturday. The next step is for Bush to sign it into law.



The Indian nuclear market is a rich prize, and the agreement could open the way for U.S. companies to earn billions of dollars building nuclear power plants in India. The French government clinched its own nuclear trade deal with India on Wednesday when President Nicolas Sarkozy signed an agreement in Paris. That puts French companies in the running for some of the same contracts U.S. companies want.



In exchange for access to U.S. nuclear technology, India would allow international inspections of its civilian -- but not military -- nuclear power plants. It would also promise not to resume testing of nuclear weapons.



The United States banned nuclear trade with India after India exploded a nuclear device in 1974 and refused to sign the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty.



In an informal agreement between the two nations, the United States said it would halt any nuclear cooperation should India resume testing.

***

(CNN) -- California's Silicon Valley has long dominated the internet industry. The world's largest dotcom companies operate from the valley, it attracts the industry's brightest minds and countless innovative ideas are generated out of the area. So, can Europe make headway in this ever-expanding industry?





Ilja Laurs, founder of Getjar -- the world's largest app store -- says there are labor, cultural and bureaucratic factors that make it very difficult for Europe to compete with Silicon Valley.





Laurs argues the talent pool across the continent for specialist services in Europe is too small. "While there are certain pockets of good people for particular niches, you maybe only able to find a hundred people in those specific areas."





That compares to the thousands available in Silicon Valley, putting Europe at a competitive disadvantage.





European startup enterprises face the same regulations that are applied to large corporations, Laurs says, putting an unfair burden on smaller companies.





Laurs says governments need to decide whether encouraging high-tech communities is something they want to focus on. He believes changes must be made to labor laws and capital gains tax for small organizations to be viable.





"The same set of rules that governs big corporations can be very damaging to small startups which operate in a very different environment," he says.





Cultural differences can also make it difficult for Europe to compete, Laurs says. He points to America's strong work ethic as an example, saying it gives Silicon Valley an edge. Facebook, for example, is not "working nine to five," he says. In Europe, by comparison, some government regulations dictate six weeks of vacation time.





He believes Europeans value other aspects of life, such as family, above work. "Americans are proud if they work and spend a hundred hours a week in the office. I'm not saying that it's good or bad, it's just the way it is and that's very incompatible with innovation."





But ultimately, Laurs says, innovation is "about trial and error."

***

(CNN) -- The son of former Liberian President Charles Taylor Sr. was sentenced Friday to 97 years in prison for charges including torture and conspiracy, according to a federal court in Florida.



The U.S.-born son of Charles Taylor Sr., pictured, moved to Liberia when his father became president.



U.S. District Judge Cecilia M. Altonaga sentenced Charles "Chuckie" Taylor Jr., 31, in a Friday morning session that lasted four hours, according to a court document.



Altonaga cited Taylor's "sadistic, cruel and atrocious past," saying it "constituted unacceptable, universally condemned torture," The Miami Herald reported.



"The lengthy prison term handed down today justly reflects the horror and torture that Taylor Jr. visited upon his victims," said Matthew Friedrich, acting assistant attorney general of the criminal division.



Taylor, also known as Charles McArthur Emmanuel, was convicted October 30 of torture, conspiracy to commit torture and firearm charges.



His case, tried in Miami, was the first brought under a 1994 U.S. law saying those accused of committing torturous acts overseas can be tried in a U.S. federal court, as long as the person is a U.S. national or is present in the United States, regardless of nationality.



Calls to Taylor's defense attorneys were not immediately returned.



Prosecutors had asked for Taylor to be sentenced to 147 years.



Taylor was born in Boston, Massachusetts, but he moved to Liberia when his father was named president.



Prosecutors said Taylor became the leader of the Anti-Terrorist Unit and the Liberian National Police while his father was president. The two groups are accused of abducting, torturing and killing people.



From 1999 to 2002, Taylor committed torture and allowed others to commit torture, prosecutors said.



Taylor and his associated burned victims with molten plastic, lighted cigarettes, candle wax and an iron. Some were severely beaten with firearms, cut and stabbed and shocked with an electric device, prosecutors said in an indictment that superseded the initial indictment from 2006.



In the initial indictment, Taylor was charged with one count of torture, one count of conspiracy to torture and one count of using a firearm during the commission of a violent crime.



The superseding September 2007 indictment -- which incorporated the initial charges -- included five counts of torture, one count of conspiracy to torture, one count of using a firearm during the commission of a violent crime and one count of conspiracy to use a firearm during the commission of a violent crime.



The defense had said the U.S. government had little or no evidence to back up its claims.



Also Friday, the World Organization for Human Rights USA filed a civil class action suit against Taylor on behalf of a group of people who are said to have been subjected to torture and other human rights abuses by Taylor or his subordinates, according to the organization.



The suit seeks declaratory relief and general, compensatory and punitive damages, the organization said in a written statement.



"This civil suit aims to address Defendant Taylor's wrongs on a much greater scale" than the criminal trial, the organization said.



Taylor's father, Charles Taylor Sr., is standing trial in The Hague, Netherlands, on war crimes charges.



CNN's John Couwels contributed to this report.

***

MODESTO, California (CNN)  -- Some of the people hit hardest by this bad economy are the youngest. Almost 2 million children nationwide have had or will have their lives disrupted by home foreclosures, according to one study.

There are more empty desks in Suzell Tougas's fourth grade classroom after 10 students have stopped coming.

These are the children whose families have had to move, sometimes more than once. The youngsters are pulled out of school, often leaving their friends behind without even saying goodbye.

Nine-year-old Kenia, who is in the fourth grade at Fairview Elementary School in Modesto, California, said that is what happened to her. She is new to the school, having moved to the area just a few months ago. She said it is really hard and she misses her friends.

Her classmate Bethany said her best friend since kindergarten just left without saying goodbye.

Heather Sharp, the principal at Fairview, said her school has been the one most affected by the bad economy in the Modesto City School system.

"We have, over the last couple of months, 50 students coming new to the school and 50 students leaving," Sharp said.

It was so bad that the school conducted a door-to-door search for missing students, she said.

"We had our community aide going out to houses. And they were boarded up, windows boarded, yard brown. She had to go to neighbors to find out where the kids were."

In terms of raw numbers, California had the most foreclosures of any state from 2007 through January 2009. More than 57,000 homes entered foreclosure. Many of those were in Stanislaus County, where home prices have declined 65 percent since December 2005, according to the Modesto Bee.

Fourth-grade teacher Suzell Tougas said she has lost 10 kids from her class so far this year and is braced to lose more. She usually has a room full of children with every desk occupied. Now, it "looks empty ... it's like a "ghost town".

She said constant moving is hard on kids.

"Just having to start over and start over is really hard on a child," Tougas said. "It takes six weeks for a child to adjust ... at least."

While children are in that period of adjustment, she said, they aren't learning and their studies suffer.

"The biggest issue is that when [children have to move] when there are other stressors going on, we know it puts these kids at greater risk for being behind in their academics," said Pat Popp, a past president of the National Association for the Education of Homeless Children and Youth.

That is borne out in a recent study by a nonpartisan group in Washington called First Focus. It said that children who move twice in one year are only half as likely as others to be able to read proficiently, and may have a greater chance of being held back. It also found that  moving a lot reduces the student's chance of graduating from high school by half. Read the report here

The report, published in May, estimated that 1.95 million children will be affected by foreclosure over the next two years.

The number of homeless students is increasing dramatically. A study by the National Association for the Education of Homeless Children reported that more than 450 school districts across the nation had an increase of at least 25 percent in the number of identified homeless students between the 2006-2007 and 2007-2008 school years. Read the report here (pdf)

A student who moves "may hear the same information again that you learned in your previous classroom or miss information that has already been covered in your class but wasn't taught in your previous school," Popp said.

The fallout from the rash of foreclosures likely will have a long-term impact on education, especially in California. Schools get much of their funding from property tax revenues. Real estate values are spiraling downward and so is the revenue.

At Fairview Elementary, Principal Sharp worries about students like

***

Colombo, Sri Lanka (CNN) -- Sri Lanka's response to a scathing United Nations report alleging war crimes and human rights violations has reached the president's desk.





President Mahinda Rajapaksa received the 400-page document on Sunday night. The response, compiled by the Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation Commission, will be presented to Parliament, though Rajapaksa did not say when.





At their president's urging, Sri Lankans took to the streets in May to rail against the U.N. report, which cites "credible allegations" that crimes were committed by both sides during the final stages of the country's civil war.





A three-member U.N. panel recommended that Sri Lanka immediately conduct an investigation into the alleged violations of international law.





Human rights groups have already alleged both government troops and Tamil Tiger rebels violated humanitarian laws and that thousands of civilians were killed during the war, which ended in May 2009 after the government declared victory. The rebels had fought a 26-year bloody separatist war that left thousands dead and large numbers of others internally displaced, according to the United Nations.





The U.N. report concluded there were "credible allegations, which, if proven, indicate that a wide range of serious violations of international humanitarian law and international humanitarian rights law was committed both by the government of Sri Lanka and the LTTE (rebels), some of which would amount to war crimes and crimes against humanity."





In the war's final stage, which lasted from September 2008 to May 2009, the Sri Lankan army advanced into an area of northern Sri Lanka known as the Vanni, where about 330,000 people were trapped by fighting.





The report said the government used "large-scale and widespread shelling" that left many civilians dead.





Some of the shelling happened in no-fire zones where the government had encouraged civilians to congregate, the report said. Government forces also shelled a U.N. hub and food distribution lines and fired near International Committee of the Red Cross ships that were picking up the wounded, the report said.





The government also shelled hospitals on the front lines, some of them repeatedly, the report said.





"Most civilian casualties in the final phases of the war were caused by government shelling," the report said.





A spokesman for U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said Ban hopes the U.N. report "will make a contribution to full accountability and justice so that the Sri Lankan government and people will be able to proceed towards national reconciliation and peace."

***

Washington (CNN) -- President Obama huddled with the Joint Chiefs of Staff and other top military advisers at the White House on Friday as the administration continued its sweeping review of U.S. strategy in Afghanistan.



Each branch of the armed services was given a direct opportunity to tell Obama the effect on the military if a large number of additional forces are sent to Afghanistan, two military sources told CNN's Barbara Starr.



The meeting was the seventh in a series of high-level discussions being held in part to forge a consensus on how best to confront Taliban and al Qaeda militants threatening the governments of Afghanistan and Pakistan.



"The president wants to get input from different services," White House spokesman Tommy Vietor said earlier this week. "It's a chance to consult with uniformed military leadership as a part of his [Afghanistan-Pakistan] review."



The potential for a major expansion of the number of U.S. soldiers in Afghanistan comes with some misgivings from the military chiefs. The Army and Marine Corps have expressed concerns that it could make it tougher to give troops promised time at home with their families between overseas tours.



The White House strategy review is being conducted against a backdrop of rising U.S. casualties in Afghanistan and increased Taliban violence.



October has already become the deadliest month for U.S. forces since the war began in late 2001, with the deaths of 56 American troops.



Taliban militants have become increasingly bold. This week, they attacked a U.N. guesthouse in central Kabul, killing five U.N. staff members.



There also is political turmoil surrounding a planned November 7 Afghan presidential election runoff. On Friday, a source close to the Afghan leadership told CNN that President Hamid Karzai's runoff opponent, Abdullah Abdullah, would withdraw from the race.



The presidential campaign has become increasingly contentious as Abdullah demanded the removal of the country's election chief and 200 other staffers of the election commission to ensure a fair runoff.



Abdullah and others have charged that massive fraud occurred in the first round of voting on August 20. The initial results gave Karzai the win, but a subsequent review by a U.N.-backed panel of election monitors threw out nearly one-third of Karzai's votes because of "clear and convincing evidence of fraud."



The result left Karzai short of the 50 percent needed to avoid a runoff. After a flurry of meetings with U.S. and U.N. officials, the Afghan president agreed to the runoff.

***

(CNN) -- A United Nations court convicted a former governor of Rwanda to life in prison for his role in a 1994 genocide that left about 800,000 dead in the central African country.



An estimated 800,000 people -- mainly Tutsis -- were killed in Rwanda in 1994.



Tharcisse Renzaho was found guilty of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes.



The verdict, delivered Tuesday, is the third judgment on charges of genocide delivered this year by the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). The U.N. court is holding hearings in Arusha, Tanzania, where it is based.



Renzaho was governor of the capital, Kigali, and a colonel in the Rwandan Armed Forces in 1994 during the country's genocide, when extremist militias made up of ethnic Hutus slaughtered ethnic Tutsis across Rwanda.



It began in April of that year and within 100 days, an estimated 800,000 people were killed.



The court found that Renzaho ordered soldiers, police and militias to set up roadblocks to identify Tutsi civilians to be executed. It found he ordered the distribution of weapons to people who then killed Tutsis.



Renzaho also supervised a selection process at a refugee site where about 40 Tutsis were abducted and killed, the court found.



Renzaho participated in an attack at the Sainte Famille church in which more than 100 Tutsis were killed. People across Rwanda sought refuge in churches all over the country as the genocide unfolded.



He also made remarks encouraging the sexual abuse of women, according to the court, and was found criminally liable for the rapes that followed.



The genocide ended when Tutsi-led militias backing Rwandan President Paul Kagame ousted the Hutu government supporting the massacre.



Renzaho was arrested in September 2002 in the Democratic Republic of Congo. His trial began in January 2007 and closed in September that year after hearing from 53 witnesses, including Renzaho.



Throughout the trial, Renzaho maintained his innocence and said he had no association with the militia. Renzaho's lawyer blamed the case on political interference by the Rwandan government.



Renzaho has the right to appeal the verdict.



The decision is the third judgment on charges of genocide delivered this year by the tribunal.



Emmanuel Rukundo, a former military chaplain, was convicted of genocide and crimes against humanity and sentenced to 25 years in prison. The court found Rukundo had a history of contempt for Tutsis and his fellow clergymen, and that he ordered the killings of Tutsi civilians.



Callixte Kalimanzira was sentenced to 30 years in prison for genocide and incitement to commit genocide. The court found that Kalimanzira, a senior civil servant who at one point worked with the Interior Ministry, participated in various massacres of Tutsi civilians and actively encouraged other crimes against them.



Prosecutors at his trial said he beat some Tutsis to death and called for the elimination of all Tutsis, including pregnant women and their babies.

***

(CNN) -- One female fan on Twitter said "Off the Wall" was the first cassette tape she owned. "I have it on CD now and still listen to it," she said.



Many people found out about Michael Jackson's death through Web sites like Twitter and Facebook.



"I saw the Victory Tour at Dodger Stadium in 1984," posted a man on his Facebook status update. "Anybody else?"



And on CNN's iReport.com, a tearful Melissa Fazli of Yorba Linda, California, posted an emotional video. "I grew up with Michael Jackson," she said, choking back tears. "This is just a very sad day."



From Facebook to Flickr, Twitter to YouTube, stunned and saddened fans came together across the vast online universe to share their memories of the iconic pop star, who died Thursday afternoon in Los Angeles.



By Thursday evening, 9 of the 10 top trending topics on micro-blogging site Twitter were about Michael Jackson.



Because traditional media outlets were slow to confirm the news of Jackson's death, many people appeared to find out through messages on social-networking sites. Some of those linked to celebrity gossip site TMZ.com, which was among the first to report the news.



"Damn ... it's official," posted one Twitter user, shortly after the news of Jackson's death was confirmed. "RIP to the BIGGEST star the world has EVER seen." Another woman vowed in a tweet never to change her cell phone's ringtone, which was set to "P.Y.T (Pretty Young Thing)," a hit from Jackson's classic "Thriller" album.



Sony BMG, Jackson's music label, removed from its Web site a list of dates for the singer's European tour, which was to kick off next month in London.



Within minutes, Jackson's Wikipedia page had been updated to reflect his death, with biographical information changed to the past tense.



On Flickr, fans posted images from all phases of Jackson's career, from his child-star, large-Afro days to moody publicity shots to dramatic photos of a costumed, windblown Jackson in concert.



While most fans celebrated Jackson's buoyant music and dynamic stage presence, others viewed him as a tragic figure with an increasingly bizarre public image who, in his later years, battled child molestation charges and mounting debt.



One grieving fan posted an image on Flickr of herself, head in hands. "He was ... amazing. And had amazing songs. :( What's so weird is that I was singing his songs today before I found out about this," she wrote. "At least he'll be safe now. Away from all the troubles and stuff. :)"



On Twitter and other sites, several online mourners posted "Never Can Say Goodbye," echoing the title of one of the Jackson 5's early hits. Another fan quoted from Jackson's "Man in the Mirror," saying, "If you want to make the world a better place, take a look at yourself, then make a change."



The swirling news may have overwhelmed Facebook, which was inaccessible at times Thursday evening. When the site was viewable, people filled their status updates with Jackson memories, lyrics and links to his videos.



Others remarked on the coincidence of two pop icons, Jackson and Farrah Fawcett, dying within hours of each other.



"Johnny [Carson] is going to have a great show in heaven tonight," wrote a Los Angeles man on Facebook. Ed [McMahon]'s back, and he's got two great new guests."

***

Yasuf, West Bank (CNN) -- Vandals burned a mosque in the West Bank on Friday in an attack a Palestinian official said reflected Israeli settler rage over a government moratorium on settlement construction.





No one knows who set ablaze and vandalized the mosque -- located in the West Bank village of Yasuf.





But the governor of Salfit district, Munir al-Abboushi, told CNN he believes Jewish settlers were responsible for the attack.





"The mosque was completely burned," al-Abboushi said. "They burned the praying carpets and Quran holy books, and set the mosque completely on fire, they even burned the loudspeakers where the Imam preaches inside the mosque."





Al-Abboushi said the culprits had scrawled Hebrew graffiti at the entrance of the mosque that read "price tag -- with regards from Effi."





"Price tag" is the expression radical Israeli settlers have used to denote reprisal attacks against Palestinians in response to moves by the Israeli government to evacuate illegal West Bank outposts.





Israel's Defense Minister Ehud Barak called on the Israeli military, which occupies the West Bank, to find those responsible for the attack.





"This is an extremist action that is meant to harm any effort by the government to advance political processes for Israel's future," Barak said in a statement released by his office.





Settler leader Dany Dayan -- chairman of the Yesha Council, a group of Jewish municipal councils from the West Bank -- told CNN, "I hope that Israeli police will uncover the perpetrators whoever they are and will bring them to trial. This act is wrong and foolish. If this act was carried out by a Jew it fills me with great shame."





Al-Abboushi said later Friday morning, after word of the mosque attack had spread, residents of the village were prevented by the Israeli army from approaching the area which resulted in minor clashes with exchanges of rocks and tear gas between the residents and Israeli soldiers.





Al-Abboushi expressed doubt that the attack would be investigated properly. "What do the police and Israeli army do when they attack our holy mosques and houses? What do they do to the settlers? But when they attack us they do nothing."





Last month, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu announced a 10-month freeze on new settlement construction in the occupied West Bank.





The move has been met with fierce opposition by the politically powerful settler movement and confrontations have erupted almost daily in the West Bank, with groups of settlers forcibly attempting to keep away government inspectors enforcing the ban.

***

(CNN) -- Key structural changes have been identified in the brain images of some patients with mild cognitive impairment which could help determine who's at greatest risk for developing Alzheimer's disease.



Researchers at the University of California, San Diego, studied MRI scans of 84 patients with Alzheimer's disease, 175 patients with mild cognitive impairment, or MCI, and 139 images of healthy brains.



"Our initial goal was to locate similarities in the patients with Alzheimer's disease to those with MCI, in the hopes of finding a method to predict [MCI patients'] likelihood of developing the disease," said lead study author Linda McEvoy, assistant project scientist at UCSD's department of radiology.



Neuroimaging results for the patients with Alzheimer's disease were as expected, according to the study, which was published online in the journal Radiology. Atrophy, which is loss of brain tissue, was visible throughout the brain. The temporal and parietal lobes, which affect cognitive function, saw the most damage.



What surprised researchers were the differences in images from the MCI patients. More than 50 percent of the brains in the MCI group showed atrophy similar to the Alzheimer's disease patients. The other half of the MCI patients showed only small amounts of tissue damage.  Watch Dr. Gupta explain the findings »



"Although the symptoms for the entire MCI group were primarily memory problems, other parts of the brain were impacted in over half the group," McEvoy said. "And even though these patients [with Alzheimer's-like atrophy] don't have problems with their cognitive function now, their MCI will likely develop to that in the future."



Researchers also evaluated the brains of the MCI group one year after initial testing. They found that patients who earlier had mild cognitive impairment plus signs of atrophy were getting worse. Twenty-nine percent of the group had since been diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease and the others had begun to show signs of more serious cognitive decline.



The condition of patients in the MCI group whose scans showed minimal signs of atrophy the previous year remained about the same. "Only 8 percent of this group had developed Alzheimer's disease. The rest of the patients were stable and their symptoms had not increased," McEvoy said.



Bill Thies, chief medical and scientific officer for the Alzheimer's Association, underscored the significance of these findings. "What this study really shows is how different people with MCI can be, despite having similar symptoms. We can now use this information to create new treatments," he said.



There are several drugs on the market that treat the symptoms of Alzheimer's disease, but none that prevent its progression.



Clinical trials may be able to use this data to select a better pool of candidates when testing new drugs. "If they use a MCI patient with loss of brain tissue, someone who we now know is progressing fast towards Alzheimer's disease, we'd be able to quickly figure out if drug 'X' is slowing things down or not helping at all," Thies added.



In addition, researchers hope that within the next few years patients could regularly be tested by their physicians to determine their risk of developing  Alzheimer's. "If nothing else it would be good information for their family members to have early on, to be better prepared for the future." McEvoy said.



Over 5 million Americans have Alzheimer's disease and an estimated three and a half million have mild cognitive impairment.

***

(CNN)  -- From a small apartment in Toronto, Iranian exile Saeed Valadbaygi is trying to bring news from his country to the world.





Using a network of Iranian journalists and eager volunteers back in Tehran, the 27-year-old former student collates reports, pictures and video for his Web site astreetjournalist.com.





Having fled Iran following the June demonstrations, Valadbaygi set up the site in November -- his latest attempt to beat what he says are government hackers and offer news and views about the unrest in Iran.





With international media operating under restrictions in Iran, independent journalists using blogs and social networking sites have become an important source of information.





"What's happening in Iran is not being reflected globally. We want to let the world know and let the state know that the world is watching," said Valadbaygi.





During the deadly street demonstrations in Tehran on December 27, Valadbaygi said his web site had 17 million hits in two days. The site, which is maintained by about 12 volunteers, wobbled and slowed down, but stayed up and running.





"We've already experienced a large number of viewers on our blogs and web sites and therefore we have been hacked by the regime of Iran repeatedly and unfortunately have lost access to many of our web sites. But introducing this web site (to) professional colleagues and also lots of viewers who are currently collaborating with us has helped in achieving wonderful results in the past few days."





Valadbaygi believes in the power of social media. He is active on Facebook and Twitter and maintains a blog called Revolutionary Road.





"Facebook and Twitter have turned into a strong tool for people in spreading news. Citizen journalists have the most effect on news and today we clearly see that each citizen in Iran is acting as a media. Therefore we have the responsibility in gathering the news in one place to achieve a better result against the regime's censorship," he said.





Valadbaygi, who says he was expelled in 2008 from Amirkabir University in Tehran because of his political views, took part in the June protests and distributed underground newspapers as an independent demonstrator, rather than a supporter of opposition leader Mir Hossein Moussavi.





Deciding that he needed to leave Iran to pursue his politics, he says he went first to Turkey before arriving in Canada as a "political refugee" and quickly connecting with an ex-pat Iranian community in Toronto. He now works long hours collating information for his web site.





Meanwhile, Valadbaygi worries about his parents, brother and sister in Tehran. He says his brother was recently arrested. He communicates with his family using multiple email accounts while his parents use public phones to minimize the risk of the call being traced.





And he acknowledges that his network of correspondents in Iran, which he says is spreading to cities beyond Tehran, contact him in the full knowledge that they could attract the attention of the authorities. "They could track the IP addresses and this could cause problems in the workplace or university."





Valadbaygi says eight of the people he has worked with in the past are currently in jail.





Assessing the latest street demonstrations, Valadbaygi says the protest movement is fragmented with diverse demands but there is a groundswell of public opinion that wants a new secular government.





"It's important that a leadership emerges as quickly as possible otherwise it might all die down."

***

(CNN) -- Michelle Obama, wife of Sen. Barack Obama, is honing her message for the fall, aides say.



Sen. Barack Obama and wife, Michelle, have been thrust into the public eye.



"Michelle wrote her own stump (speech). And you know, she's refining it now I think as we're going into the general election," said senior Obama adviser Valerie Jarrett.



"We have an opportunity for her to kind of step back and think about the message she wants to deliver. So she's really working on it as we speak."



Her new speeches will include more details about her family and humble upbringing on Chicago's South Side, aides said.



Michelle Obama graduated from Harvard Law School, was a vice president at the University of Chicago and landed a job as a health care executive making $275,000 a year.



But along with her success has come criticism -- that's she's too angry, too negative and too sarcastic.



Now, the woman who would become the first black first lady is trying to connect with voters on a more personal level.  Watch experts weigh in on how Michelle Obama is perceived »



On Wednesday, she made an appearance as a guest co-host on ABC's "The View," and later this week, she and her husband will grace the cover of Us Weekly.



The magazine is headlined "Michelle Obama: Why Barack Loves Her," and includes details about her love for Target, "Sex and the City" and her daughters' recitals.



Asked Wednesday while on "The View" if she's going through a makeover, she said she realizes "I wear my heart on my sleeve" and that "it's a risk you have to take."  She said she thinks people will change their perception of her as they see her family more.



Michelle Obama's spokeswoman, Katie McCormick Lelyveld, said earlier there is no "image makeover" in the works.  Watch what Michelle Obama would be like as first lady »



"She has staff engaged in simply part of the process of growing to a general election campaign and putting a strategy together to help people get to know her," Lelyveld said. "It's what you do as you move from primary voters to general election voters."



Carl Sferrazza Anthony, a first ladies historian, said it's important for Michelle Obama to define herself before others define her.



"One comment made off-hand ... might be easily misinterpreted by the opposition," he said.



Michelle Obama saw that in February when a Republican ad used a snippet from a campaign event in which, referring to record voter turnout in the Democratic primaries, she said, "for the first time in my adult lifetime, I am really proud of my country."



Obama's campaign says she was just excited about the grassroots support, but her words still provided fodder for her husband's opponents.



The day after the comments, Cindy McCain, wife of presumptive Republican nominee John McCain, introduced her husband saying, "I don't know about you, if you heard those words earlier -- I am very proud of my country."



Michelle Obama has been a vocal advocate for her husband while on the campaign trail, delivering sometimes impassioned speeches on his behalf.



Robin Givhan, fashion editor with the Washington Post, said people see Michelle Obama in different ways.



"Some people will see confidence, and others might see cockiness. I think some people will see strength. Others might see arrogance," she said. "She comes across as someone who is extraordinarily independent and very much a force to be reckoned with."



Behind the scenes, she maintains that independence. According to the campaign, Michelle Obama picks out her own clothes. She received a lot of attention for the sleeveless purple dress and pearls she wore the night her husband became the presumptive Democratic nominee.



Beyond her style, though, a sense of dignity may be what most defines a first lady. It's a job that requires

***

NEW ORLEANS, Louisiana (CNN) -- At the New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival, some of the best music happens miles from the Fairgrounds, hours after the crowds have gone and the last of the crawfish bread has been consumed.



Shamarr Allen, Mark Mullins and Ben Ellman sport the Midnite Disturbers T-shirts as they perform.



It happens with the arrival of Midnite.



At 1:18 a.m., Bonerama -- a brass-funk rock band lead by three trombones -- has just finished a 90-minute set that started with a soulful, passionate original tune written by bandleader Mark Mullins, and concluded with a cover of Jimi Hendrix' "Crosstown Traffic," complete with the trombones running through wah-wah pedals.



Suddenly the crowd of about 75 clears out of the way as a dozen musicians parade in the room. Dressed in black shirts, they are the Midnite Disturbers, a Jazz Fest supergroup whose appearance is as infrequent as a lunar eclipse. Each member of the Midnite Disturbers fronts his own band, and the artists are rarely in the city at the same time.



The band was started by New Orleans drummers and longtime friends Stanton Moore and Kevin O'Day. In the weeks following Katrina, O'Day had moved into Moore's house, where the two hit on an idea.



"We realized we had never had our own band together, and we decided to invite all of the best horn players we know to play with us," O'Day said.



Each artist has a name, printed in red, on his shirt, following the command "Listen to": Smokey Johnson ... Brian O'Neill ... Henry "Red" Allen. They're the band's predecessors and mentors. Although probably little known outside the Crescent City, they're the musicians who shaped New Orleans music: masters of their craft.



Modern-day masters in their own right, the Midnite Disturbers live up to their name, splitting the night with their loud, hard, funky jams. There are up-and-comers Troy Andrews and Shamarr Allen, and veterans such as Mullins from Bonerama, Stanton Moore and Ben Ellman from Galactic. Their black shirts are drenched with sweat by the time they finish playing.



"Its an honor to play with such veterans because it's confirmation that I'm doing my thing on a level to where people are noticing the hard work that I have been putting in," said trumpet player Shamarr Allen. "Playing with this kind of band keeps you on your toes. It's more interesting and challenging to try to understand everyone's musical approach and find a spot for yours to fit.



"That's the beauty of it," he said. "How to sound good, have fun, listen to each other, entertain a crowd, and stay on the same page at the same time. It lets me know, if I'm not there yet, I'm on my way to being one of the big boys."



The Midnite Disturbers will be at Jazz Fest -- of course -- holding down a 5:55 p.m. slot Saturday afternoon. And then, when it's over, they'll be gone -- ready to get together when the moon beckons.

***

(CNN) -- Britain's David Cameron and Germany's Angela Merkel restated their commitment to a strong Europe Friday, as they sought to show a united front in the face of Europe's debt crisis.





Their talks in Berlin come amid tensions between the two nations over how to restore financial stability in Europe.





"The United Kingdom has a great interest, and very sensibly so, in seeing the eurozone being strong," Merkel said.





While Britain has some differences of opinion with Germany over the EU treaty and ways to boost competitiveness, she said, the two countries are tied by "strong bonds of friendship."





Both will work closely together ahead of a meeting of European leaders next month, she said.





Britain is the biggest economy in Europe outside the 17-nation eurozone, which uses the euro as its currency, while Germany is the economic powerhouse within it.





The pair have not always agreed on the best ways to tackle the current debt crisis, which has seen attention focused on Italy and Greece in recent weeks.





Senior members of Cameron's Conservative Party have been calling for more powers to be brought back to Britain from Europe, as EU treaty changes are made to ensure economic stability.





Cameron, who has previously expressed concern that Europe's difficulties are affecting Britain's economic recovery, also downplayed divisions between the countries as he stood alongside Merkel.





"We have had a very good discussion between very good friends," he said. "There are many things on which we are in absolute agreement."





However they have not made progress on plans for a European financial transactions tax, Merkel acknowledged. Britain opposes such a tax, fearing it could disadvantage London as a global financial center.





Cameron called for the deal reached at a summit in Europe on October 27 to be implemented as soon as possible.





The plan includes a series of measures to address the crisis, including debt relief for Greece, new capital requirements for banks and plans to build a financial "firewall" around vulnerable euro area economies.





"A strong, successful and stable eurozone is in all our interests," Cameron said.





"We need this crisis to be resolved. Britain, like Germany, has a big national interest in that happening."





And while the two do not agree on all matters, they can discuss and accommodate each other's views, he said.





Cameron met earlier Friday with European Council President Herman Van Rompuy and European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso in Brussels.





Global markets have been volatile, as political turmoil linked to the financial crisis has forced a change of government in both Greece and Italy in the past week.

***

BAGHDAD, Iraq (CNN) -- U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon paid a visit to Baghdad on Friday to congratulate its citizens for last weekend's "remarkable" Iraq-led provincial elections, a process he said "augurs well for the transition process and the solidifying of Iraq's national reconciliation."



U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, left, meets Friday in Baghdad with Iraq President Jalal Talabani.



On a tour that also has taken him to Pakistan and Afghanistan, Ban met with Iraqi leaders and appeared at a news conference with Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki, whose allies won big in nine of the 14 provinces where the local elections were held.



"I have been following the electoral process closely from the early days of the parliamentary debate over the elections law last summer to the final stages of adjudication of the complaints and yesterday evening's release of the provisional results," Ban said at the news conference, according to prepared remarks issued by the United Nations.



"It will be some days before final results are known, but current indications are that the elections have been successfully carried out."



Ban last visited Iraq in 2007. In March of that year, he got a taste of the violence that often rocks the Iraqi capital. An explosion rattled Baghdad's International Zone, where he was holding a televised news conference with al-Maliki.



Apparently used to such blasts, al-Maliki remained stoic, while Ban briefly ducked before regaining his composure and continuing.



Now, he said, he's "very much impressed to have witnessed myself the great success and progress the Iraqi government and people have made under the leadership of Prime Minister Maliki, and I congratulate you," he said, emphasizing the improvements in security.



The secretary-general praised the turnout of millions of voters in "an environment free of violence," a development he called a "remarkable achievement" in a strife-torn nation.



"Iraq has come a long way in taking their own affairs in hand, this being the first Iraqi-led and Iraqi-owned electoral process. It is a tribute to the growing effectiveness of the Iraqi security forces, and testifies to the increasing stability in the country," he said.



Ban praised Iraqi election officials, the local U.N. office and its special representative, Staffan de Mistura, and election workers.



Voters in 14 of 18 provinces turned out last weekend to elect provincial councils. The nation's three Kurdish provinces will hold elections in May, and voting in Tameem province has been suspended because of political disputes in Kirkuk.



"This marks an important event, these being the first polls to affect the day-to-day lives of Iraqi voters," Ban said. "In fact, these elections are about real power, in the sense that local leaders are nominated to be accountable for the delivery of basic services."



The United Nations helped Iraq with logistics in its election process and plans to help in this year's parliamentary elections and to deal with sticky disputes, such as the status of Kirkuk and disputes over some internal boundaries.



Al-Maliki thanked the United Nations for the supportive role it played.



He noted that the provincial elections "changed the political map" of Iraq, but he said the elections were successful for all Iraqis. He said he was proud people voted for blocs based on political goals and not along sectarian and ethnic lines.



Ban also met with the three members of the presidency council -- Kurdish President Jalal Talabani, Shiite Vice President Adel Abdul Mehdi and Sunni Vice President Tariq al-Hashimi.



CNN's Mohammed Tawfeeq and Jomana Karadsheh contributed to this report.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Senate Republicans on Tuesday blocked a Democratic initiative that would have taxed the windfall profits oil companies have enjoyed due to rising energy prices, with the minority leader calling the proposal a "gimmick."



Record energy prices have led to record profits for oil companies.



The measure failed to achieve the 60 votes required by Senate rules to proceed. The vote was 51-43.



Six Republicans, including three seeking re-election in November, broke ranks to support the bill.



Two Democrats -- Sen. Mary Landrieu of oil-producing state Louisiana and Majority Leader Harry Reid, who voted no to be able to bring the measure back to the floor under Senate rules -- voted against the measure.



Along with placing a special tax of 25 percent on oil companies, the bill would have permitted lawsuits against the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, the oil-producing cartel, and suspended deposits into the Strategic Petroleum Reserve.



Profits from renewable energy sources would be excluded from the tax.



"We're not afraid, on this side, to go after Big Oil when they are not doing the right thing," said Sen. Charles Schumer, D-New York. "And we are not afraid to go after OPEC because they are a cartel that squeezes us.



"We're not afraid to do some strong tough things that will -- some in the short run, some in the longer run -- that will bring down the price, the all too high price, of gasoline."



Sen. Byron Dorgan, D-North Dakota, said the measure was needed to "wring out" speculators he blamed for driving the price of crude oil to more than $130 a barrel in recent weeks



But Senate Republicans insisted the new taxes ultimately would hurt consumers and cut American oil supply, saying Democrats simply were playing election-year politics.



The bill is "pure and simple a pathetic attempt to even call itself an energy plan," said Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchison, R-Texas.



Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell said, "Hitting the gas companies might make for good campaign literature or evening news clips, but it won't address the problem. This bill isn't a serious response to gas prices. It is just a gimmick."



The Kentucky Republican added, "They are hoping the idea of going after energy companies will create the illusion of action after a week in which they themselves fought for a bill that would make the problem worse. What a political charade."



As the average cost of gas edged above $4 a gallon, high prices are definitely on the minds of voters.



A CNN/Opinion Research Corp. poll released Tuesday shows 40 percent of respondents are more concerned about the cost of gasoline than long lines at the pump, which occurred during the energy crisis of the 1970s.



But 55 percent of those surveyed are more worried about the long lines and rationing.



The poll results reflect telephone interviews with 1,035 adults on Wednesday and Thursday. The margin of error is plus or minus 3 percentage points.



CNN's Ted Barrett, Lisa Desjardins, Matt Smith, Virginia Nicolaidis and Scott J. Anderson contributed to this report.

***

PARIS, France (CNN) -- France is sending four state police units to its overseas department of Guadeloupe after a month of sometimes violent demonstrations, Interior Minister Michele Alliot-Marie said Thursday.





French gendarmes face-off against Guadeloupe protesters.





"The pillaging ... the violence against people, are not tolerable and will not be tolerated," Alliot-Marie told the French radio station RTL. "It's no longer simply a question of containing the protests. ... This mission of honor will continue to be undertaken, but we also have to fight against the violence."





French President Nicolas Sarkozy planned to meet with elected officials from overseas departments, including Guadeloupe, Thursday afternoon, his office announced.





A general strike over low wages and living conditions in the Caribbean island has included demonstrations and clashes with police. At least one civilian has been killed in the riots, officials said.





Hospitals and emergency services continue to function and the main international airport is open, but petrol stations, schools, and most businesses -- including supermarkets and car rental offices -- are closed, the British Foreign Office said in a travel advisory.





Hotels are open, but the strike is causing daily cuts to electricity and water supplies, the Foreign Office said.





French Prime Minister Francois Fillon said Thursday he is ready to approve a compromise that would give nearly a €200 ($254) monthly supplement to workers in Guadeloupe with low-paying jobs.





"This crisis is serious, and profound, but it's not new," Fillon said, adding that it's linked to "the lifelessness of the economy in the Antilles, aggravated by the global economic crisis."





Sending supplementary police forces is justified, Fillon said, because "we cannot accept what has happened" in the department.





He was referring to the attacks on businesses, the roadblocks in the streets and above all, the death of the civilian, who he said was a union leader.





Agence France-Presse identified the victim as union representative Jacques Bino. He was shot dead Tuesday night when he drove past a roadblock manned by armed youths in the city of Pointe-a-Pitre. His car was hit three times by shotgun fire, prosecutors told AFP.





Three police who accompanied emergency services trying to help the dying man were lightly wounded, officials said, according to AFP.





Speaking with RTL on Wednesday, one demonstrator denied he was fanning the flames of unrest.





"We have always called for calm," Elie Domota, leader of the Coalition against Exploitation, said.





"We have told the young people to go to their homes and continue to protest peacefully, but the police yesterday beat protesters and called them racist names, so the situation escalated."





CNN's Alanne Orjoux in Atlanta, Georgia, contributed to this report

***

JOHANNESBURG, South Africa (CNN) -- Police armed with rubber bullets were patrolling neighborhoods in Johannesburg on Tuesday in an effort to quell a recent spree of violence aimed at foreigners that police say has killed 22 people and displaced an estimated 13,000.



A crowd armed with clubs, machetes and axes rioted on the outskirts of Johannesburg on Tuesday.



Many of the victims are Zimbabweans who have fled repression and dire economic circumstances in their homeland.



Evidence of the violence was seen in smoke rising from burned homes in one Johannesburg neighborhood. Locals angry about the rising number of foreigners arriving in South Africa had set homes ablaze.



Firefighters said they had fought more than 100 such blazes since Thursday.



Standing outside a row of charred homes, Diamond Minnaar said there is a solution for foreigners.



"Most of them just have to go back to their country and leave us in peace," Minnaar said. "That is the only solution. Or they are just going to get killed. Look at how many shacks have burnt down."



The attacks and looting have drawn condemnation from South African officials and other African leaders. iReport.com: Are you there? Send photos, video



The violence began a week ago in Johannesburg's Alexandra Township, police say, and has been concentrated in the city's poorest areas.



"People are angry because they are unemployed, poverty-affected people struggling for basic needs every day," said Dean Christopher Barends, a local Lutheran minister. "This will explode into something."



One person victimized was Pascoal Sendela Gulane, a Mozambican man, who said gangs broke into his home and stole his belongings.



He fled to a church with his family and is now living with his children in his car on the church's property. For him and many others, churches and police stations have become safe havens.  Watch footage of the attacks »



On Monday, South African President Thabo Mbeki called for an end to the violence.



"We dehumanize ourselves the moment we start thinking of another person as less human than we are simply because they come from another country" he said in a statement.



"As South Africans, we must recognize and fully appreciate that we are bound together with other Africans by history, culture, economics and, above all, by destiny. I call upon those behind these shameful and criminal acts to stop! Nothing can justify it."



He has called for an investigation into the violence.



Also Monday, the Nelson Mandela Foundation issued a statement condemning the "senseless violence."



South African police have arrested more than 200 people in connection with the violence for offenses including rape, murder, robbery and theft.



Police director Govindsamy Mariemuthoo said that at least one foreigner was burned alive over the weekend, while others saw their houses torched, their shops looted and their possessions stolen.



Tuesday there was a large police presence in the neighborhoods were the violence had occurred, according to a CNN producer on the scene.



Despite the police presence, sporadic looting still took place in several townships east of Johannesburg.



Mbuso Mthembu, provincial manager at the Red Cross office in Johannesburg, said that the number of people fleeing is continuing to grow and that violent attacks seem to be spreading into other areas.



His organization has made an emergency appeal for people to donate 1 million rand (about $135,000) to help support the estimated 13,000 who have fled their homes. Many had to flee quickly, leaving all their belongings behind, Mthembu said.



"We have delivered blankets, kids clothing, baby formula," he said. "But we need more."

***

BAGHDAD, Iraq (CNN) -- A series of bombings rocked Iraq's capital within one hour Wednesday, killing at least 95 people and wounding 563 others, an Iraqi Interior Ministry official said.



People gather outside the Iraqi Foreign Ministry on Wednesday in a residential area in Baghdad.



The six explosions marked the country's deadliest day since the United States pulled its combat troops from Iraqi cities and towns nearly two months ago and left security in the hands of the Iraqis.



In one attack, a truck bomb exploded outside the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The blast blew through the front of the building, sending some vehicles flying and leaving others in mangled twists of metal in the area, which is just outside the restricted International Zone, also known as the Green Zone.



Nearby, Iraqi security forces stood with shocked expressions as ambulances screamed past.  More photos of Baghdad's deadly day »



Another truck bomb went off outside the Ministry of Finance building.



In central Baghdad, a roadside bomb exploded on Kifa Street, and another bomb exploded in the Salhiya neighborhood, where on Tuesday security forces had avoided injuries by successfully defusing a truck bomb. Wednesday's other two bombs exploded in eastern Baghdad's Beirut Square, officials said.



"The terrorism attacks that took place today require, without a doubt, the re-evaluation of our plans and our security mechanisms to face the challenges of terrorism," Iraqi Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki said in a written statement.



U.S. Ambassador to Iraq Chris Hill and Gen. Ray Odierno, the top U.S. commander in Iraq, issued a joint statement condemning the bombings.



"The horrific injuries and loss of life witnessed in Baghdad today are terrorist attacks that serve no legitimate purpose," they said.



The attacks "will not deter Iraqis from continuing their efforts to build a peaceful and prosperous society and engage the international community, nor will they weaken our resolve to help them in their efforts," they added.



Two people believed to be connected to the bombings have been arrested, an official with the Iraqi army told CNN.



The two suspects were driving in a car rigged with explosives before they were arrested by Iraqi Security Forces, the official said.



The two suspects were believed to be al Qaeda in Iraq senior leaders, the official said.



The United States pulled its combat troops from Iraqi cities and towns on June 30, leaving security responsibilities to the Iraqis. The U.S. military remains in a training and advisory capacity in those areas and continues to conduct combat operations outside cities and towns.



Since then, al-Maliki has ordered his government to remove the concrete blast walls that line Baghdad's streets and surround whole neighborhoods.



The order does not cover the Green Zone -- which houses Iraqi government buildings and the U.S. Embassy -- or military installations, government institutions, hotels and some private companies.



The government has also removed some checkpoints, including one on the road where the bombing near the Ministry of Foreign Affairs occurred. That checkpoint had contained bomb-detection equipment.



Major incidents of violence in Iraq since 2008 include:



CNN's Arwa Damon and Mohammed Tawfeeq contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Humanitarian aid agencies scrambled Monday to offer help to the tens of thousands of people in need after Tamil separatists declared an end to their quarter-century struggle in Sri Lanka.



A Tamil refugee holds her child at a tented site in Vavuniya.



The United Nations said Monday that over the past few days some 65,000 people had fled what had been the fighting zone in northeast Sri Lanka, bringing to 265,000 the number of internally displaced people, which it refers to as IDPs.



"This latest massive influx of people, who have endured extreme conditions, will put an even greater strain on the transit and IDP sites that are already buckling under the pressure of the existing IDP population," the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees said in a written statement.



The agency pledged to erect an additional 10,000 shelters to accommodate people streaming from the combat zone.



It reiterated its request for the Sri Lankan government to set aside land for the construction of emergency shelters, water and sanitation facilities and public buildings in Vavuniya, Jaffna, Mannar and Kilinochchi.



And it called on the government to improve conditions at 42 sites already hosting the displaced people, and to ensure adequate care and maintenance for them.



But the United Nations said its access to the sites in Vavuniya had been curtailed in recent days "and this affects our ability to monitor and distribute aid to the displaced. We hope this ends quickly."



Suresh Bartlett, aid agency World Vision's national director, said, "The conventional war may be over but the real challenge now is to foster an environment where fractured and displaced Tamil communities can heal and have a real chance at creating a future for themselves and their children."



Among the pressing issues, he said, is getting people back to their land and homes as quickly as possible, which in some cases will require that land be demined and buildings be repaired.



About 80,000 of the displaced -- a third of the people in camps -- are children, who need emotional, psychosocial and educational support in addition to physical aid.



"It is important to get people home as quickly as possible so they can feel a sense of ownership over their own lives, recover their dignity and livelihoods and create an environment where their children feel safe," he said.



In a telephone interview from Colombo, Sri Lanka's most populous city, Bartlett said that the displacement camps are overcrowded, with two and three families staying in shelters intended for a single family.



"A lot more needs to be done," he said. "More land needs to be cleared, more shelters set up" and safe drinking-water supplies assured. "It's not easy and it's not straightforward."



He said many of the people still streaming into the camps are malnourished.



Though the end of the conflict marks a great opportunity, "we can do with all the international support that we can get at this time," he said.



Estimates put the number of civilians killed in the conflict at 70,000 to 80,000, but Bartlett acknowledged that the true number may never be known.



Medecins Sans Frontieres, the aid group also known as Doctors Without Borders, was trying to scale up on Monday, a spokeswoman said.



The group's head of mission, Hugues Robert, said the 1999 Nobel Peace Prize-winning organization is staffing three hospitals in the region, where it was screening people seeking help to determine their needs, stabilize them, then treat them.



With fighting apparently ended, Robert predicted that the organization's team of 343 national staff and approximately 50 international staff will focus many of their efforts on providing post-operative care.



"We have a lot of wounded people," he said.



One area of need that remains largely unaddressed, he said, is mental health.



Amnesty International called for steps to be taken to ensure civilians and captured fighters are protected.



"The Sri Lankan government must ensure that its forces fully respect international law, including all provisions relating to protecting civilians from the effect of hostilities," said Amnesty International's Asia-

***

(CNN Student News) -- Students will examine Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.'s famous "I Have a Dream" speech. Also, they will compose written responses to Dr. King in which they compare his historic vision of racial equality in the United States to the reality of present-day life.





Procedure





On August 28, 1963, Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. shared his vision of racial equality in America in his historic "I Have a Dream" speech. Now, efforts are under way to build on that dream by constructing a monument to Dr. King on the banks of the National Mall's Tidal Basin in Washington, D.C.





In class discussion, have students define the following terms: racism, prejudice and discrimination. Have them give examples of each. Then, point out that Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. spoke of being judged not by the color of one's skin, but by the content of his or her character. Direct your students to read Dr. King's famous "I Have a Dream" speech and discuss its content in class. Then, challenge each student to compare Dr. King's dream to the reality of life in the U.S. in the year 2008. Direct each student to compose a written response to Dr. King, explaining what life is like in the U.S. today and to what extent his dream has been realized. (Encourage students to be creative in their responses. For example, students could write a letter, a speech, a song or a poem.) After students share their responses to Dr. King, pose the following questions for class discussion:





Do you think that in today's society individuals are judged by the content of their character and not by their race? Give examples to support your opinion.





Correlated Standards





United States History





Standard 29. Understands the struggle for racial and gender equality and for the extension of civil liberties





Level II [Grade: 5-6]





Benchmark 1. Understands the development of the civil rights movement (e.g., the Supreme Court case Brown v. Board of Education and its significance in advancing civil rights; the resistance to civil rights in the South between 1954 and 1965; how the "freedom ride," "civil disobedience," and "non-violent resistance" were important to the civil rights movement; Martin Luther King Jr.'s "I Have a Dream" speech in the context of major events)





Level III [Grade: 7-8]





Benchmark 1. Understands individual and institutional influences on the civil rights movement (e.g., the origins of the postwar civil rights movement; the role of the NAACP in the legal assault on the leadership and ideologies of Martin Luther King, Jr. and Malcolm X; the effects of the constitutional steps taken in the executive, judicial, and legislative branches of government; the shift from de jure to de facto segregation; important milestones in the civil rights movement between 1954 and 1965; Eisenhower's reasons for dispatching federal troops to Little Rock in 1957)





McREL: Content Knowledge: A Compendium of Standards and Benchmarks for K-12 Education (Copyright 2000 McREL) is published online by Mid-continent Research for Education and Learning (McREL) (http://www.mcrel.org/standards-benchmarks), 2550 S. Parker Road, Suite 500, Aurora, CO 80014





Keywords





Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., "I Have a Dream" speech, racial equality, discrimination, prejudice, racism

***

(CNN) -- For actress Kyra Sedgwick, it's the public's approval that makes it worth being away from her family for six months to tape her critically acclaimed series "The Closer."



Kyra Sedgwick and her husband, Kevin Bacon, at the 66th annual Golden Globe Awards this month.



But she may be getting more approval from her peers, too.



Sedgwick will walk the red carpet again Sunday night at the Screen Actors Guild Awards, where she is nominated for a fourth consecutive year for outstanding performance by a female actor in a drama series for her role as Deputy Chief Brenda Johnson. She's also won a Golden Globe for her performance, in 2007.



The TNT series resumes Monday night where it left off in September with what Sedgwick called "a fantastic five episodes." (TNT is a unit of Time Warner, as is CNN.)



"I said to the writers, 'I really want a lot of personal stuff for Brenda,' " Sedgwick said. "I feel like there's some of those personal quiet moments with her alone, is something that I've been missing as an actor, and I feel like the audience has been missing, too.



"She is such a complicated, fascinating character, and watching her growth and lack of growth is something that is really interesting," she said.



When CNN asked whether the new episodes might include a wedding for her character, Sedgwick laughed.



"That might very well happen," she said. "That's pretty insightful of you. I'm just going to just say that."



A marriage for Brenda Johnson would be "a complicated, difficult situation," she said, because "she's basically married to her work."



Sedgwick's job also complicates her real-life marriage to Bacon, since the show is produced in Los Angeles and the couple lives in Connecticut with their two children.



That's where the approval -- whether on the street from fans or at award shows -- has "been a wonderful phenomenon for me," she said.



"On a personal level, that's really good for me, because I really miss my family when I'm working on the show six months in L.A.," she said. "As much as I try to get my kids to move to L.A. and my husband, they just wouldn't have it.



"It's challenging, and I'm glad that people are watching, because otherwise it would be kind of hard to go to work," Sedgwick said.



Sedgwick has moved into an executive producer's role on the show, which she said she expects to continue for at least two more years.



"I love being with a group where there's not a power struggle," she said. "I have a lot of say, and I always have. And that feels really good."



CNN Radio's Jackie Howard contributed to this report

***

(CNN) -- Those battling global warming by promoting biofuels may unintentionally be adding to skyrocketing world food prices, creating what one expert calls "a silent tsunami" in developing nations.



The rising prices are "threatening to plunge more than 100 million people on every continent into hunger," Josette Sheeran, executive director of the United Nations' World Food Program, said on the agency's Web site Tuesday.



Sheeran is one of the experts attending a Food summit hosted Tuesday by British Prime Minister Gordon Brown, aimed at determining ways to boost food supplies and identify deterrents. Also attending the meeting are scientists and representatives from the European Union and Africa.



On the Web site, Sheeran said the increase in food prices is "a silent tsunami that respects no borders."



"The world's misery index is rising ... as soaring food and fuel prices roll through the lives of the most vulnerable," she said Friday.



The crisis is forcing the organization to look for cuts in aid to some of its recipients, she said.



Soaring food prices have triggered violence in some developing countries, and biofuels are bearing at least part of the blame.



Producing fuel from plant crops is supposed to be greener than drilling for oil, and biofuels generally burn cleaner, too. But the global biofuels industry now stands accused of a list of side effects that are said to be damaging lives, especially of the world's poorest people.



"The drive for more biofuels means more investment is going into those crops, meaning less land and less investment going in for food crops, causing a massive conflict and resulting in rising prices, which is having a huge negative impact, especially on developing countries," said Clare Oxborrow, food campaigner for Friends of the Earth.  See why tortilla makers are blaming biofuel for increasing food prices »



Critics also say that in Africa, Asia and South America, people are being driven from their land and forests are being cleared to make room for the booming biofuel industry.



The International Food Policy Research Institute says the use of cereals for industrial purposes like making biofuels has risen by a quarter since 2000.



Brown said in an article posted on the 10 Downing Street Web site, "We now know that biofuels intended to promote energy independence and combat climate change are frequently energy-inefficient.



"We need to look closely at the impact on food prices and the environment of different production methods and to ensure we are more selective in our support. If our UK review shows that we need to change our approach, we will also push for change in EU biofuels targets," he said.



"We must also do more to explore the links between climate change and food, and particularly their impact on the livelihoods and vulnerability of the very poorest, who are likely to be most affected by climate change."



The meeting he convened, Brown said, is a precursor to the G8 summit of industrial nations, to be held in July, and a special U.N. summit in September.



He urged prompt action.



"With one child dying every five seconds from hunger-related causes, the time to act is now," Brown stressed.



The World Health Organization views hunger as the No. 1 threat to public health around the world, responsible for a third of child deaths and 10 percent of all disease.



Douglas Alexander, Britain's International Development secretary, announced Tuesday that Britain has set aside a 455 million-pound [$900 million] aid package to address the food crisis. His agency manages Britain's aid to poor countries with the goal of eliminating extreme poverty. E-mail to a friend



CNN's Phil Black contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Portuguese football coach Jose Mourinho, ever the headline creator, has caused further outcry this week after he substituted Ghanaian midfielder Sulley Muntari from his Inter Milan side during their Italian Serie A clash with Bari.



Inter midfielder Sulley Muntari was substitued Jose Mourinho for his low-energy levels as a result of fasting.



Taking a tired player from the field of play was hardly breaking news, at least it wasn't until Mourinho revealed the move had been prompted because the player's perceived "low-energy levels" were as a result of fasting.



Muntari is a practicing Muslim who, like many of the same faith around the world, is currently not eating during the hours of daylight to mark the Ramadan holy period .Should fasting footballers be dropped by their managers? Sound Off below.



A discipline that clearly irked Mourinho who said in a post-match press conference: "Muntari had some problems related to Ramadan, perhaps with this heat it's not good for him to be doing this (fasting). Ramadan has not arrived at the ideal moment for a player to play a football match."



Muslim leaders in Italy have criticized the opinions of the coach known as the "Special One", but Mourinho did not rule out the possibility of dropping the player for the Milan derby between arch rivals Inter Milan and AC Milan this weekend for the same reason.



Click here to see our gallery of the top 10 Muslim football stars »



Elsewhere in Italy, fellow Muslim and Siena striker Abdelkader Ghezzal added to the debate by revealing he cannot fast and play at the same time.



"I've always observed Ramadan but I have had to change my habits for health reasons from the first year that I became a professional. Before that I played at Crotone [while fasting] but after two weeks I felt ill and had to stop."



Egypt's Under-20 football squad passed up the chance to break the Ramadan fast to help them prepare for the forthcoming World Youth Championship which they host at the end of September.



The Egyptian Football Association confirmed that the Dar al-Ifta, the country's institution which clarifies religious principles and issues edicts, had given specific permission for the players to legitimately avoid fasting.



It is not just Ramadan which has caused issues between Muslim players and their clubs.



The beliefs of Sevilla striker Freddie Kanoute have conflicted with the demands of his professional career.



Kanoute taped over the logo of the Sevilla club's shirt sponsors - internet gaming company 888.com -- in 2006 because he said Islam forbade the promotion of gambling.



So is Mourinho right to take account of how religious practices may affect his players' performance? Is it wrong to drop a fasting footballer whose energy levels may be lower than his teammates?



Should Mourinho contemplate that a player of faith may perform better in a period of self-enforced discipline? Were the Egyptian players right to carry on fasting even though they were given permission to break the fast?



If Kanoute right to bring his religious beliefs into his place of work? And can sport and religion ever be separated in a satisfactory way?Let us know your thoughts in the Sound Off box below.

***

ROME, Italy (CNN) -- Officials monitoring the River Tiber in Rome fear it could break its banks as early as Friday evening after a spate of bad weather in Italy -- but do not expect major flooding.



A rescue boat patrols the swollen River Tiber in central Rome early Friday.



Guido Bertolaso, the head of the Italian Civil Protection Department said that there is a 20 to 30 percent chance the river could break its banks and cause disruption in some neighborhoods in northern Rome, but not in the historic city center.



Two people have died in weather-related incidents elsewhere in Italy.



"We see that the flow is increasing, but it is not reaching a level that could be dangerous for the capital city of Italy," said Bertolaso about the Tiber, deeming the situation "crucial but not serious."



Bertolaso, calling the situation "quite extraordinary," labeled the flood threat and storms as the "fifth most serious situation of the past 100 years."



"But I think it is under control and the secret is to have the technology and the kind of organization to monitor the situation and to intervene if an emergency arises," he said. Bertolaso noted that authorities have been keeping a minute-by-minute watch because of heavy storms over the past few days.



He said the water level would probably increase for a few more hours and eventually peak between 8 p.m. and midnight local time Friday (between 1800 and 2200 GMT).



"If there will be no more rain, the situation is expected to stabilize," he said.



Rome Mayor Gianni Alemanno said he did not expect a major flood and noted that only a few dwellings have been evacuated -- primarily those inhabited by immigrants and Roma, who have set up makeshift camps on the banks of the Tiber.



"I just recommend people to stay at home and not to rush to the river banks to watch the river swelling," Alemanno said.



Hundreds of volunteers and civil protection officials have been deployed around Rome to monitor the situation, the Civil Protection Department said.



Sandbags have been lined up to contain any possible river overflow, and the fire brigade is ready with amphibious vehicles.



Police have blocked access to some pedestrian bridges and river banks, while residents are being urged to use their vehicles only if necessary.



Firefighters Thursday had to rescue dozens of motorists stranded in their cars. Because of the intense rain, the streets of some northern Rome neighborhoods were already flooded by water and covered in thick brown mud.



One woman died near Rome early Thursday when her car was submerged by a wave of water and mud in an underpass. The body of a second victim was found in the southern region of Calabria after a bridge collapsed.

***

(CNN) -- Let's face it; most awards shows can be pretty dull. It's not that we don't tune in to every single one, of course, but it's always a pleasant surprise when the ceremony is actually fun to watch.





Last night's Emmy Awards hosted by Jane Lynch not only honored Emmy shoo-ins like "The Daily Show," "Mad Men" and "Modern Family" and fan favorite "Friday Night Lights" alike, but also brought the laughs.





Here are our top five funniest moments.





1. Leading ladies storm the stage





As soon as Sofia Vergara and Rob Lowe presented the nominees for outstanding lead actress in a comedy, Amy Poehler, whose name was read first for "Parks and Recreation'" smiled at the camera and then promptly ran up onto the stage before any of the other nominees -- let alone the winner -- was announced.





As Vergara and Lowe continued to read names, each of Poehler's fellow funny women, Melissa McCarthy ("Mike and Molly"), Martha Plimpton ("Raising Hope"), Edie Falco ("Nurse Jackie"), Tina Fey ("30 Rock") and Laura Linney ("The Big C") joined her on stage. The group lined up and held hands in their best beauty pageant re-enactment while waiting for the big reveal -- a bit which received a standing ovation from the audience.





To top off an already stellar and hilarious display of female solidarity, when McCarthy won the Emmy she not only received genuine smiles and big hugs from the rest of the women, but also walked away with a bouquet of roses and a tiara as a bonus.





"Wow, it's my first and best pageant ever!" McCarthy said.





2. All-star 'Office'





Back from commercial break, viewers were treated to a sketch where characters from different shows all popped up at the Dunder-Mifflin office to discuss their least favorite thing about their jobs.





There was Tom Haverford from "Parks and Recreation," Tracy Jordan from "30 Rock," Roger Sterling from "Mad Men" and Jesse Pinkman from "Breaking Bad" (who we learn is Creed's crystal meth dealer) and more. Kim Kardashian showed up, but even she was a little confused as to why. "I'm sorry, I'm not sure I get the question," she deadpanned. "What do you mean by work? Am I saying that word right? Work?"





Finally, we see Ashton Kutcher in Michael Scott's old office, but the rest of the staff is sure this is a mistake. "I'm pretty sure that I'm taking over as the new lead," Kutcher said. When Ed Helms tells him that's for a different show and this isn't Warner Brothers lot, it all clicks for Kutcher. "Oh, I was wondering where the half man was!"





3. Jane Lynch's shortest, sweetest zinger





"A lot of people are curious why I'm a lesbian. Ladies and gentleman ... the cast of Entourage."





4. Steven Levitan's wife





When Steve Levitan and Jeffrey Rich of "Modern Family" won for outstanding writing in a comedy series, it was a safe bet that the speech would be funny. But viewers weren't expecting Levitan's wife Krista's perfect, comedic timing to steal the show.





When Levitan explained that the inspiration for the winning episode was when his children walked in on him and his wife "in the act," Krista looked directly at the camera and rolled her eyes. Later in the speech when Levitan went back to the mic to thank his "somewhat-satisfied wife," she reprised the disgruntled eye roll and forever cemented a place in our hearts.





5. Remote Ricky Gervais





Just when we thought all the joke mileage that could be gotten out of Ricky Gervais' Golden Globes hosting controversy had run out ages ago, he once again faced some of the celebs he slammed -- albeit in an Emmy pre-recorded message.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- President-elect Barack Obama plans to nominate New Mexico Gov. Bill Richardson to be secretary of commerce, a Democratic source told CNN on Tuesday.

New Mexico Gov. Bill Richardson was a candidate for the Democratic presidential nomination this year.

The former Democratic presidential candidate's name has been bandied about as the next head of Commerce.

Obama spoke with Richardson about the position November 14, a senior Democratic source said. The source said Richardson has always been on Obama's list of possibilities for the key Cabinet position.

Richardson, 61, also traveled to Chicago, Illinois, in November to meet with Obama, according to a source.

"He brings to this plate, in particular in an era where the economy is the focus of attention, a lot of skills that could be put to use -- perhaps opening up marketplaces for U.S. products abroad," CNN senior political correspondent Candy Crowley said.

"In New Mexico, he sought to bring in new businesses and to create jobs ... so the Obama team considers this part of the economic team."

One of the most prominent Hispanic politicians in the nation, Richardson withdrew from the race for the Democratic presidential nomination January 10 and later endorsed Obama.

He has served as a U.N. ambassador and as energy secretary in the Clinton administration.

If Richardson steps down as chief executive of New Mexico, Democratic Lt. Gov. Diane Denish takes over. She was Richardson's running mate in the 2002 and 2006 gubernatorial elections.

It's a very different situation in neighboring Arizona, where another Democratic governor, Janet Napolitano, is also stepping down to join the Cabinet. Arizona doesn't have a lieutenant governor. Under state law, Secretary of State Jan Brewer -- a Republican -- takes over.

Richardson sought the Democratic presidential nomination but dropped out of the race after a poor showing in the January 8 New Hampshire primary.

Declaring that Obama is an "extraordinary American," Richardson endorsed Obama to be the Democratic nominee for president March 21.

"Barack Obama will make a great and historic president," Richardson said at a rally in Portland, Oregon, with Obama at his side. "[It] is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity for our nation, and you are a once-in-a-lifetime leader."

Obama said, "I am extraordinarily grateful to have the support of one of the great public servants of these United States."

"He's done the kind of work that you want from your public servants, somebody who's driven not just by raw ambition, not just by an interest in personal aggrandizement," Obama added. "He's been somebody who's been motivated by the desire to make the lives of his constituents and working people a little bit better."

Obama and Sen. Hillary Clinton both lobbied Richardson for his endorsement.

Richardson said that his "affection for Hillary Clinton and President Bill Clinton will never waver" but that "it is now time for a new generation of leadership."

Obama "can bring us the change we so desperately need by bringing us together as a nation here at home and with our allies abroad," he said.

Hillary Clinton was named this week as Obama's pick for another Cabinet post: secretary of state.

Richardson caused controversy in Democratic circles with his endorsement of Obama this year.

In April, Richardson said he was "very close to endorsing" Clinton but decided not to after the campaign became negative.

His endorsement was viewed as an act of betrayal by some longtime Clinton supporters.

CNN political analyst James Carville, who has close ties to both Clintons, likened Richardson's endorsement to Judas' betrayal of Christ.

Richardson responded to Carville's criticisms by saying that Carville and other Clinton supporters believe they are a "dynasty" and that they were "clinging to the throne."

CNN's Candy Crowley, Ed Hornick and Paul Steinhauser contributed to this report.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- The U.S. Open has a reputation for testing the world's best golfers with the most demanding courses.



The 2002 US Open at Bethpage Black featured punishing rough and heavy rain.



The competition is designed to challenge, traditionally favoring courses that feature brutal rough and narrow fairways. This year's U.S. Open is no exception, taking place at Bethpage Black in Long Island, New York, widely regarded as one of the toughest courses in the game.



The U.S. Open was first staged at Bethpage in 2002, when it became the first municipal course to host the competition and, at 7,214 yards, the longest course in the competition's history.



Those who played at Bethpage 2002 still have the scars to prove it. Heavy rain and swirling wind turned the event into an endurance contest. It was survival of the fittest, with Tiger Woods the only competitor to finish under par, ending the tournament three under.



Those brave enough to return to Bethpage on Thursday will find there have been a few changes. For starters, the course has been lengthened by 200 yards, which will make the grueling course even more exhausting.



More welcome will be the introduction of "graduated" primary rough. That means there will be a strip of intermediate rough next to the fairway, and beyond that there a strip of primary rough approximately two-and-a-half to three inches deep, followed by a second cut of rough, which will be about four to six inches deep and stretch to the gallery rope lines.



The idea is to penalize narrow misses less severely than big misses: a player who hits his shot slightly off target will land in the shorter cut of rough, an easier shot than the longer second cut.



See our choice of 10 golfers to watch at the U.S. Open. »



Mike Davis, senior director of rules and competitions for the United States Golf Association, has said the course will be structurally very similar to 2002, but there will be more "risk and reward" opportunities. That means there are more holes where golfers can choose to gamble from the tee. A well-executed drive will save strokes and a misplaced drive could cost them dear.



The sheer length of the course is likely to favor the game's big hitters. That includes the likes of Tiger Woods, the golfer who most successfully tamed Bethpage in 2002. Woods also showed his big-course credentials by winning last year's U.S. Open at Torrey Pines, which topped Bethpage with its 7,643-yard course.



The distance the golfers have to cover will probably favor those in good physical condition. But the size of Bethpage is not the only thing that will decide the contest.



Graduated or not, the rough will be a real problem, making accurate driving a necessity. Phil Mickelson will go into the tournament as one of the favorites, but he will need to be precise from the tee, not one of his strong points.



Patience will be a virtue. The fact that it is such a tough course means competitors will have to accept that they will not be able to get under par on many of the holes. On the other hand those new "risk and reward" holes will give gamblers the opportunity to throw caution to the wind if they are falling off the pace.



The golfers and spectators will no doubt be hoping for better weather than in 2002, but even in glorious sunshine, it will still be the kind of tournament that separates the men from the boys.



U.S. golfer John Daly failed to qualify for the U.S. Open last week, but he was full of praise for the course, saying "I love Bethpage. It's the ultimate major course. It's fair. It's so hard they really can't make it any harder."

***

(CNN) -- Chevy Chase didn't look like Gerald Ford and didn't sound like Gerald Ford. But in the mid-1970s, when "Saturday Night Live" first went on the air, Chase -- then a writer and cast member of the show -- made his impression of the president, rife with pratfalls and slapstick, the talk of the country.

He also made the president a butt of jokes, which was intentional, Chase told CNN in an interview.

"[Ford] was a sweet man, a terrific man -- [we] became good friends after, but ... he just tripped over things a lot," he said. "It's not that I can imitate him so much that I can do a lot of physical comedy and I just made it, I just went after him. And ... obviously my leanings were Democratic and I wanted [Jimmy] Carter in and I wanted [Ford] out, and I figured look, we're reaching millions of people every weekend, why not do it."

Over the years, "Saturday Night Live's" political satires have become a mainstay of the show, sometimes to startling effect.  Watch Chase talk about "SNL's" impact Â»

Al Franken -- now the Democratic nominee for the U.S. Senate from Minnesota -- and his then writing partner, Tom Davis, wrote a wicked takeoff of Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein's book, "The Final Days," which included Dan Aykroyd as a bitter Richard Nixon and John Belushi as a toadying Henry Kissinger. In the mid-'80s, a sketch starring Phil Hartman as Ronald Reagan showed the president, often lampooned as forgetful, with a razor-sharp command of the Iran-Contra situation, cutting deals in Arabic and barking orders at his staff.

More recently, Dana Carvey's malaprop-laden impression of George H.W. Bush, Hartman's puppy-dog Bill Clinton, Will Ferrell's George W. Bush and Tina Fey's Sarah Palin have embedded themselves in the culture.

Though Chase believes the show leans left, and Fey's Palin is an attempt to hurt the Republicans, Marc Liepis, NBC Universal senior director of late night publicity, had no comment.

Certainly, "SNL" -- which began as one of the old '60s counterculture's first forays into network TV -- has also mocked Democrats. Indeed, sketches about the Democratic debates in the spring, one of which portrayed the media as fawning over Barack Obama, gave Hillary Clinton ammunition in her pursuit of the nomination. The writer of that sketch, Jim Downey, has been described as leaning conservative, though he was quoted in a March New York Times article as calling himself a registered Democrat.

In the same article, "SNL" creator Lorne Michaels said, "We don't lay down for anybody."

Chase talked about his Ford impression and the political impact of "Saturday Night Live" with CNN's Alina Cho. The following is an edited version of that interview.

CNN: Let's go back to '76.

Chevy Chase:  It was Gerald Ford that was president but hadn't been elected and was running again and I just ...

CNN: Some people say he was an accidental president and you made him accident prone.

Chase: Actually, he was accident prone and he was a sweet man, a terrific man, became good friends later, and a relatively good athlete in college too ... but he just tripped over things a lot. ... You know, after a while, you just start writing the jokes and start doing it.

So it's not that I can imitate him so much that I can do a lot of physical comedy, and I just made it, I just went after him. And I certainly, obviously my leanings were Democratic and I wanted Carter in and I wanted [Ford] out and I figured look, we're reaching millions of people every weekend, why not do it.

CNN: You mean to tell me in the back of your mind you were thinking, hey I want Carter ...

Chase: Oh, yeah.

***

(CNN) -- Seven states and two organizations have sued the Bush administration in an attempt to block a federal regulation that would further protect health care workers who refuse to perform abortions or other medical procedures because of religious or moral reasons.



A rule protecting the rights of health care providers who refuse to participate in certain procedures is under fire.



Connecticut Attorney General Richard Blumenthal filed a lawsuit Thursday on behalf of his state, California, Illinois, Massachusetts, New Jersey, Oregon and Rhode Island.



Blumenthal said the regulation would put women's health care at risk and would undercut state contraception laws.



"On its way out, the Bush administration has left a ticking legal time bomb set to explode literally the day of the inaugural and blow apart vital constitutional rights and women's health care," Blumenthal said in a statement. "Women's health may be endangered -- needlessly and unlawfully -- if this rule is allowed to stand."



He said the regulation "intentionally shrouds" abortion in "new and unnecessary ambiguity," encouraging individuals to define it and to "deny virtually all forms of contraceptions, even emergency contraception to rape victims."



The Planned Parenthood Federation of America and American Civil Liberties Union, which was acting on behalf of the National Family Planning & Reproductive Health Association, also filed separate suits Thursday.



The Department of Health and Human Services said the regulation would allow the federal government to withhold federal funds for state and local governments, health plans and health care facilities that do not follow existing federal laws that ban discrimination against doctors and other health workers who refuse to participate in procedures such as sterilizations or abortions or to make referrals for such procedures.



"We have not had an opportunity to review the lawsuits and we will respond to the court on any pending litigation," department spokeswoman Rebecca Ayers said in an e-mail. "The department followed appropriate procedures to put the regulation in place and the regulation is fully supported by law."



The department promulgated the rule last month.



"Doctors and other health care providers should not be forced to choose between good professional standing and violating their conscience," Health and Human Services Secretary Mike Leavitt said in a statement then. "This rule protects the right of medical providers to care for their patients in accord with their conscience."



The department has said that it believes the public and health care providers are unaware of the federal anti-discrimination laws.



"Many health care providers routinely face pressure to change their medical practice -- often in direct opposition to their personal convictions," said the department's assistant secretary of health, Adm. Joxel Garcia, in a statement in December.



"During my practice as an OB-GYN, I witnessed this firsthand. Health care providers shouldn't have to check their consciences at the hospital door. Fortunately, Congress enacted several laws to that end, but too many are unaware these protections exist."

***

(CNN) -- A man who faked his drowning death nearly 20 years ago off a Florida beach was found out by North Carolina police who stopped him for a traffic violation, authorities said Thursday.



Bennie Wint told police he faked his drowning death in Daytona Beach, Florida, in 1989.



Bennie Wint left behind a grieving fiancee and a daughter from a previous marriage. Over the past two decades, he acquired a common-law wife and another child in Marshall, North Carolina.



Wint told police he faked his death in Daytona Beach, Florida, because he was "paranoid" about his narcotics-related activity at the time, Weaverville, North Carolina, police Sgt. Stacy Wyatt told CNN.



When pulled over in Weaverville on Saturday because of malfunctioning lights on his license plate, the man said his name was James Sweet, Wyatt said. But when Wyatt ran the name through official databases, he was unable to find any information.



"I found it suspicious and believed it to be a false name," Wyatt said. He arrested the man on suspicion of driving without a license and giving false information, both misdemeanor offenses, and booked him under the name "John Doe."



But "John Doe" finally opened up to Wyatt, admitting he was really Bennie Wint and had been on the run since 1989.  Watch how reports of his death were premature »



Wint returned a call Thursday from CNN and asked what an interview with him would be "worth to you." Told that CNN does not pay for interviews, he responded, "Unless you want to pay for it, don't come up here. You are wasting your time. There are 'no trespassing' signs on my property." He then hung up.



According to police reports, Wint was on a trip to Daytona Beach with his then-fiancee, Patricia Hollingsworth. She told police they were engaged and had discussed getting married while on the trip.



But it was not to be. On September 25, 1989, Hollingsworth told beach patrol officials that Wint disappeared while swimming.



"We spent a bunch of time looking for him," said Volusia County Beach Patrol Capt. Scott Petersohn, who was on the beach patrol at the time, although he did not respond to the call. "We used helicopters, boats and boatloads of lifeguards."



Hollingsworth, then 37, told officials Wint entered the ocean about 4 p.m. and swam past the breakers before she lost sight of him, according to the incident report. The report notes Hollingsworth was "very upset" and that after contacting officials, she "began to run north and south in the area," looking for Wint.



Members of the beach patrol, however, thought the supposed drowning was suspicious.



"It is very rare to drown offshore and not wash back in onto the shore," Petersohn said. In addition, he said, the lifeguard on the beach told officials he did not see anyone swimming in the area.



Wyatt submitted Wint's fingerprints to the FBI for identification and, while waiting for the results, searched the Internet for information on a Bennie Wint.



"I found a daughter that was looking for him," Wyatt said. The woman posted information about her father in 2007, saying he went missing under suspicious circumstances.



Wyatt contacted the now-23-year-old woman, who said she was 4 when her father disappeared.



Wint has been released from jail and has not been charged in relation to the 1989 incident. It was not known whether he contacted his daughter.



Wyatt said Wint now has a common-law wife, a child and a business selling NASCAR items. The night he was arrested, Wyatt said, his wife was "distraught" upon learning his true identity.



Wyatt said Wint told him he was involved in narcotics in the 1970s and '80s, and "he ran out of paranoia, thinking people were out to get him." He said he went from Daytona Beach to Ozark, Alabama.



CNN's attempts to contact Hollingsworth were unsuccessful, and

***

Jerusalem (CNN) -- The Palestinian Liberation Organization's leadership reiterated its push for recognition as an independent state by the United Nations and condemning Israel's latest proposal for new settlements on disputed territory, state-run media reported.





Palestinian Authority Prime Minister Mahmoud Abbas led the meeting in Ramallah on Thursday to discuss the official position, according to the official WAFA news agency.





The U.N. Security Council's admissions committee is set Friday to review the Palestinian application for statehood.





Last week, the Middle East Quartet -- made up of the United States, the European Union, the United Nations and Russia -- called on Israel and the Palestinians to resume peace talks within a month and set the end of 2012 as the deadline for their completion. But no such direct talks have taken place.





Abbas has said repeatedly that the Palestinians would not return to negotiations until Israel halted all settlement construction and accepted 1967 border lines as a basis for the return to talks.





Israel has maintained that negotiations should begin with no preconditions.





Besides calling for negotiation, the Quartet also called on both sides to "to refrain from provocative actions" -- in part a veiled reference to Israeli settlement-building in land Israel occupied as a result of the 1967 Mideast War.





This week, the Israeli Interior Ministry announced this week that a district planning committee had approved the construction of 1,100 homes in a southern Jerusalem neighborhood that was seized by Israel in 1967. That decision will be open for public comment for the next 60 days, the ministry added.





Yasser Abed Rabbo, secretary-general of the Palestinian Liberation Organization's executive committee, read a statement after the meeting Thursday criticizing the Israeli move. Palestinians, who want the land Israel now occupies in East Jerusalem and the West Bank to be part of a future Palestinian state.





A day earlier, Palestinian negotiator Mohammed Shtayyeh said the action suggests that Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and his government are not serious about making peace.





"He said at the United Nations he was giving his hand in peace, but actually, he is digging in the land to build more settlements," Shtayyeh said.





He further called Israel's move "a slap in the face of the Quartet and the whole international community, which is saying 'stop settlements.'"





In an interview with the daily Jerusalem Post, Netanyahu defended Israel's right to build in Jerusalem. "We plan in Jerusalem, we build in Jerusalem. Period. The same way Israeli governments have been doing for years."





The Israeli move drew international criticism, with British Foreign Secretary William Hague condemning it while U.S. officials expressed disappointment.





"Settlement expansion is illegal under international law, corrodes trust and undermines the basic principle of land for peace," Hague said in a statement. "We call on the government of Israel to revoke this decision."





White House Press Secretary Jay Carney said the United States was disappointed by Israel's announcement, and Secretary of State Hillary Clinton called it "counterproductive to our efforts to resume direct negotiations between the parties."





As for possible U.S. government criticism of the move, Netanyahu declared that the Americans "know this -- they have followed this a long time. There is really nothing new."





In the interview, Netanyahu also said Israel would not initiate another settlement freeze to get talks started again.





"We already gave at the office," he said, referring to a 10-month freeze enacted by his government last year.

***

NEW YORK (CNN)  -- Authorities are seeking the public's assistance in identifying a teenage girl who mysteriously turned up in Manhattan two weeks ago, claiming to have no memory of her family, her home -- or even her own name.



The teen has recalled an excerpt from the fantasy novel "Fool's Fate" by Robin Hobb.



"I just want to know who I am," the girl says in a statement released by the New York City Administration for Children's Services. The teen, who is being referred to as Jane Doe, continues, "I want to know who I am and what happened to me."



The Caucasian young woman, described by New York ACS as "very soft-spoken," is 5 feet, 6 inches tall, light-skinned, with short, straight, cropped blond hair and blue eyes. Doctors are estimating her age to be between 14 and 17.



ACS Commissioner John B. Mattingly appealed to the public in a statement, "asking anyone who may know this young woman to help us locate her family as quickly as possible, so we can safely reunite her with those who love her."



The girl was found in midtown Manhattan around 12:30 a.m. October 9 outside the Covenant House youth shelter, although the organization tells CNN that she was not a resident at the time and did not appear as if she intended to seek refuge at the facility.



According to its Web site, with nearly 7,000 youths seeking shelter per year, "Covenant House New York is the nation's largest adolescent care agency serving homeless, runaway and at-risk youth."



A security guard for the shelter noticed the girl walking around on the sidewalk near Covenant House and approached her. Finding her unresponsive, he called the New York City Police Department.



Police officers interviewed the young woman, but it became clear that she couldn't provide authorities with any information about herself. The NYPD said she was wearing military green camouflage pants, a black shirt and a pair of black sneakers when she was discovered.



Children's Services said the girl recently wrote down the name "Amber" and has responded to it on one occasion, but she has no idea whether it is her true name.



On another occasion she is said to have recalled certain words, which turned out to be an excerpt from the fantasy novel "Fool's Fate" by Robin Hobb. The girl is also apparently writing a fantasy story of her own that features a heroine named Rian, "who's been raised by the commander of the guard post on the edge of a fantasy kingdom," says the young woman.



The girl has a 2- to 4-inch scar on her lower left back and had a black, handwritten birthday message on her arm, addressed to a name of Japanese origin, when she was found, police said Friday.



Judging from poor dental hygiene, said Lt. Christopher Zimmerman, she appears to have been living on the streets for some time.



"This case has been going on since October 9," Zimmerman said. "Today is the 23rd, and we're vey concerned. It's been a very long time now. That's a long time frame to not identify somebody. Especially someone who we believe is a juvenile. Usually juveniles we get a lot of inquiries about."



While the girl is confused and her story remains vague, Mattingly said, "she is safe with us, and we are doing all we can to help her, but she needs to find her family."



She is apparently reviewing materials for a high school GED exam, saying that she is able to do the math but has no recollection of studying the history and science portions. However, according to the Children's Services statement, the young woman "can easily retain the information."



New York City Administration for Children's Services and police are asking anyone with information about the young woman or her family to contact the NYPD Missing Persons Squad at 212-694-7781 or Crime Stoppers at 1-800-577-TIPS.

***

San Francisco (CNN) -- From the ninth floor of an office building here, Verizon Wireless executives peered out of a window at the breathtaking view of the East Bay.





Behind them, baristas wrestled with an espresso maker and served up free cappuccinos to guests.





The newly renovated office, located in SoMa, San Francisco's tech hub, is home to the Verizon Application Innovation Center, which opened last month. Big and small software developers are invited to work here at no charge, with unlimited access to development phones, wireless equipment, shielded test rooms and lattes.





The modern workspace is part of Verizon's plan to improve its image in the technology industry and particularly with people who develop mobile phone apps, executives said in interviews. App makers often condemn carriers for monthly data caps and limits on high-bandwidth apps, which they see as stifling innovation.





Cell giants, including AT&T Mobility and Britain's Vodafone, are taking approaches similar to Verizon's to deflect criticism and position themselves as friends, not foes, of developers. Vodafone, which partially owns Verizon Wireless, opened its own development center in Silicon Valley this month.





AT&T cut the ribbon last week on its Foundry Development Center in Palo Alto, California. All of the furniture there is on wheels to facilitate makeshift meetings. Currently, 106 projects are under way at the foundry, many of them in collaboration with other companies.





"The purpose here was really to be right in the middle of Silicon Valley, in the heart of innovation," Jon Summers, an AT&T technology executive, said last week. "The one thing that we are extremely passionate about is enabling innovation through these partnerships and within this community."





AT&T also is working with esteemed venture capital firms Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers and Sequoia Capital to identify small companies with which the carrier should work, Summers said. Third-party developers are welcome to show up at the foundry unannounced and receive technical support from people there, he said.





An AT&T spokeswoman declined to say how many workers staff its facility, but Summers said Ericsson has employees there along with AT&T engineers, and that people from Microsoft and Juniper Networks will also work there intermittently.





Ericsson is also a founding partner in Verizon's innovation-center program. A Verizon spokesman said 25 engineers work at its San Francisco office.





Verizon previously launched a similar facility in Waltham, Massachusetts, for hardware developers. AT&T opened two others earlier this year in Plano, Texas, and Ra'anana, Israel. Work at these centers has resulted in exclusive projects for each company, executives said.





Part of the motivation for the significant investments is to avoid being seen as a "dumb pipe," or as solely a conduit for data, said Michael King, a Gartner Research analyst.





"I think the long-term goal for a lot of these carriers is they don't want to become pipes," King said. "When you think about it, the carriers don't bring a lot to a developer."





There may be technical limits to what developers can accomplish with these new carrier-specific app stores.





Telecoms operate many parts of their business as "a closed loop," rather than unlocking services such as text messaging to developers, said Andrew Bosworth, a Facebook product director.





The carriers will have a tougher time convincing software makers, especially those who produce hot consumer apps, to sign exclusivity contracts, King said.





"If you've got a really compelling app, why are you going to limit yourself to half your potential market?" King said. "You are not going to tie yourself to a carrier."





Verizon and AT&T executives acknowledged as much in interviews. Developers who use their facilities likely will offer their apps on competitors' networks, they said.





"No one has a monopoly on good ideas," Verizon Wireless CEO Dan Mead said at the center's opening last month.





Verizon appears to be winning good will with smaller tech companies, however, which could be a valuable asset. Some developers, who, according to Verizon tech exec Kyle

***

WASHINGTON (CNN)  -- Sheila Wash greets her son and daughter, 13-year-old Cecil and 9-year-old Sheliah, every day when their school buses arrive "home."





Sheila Wash says being homeless has been an "eye-opening experience" for her.





They talk about the school day, their homework and even joke that Sheliah can't remember what she ate for lunch. The fourth-grader wonders aloud, "What did we have? We had something good."





But it's hardly a homecoming for any of them.





The Wash family has been homeless since 2007, after Sheila lost her government job. She says unemployment benefits quickly ran out and, as she searched for a job, the family was forced to move six times in the last two years. They're now living in the Family Forward Shelter in Washington.





"I just thank God we have a roof over our head right now. You have to accept the things that come to you. You don't like them but, you know, until you can get your foot forward, you do what you have to do. We just keep going," Wash said.





Wash's situation was only made worse as the economic recession set in. Jobs became harder and harder to find with more competition for each position. She says she's still searching.





The Washes are part of the changing face of homelessness in America today. For years, homelessness has been depicted as that of an individual man or woman living on the street and begging for money. But with the perfect storm of the foreclosure crisis and the faltering economy, more and more families are becoming homeless. According to a recent count by the Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments, the number of homeless families in the Washington region alone has jumped 15 percent since last year.





There are several national estimates of homelessness, but many are dated or based on dated information. TheU.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development points to a study done in 2007 -- before the brunt of the foreclosure crisis hit --which stated that about 3.5 million people, 1.35 million of them children, are likely to experience homelessness in a given year. That study was conducted by the National Law Center on Homelessness and Poverty





"People lose their jobs. Their monthly household expenses spiral out of control because maybe their car broke down that month, and when you have such a tight budget with high rental costs, there is no room for error. And so that is what really leads families to the shelter door," said Mary Cunningham, author of "Preventing and Ending Homelessness - Next Steps."





Reflecting on their struggles over the last few years, Sheila calls it "eye-opening." "It's like they say you never know [someone] until you walk in their shoes, so truly I know now and if I ever get out [of] this situation, I will always give back to people less fortunate than I am because I know their struggles," Wash said.





School officials in Prince George's County, Maryland, where the two Wash children go to school, say a day doesn't go by without the need to enroll another child as homeless. Denise Ross, supervisor for the school district's Homeless Education Office, said they've been inundated with requests.





"Some of them are embarrassed, some of them are scared, some of them are sad. They're just not sure what's going to happen next," Ross said. "Students who are displaced or homeless students feel that school is a safe haven. They really want to come to school. They really want to attend school."





For homeless students, Prince George's County Schools offers free transportation to and from school, free breakfast and lunch, help with school supplies and also clothing. "Either in the shuffle of being evicted or moving from shelter to shelter or place to place, their clothes may not have followed them. Or may have been set out and somebody may have taken them. So they may only have [the] clothes that are on their back.

***

(CNN) -- A crusading Sri Lankan journalist shot dead last week knew he would be killed -- he said so in a dramatic, posthumously published column touching a raw nerve in his war-torn island nation.

A candlelight vigil in the Sri Lankan capital in memory of slain journalist Lasantha Wickrematunga.

Lasantha Wickrematunga, editor-in-chief of The Sunday Leader, was gunned down execution-style January 8 but spoke from the grave three days later when the newspaper published "And Then They Came For Me."

That posthumous column anticipated his slaying by government forces and defended the craft of journalism in his country, a profession under fire during its bitter civil war.

"Diplomats, recognizing the risk journalists face in Sri Lanka, have offered me safe passage and the right of residence in their countries. Whatever else I may have been stuck for, I have not been stuck for choice. But there is a calling that is yet above high office, fame, lucre and security. It is the call of conscience," Wickrematunga wrote.

"People often ask me why I take such risks and tell me it's a matter of time before I am bumped off."

Wickrematunga wrote that he was twice assaulted and his house was fired upon.

"Despite the government's sanctimonious assurances, there was never a serious police inquiry into the perpetrators of these attacks, and the attackers were never apprehended.

"In all of these cases, I have reason to believe the attacks were inspired by the government. When finally I am killed, it will be the government that kills me," he wrote.

Sri Lankan President Mahindra Rajapaksa, asked about threats to journalists, voiced assurance that no journalist or media institution had cause to fear any threats or attacks by the government, according to a statement on the government's official Web site.  Watch Sri Lanka's foreign minister discuss press freedom »

"The government had no interest whatever in seeking disgrace through any attacks on the media," he said, and he assured media leaders that the culprits would be captured and brought to justice, the statement said.

Hostility against journalists and their institutions has been high as the Sinhalese-dominated government forces work to eradicate the last vestiges of Tamil Tiger separatists in the Jaffna peninsula, the rebel-held northern region. The 25-year-old civil war has left more than 65,000 people dead.

Sunanda Deshapriya, spokesman for Sri Lanka's Free Media Movement, said harassment of journalists has been common, and cited these examples from the past year: two journalists killed, another journalist shot at, more than 50 reports of intimidations and threats, 12 media personnel arrested, 16 journalists physically assaulted, one tortured, one assaulted in an abduction attempt, the circulation of a list with 27 journalists targeted for killings, the proposal of a censorship law, and the naming of some journalists as terrorists or terrorist supporters.

On January 6, 15 masked gunmen entered Maharajah TV studios outside the capital, Colombo. The journalism watchdog group Committee to Protect Journalists said the attackers shot at and destroyed broadcast equipment, held staff members at gunpoint, and attempted to burn down the station's facilities.

CNN on Wednesday interviewed the head of Maharajah TV, Chevaan Daniel, about the incident. Afterward, Sri Lanka's defense secretary, Gotabhaya Rajapaksa, called for the arrest of a person who had talked to CNN, Deshapriya said.

CPJ said the government-run media has criticized Maharajah TV for its coverage of a suicide bombing in the capital and "undermining" a presidential victory speech after government troops took Kilinochchi -- which had been the de facto capital of the Tamil Tigers movement.

Government officials have condemned strikes on Colombo and have ordered probes.

Bob Dietz, CPJ's Asia program director, said that "far too often the government or its unofficial allies have been prime suspects behind attacks on journalists and media organizations," despite government condemnations and investigations.

As the civil warfare first unfolded, Tamil journalists were targeted, Dietz said.

But in the past year and a half, mainstream journalists, such as those who raise

***

(CNN) -- One suspect has been charged and police are hunting for another in connection with the killing of University of North Carolina student Eve Carson, police said Wednesday.



Demario James Atwater, 21, was arrested early Wednesday at a residence in Durham, North Carolina.



Authorities were watching the home after receiving a tip that Atwater was inside.



He was charged with first-degree murder in Carson's death.



Atwater is believed to be the man in a convenience-store photograph released by police.



A second suspect, Lawrence Alvin Lovett Jr., 17, is being sought in Carson's death, police said.



He also faces a first-degree murder charge.



Lovett could be armed and dangerous, police told CNN affiliate WRAL.



Police believe Lovett was the man seen in a surveillance-camera photo possibly using Carson's card at an ATM, Chapel Hill Police Chief Brian Curran said.



The pictures showed a young man wearing a hooded sweatshirt and baseball cap. There also appeared to be a large, shadowy form of another person in the back seat of the vehicle, which may have been Carson's SUV.



Police believe Atwater was in the back seat, Curran said.



He would not comment on whether physical evidence links the two suspects to the crime.



Atwater was taken to a hospital as part of the evidence collection process, he said, and brought back to make an initial court appearance.



"As encouraging as the developments today are, we are still a community in grief," Chapel Hill Mayor Kevin Foy told reporters at a news conference announcing the arrest.



"We also still must offer comfort to a family in mourning, Eve's family."



Carson, 22, was found shot to death about 5 a.m. March 5. The medical examiner told police that her body showed no signs of sexual assault or other injury, Curran said.



Carson's killing "feels like a random crime," Curran said Saturday.



On Sunday, more than 1,000 people crowded the First United Methodist Church in Carson's hometown of Athens, Georgia, for her funeral, the Athens Banner-Herald reported.



The UNC-Chapel Hill board of trustees had pledged $25,000 to the Crime Stoppers program in the area for information leading to the arrest of anyone responsible in Carson's slaying. Carson was a student member of the board and student body president.



The young woman was a pre-medicine student who was double majoring in political science and biology. She received the university's prestigious Morehead Scholarship and was a member of the Phi Beta Kappa honor society, according to UNC. E-mail to a friend

***

Washington (CNN) -- In a major blow to the Republican leadership, the U.S. House on Wednesday defeated a temporary spending measure that would have required spending cuts to offset additional money for federal disaster relief efforts.





The vote was 195-230, with 48 Republicans joining all but a handful of minority Democrats in opposing the short-term spending plan that would keep the government funded for seven weeks after the end of the fiscal year on September 30.





After the result, House Republican leaders met in Speaker John Boehner's office to decide if they would revise the measure and hold another vote on Thursday. Options under consideration included removing or changing the spending offsets opposed by Democrats, or reducing the total amount of spending to appease conservative Republicans.





At issue was a short-term bill to fund government agencies through November 18 that would allocate fewer resources to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the Army Corps of Engineers for disaster response than the Democratic-led Senate approved last week.





Additional funds are needed because of recent major floods from Hurricane Irene and Tropical Storm Lee along the East Coast, and wildfires in Texas that required emergency responses exceeding the amount the agencies have left in their coffers to support recovery and rebuilding efforts.





The House measure included a total of $3.6 billion in disaster relief money -- $1 billion in emergency funds available when the bill is enacted and another $2.6 billion to be budgeted for those federal response agencies for the 2012 fiscal year that begins October 1.





In addition, House Republican leaders are insisting that the $1 billion in immediate disaster funding be offset with $1.5 billion in cuts to a loan program that helps automakers retool their operations to make more fuel-efficient cars.





Democrats objected to cutting spending for disaster funding, calling it unprecedented and politicizing emergency relief for Americans. Conservative Republicans, including House Majority Leader Eric Cantor of Virginia, argued that the nation's expanding deficits require as much spending restraint as possible.





Earlier this month, President Barack Obama asked Congress for a total of $5.1 billion in additional disaster aid --- $500 million of which was for immediate relief.





Last week, the Senate bill that passed with bipartisan support included $6.9 billion for FEMA and other federal agencies for immediate disaster relief and for relief in 2012. The Senate version required no spending offsets.





The impasse could leave the government without funding after September 30 if Congress fails to authorize further spending, which would cause a partial shutdown. Cantor, however, said no shutdown would occur.





"Suffice it to say there's not going to be a shutdown," Cantor told reporters. "I think everybody needs to relax. We're trying to affect change in a way that we spend taxpayer dollars - that's what this whole thing is about. No one is denying anyone disaster aid if they need it, and we're trying to be responsible and to do the right thing."





Meanwhile, Rep. Steny Hoyer of Maryland, the chamber's No. 2 Democrat, said his party would support the measure if the offset provision was removed.





"They put something in that was clearly, we think, a job killer," Hoyer said of the offset that would eliminate the loan program for manufacturing fuel-efficient vehicles. During floor debate on the measure, Hoyer and other Democrats complained that any kind of offset would be unprecedented for emergency funding to help Americans in need.





"Even if they had the best offset in the world, I still think it's wrong" to require equivalent spending cuts when getting money to disaster victims, said House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, D-California.





To Hoyer, the defeat of the GOP measure "says that we are continuing to struggle to do things in a bipartisan fashion."





If House Republicans "expect our votes, they have to work with us," he said. "They can't just give us something and say ... their way or the highway."





-- CNN's Ted Barrett, Deirdre Walsh, Kate Bolduan and Tom Cohen contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- A plane crashed early Sunday in the southern port city of Karachi, killing at least eight people on board and sending flames shooting through the night sky, a Pakistani official said.





The cargo plane took off at 1:45 a.m. from the Jinnah Karachi International Airport for Khartoum, Sudan, said Pervez George, a spokesman for Pakistan's Civil Aviation Authority. It went down a few minutes later in the Gulistan-e Johar section of Karachi, an area where many Pakistani naval officers live.





Masood Raza, a Karachi district government official, told CNN affiliate GEO News in Pakistan that the pilot appeared to deliberately bring the plane down in a less densely populated residential area in order to save lives.





"If the plane would have crashed in a (more crowded) residential area, it would have been a very big disaster for the city of Karachi," Raza said.





All eight people confirmed dead were members of the downed aircraft's crew and all are Russian nationals, said George.





A local hospital spokesman told CNN that the hospital had received five bodies by 4 a.m.





The Russian-made cargo plane was carrying relief supplies, including tents, to Africa before it went down. The plane arrived in Karachi on Saturday from Fujairah, United Arab Emirates, George said.





An eyewitness told CNN that he saw fire on one of the plane's wings before it crashed.





Firefighters, rescue personnel and area residents rushed to the scene, with jet fuel fanning the large flames and huge plumes of smoke.





The blaze was put out by 4 a.m., according to George, at which point rescue personnel continued to comb through the rubble looking for other people possibly killed or hurt.





The plane appeared to hit several buildings under construction.





Hospital sources told GEO News that Mohammed Raees had burns over 60 percent of his body, resulting from the crash and subsequent fire. Raees told GEO News that he was hurt after flaming parts of a building hit him and the motorcyle he was preparing to ride.

***

ROME, Italy (CNN) -- Nearly two dozen Americans -- most thought to work for the CIA -- were sentenced to five years in prison Wednesday by an Italian court for their role in the seizing of a suspected terrorist in Italy in 2003, the prosecutor in the case told CNN.



The Americans did not appear for trial and are not in custody, but the ruling could effectively make them international fugitives.



The trial was the first to deal with a practice that human rights groups call "extraordinary rendition." They say the United States has often sent suspects to countries that practice torture.



Washington acknowledges making secret "rendition" transfers of terrorism suspects between countries but denies using torture or handing suspects over to countries that do.



The case centered on the extraordinary rendition of a Muslim cleric, Osama Mustafa Hassan Nasr, or Abu Omar.



He was seized on the streets of Milan, Italy, in 2003, transferred to Egypt and tortured, he said. He was suspected of recruiting men to fight in Iraq and Afghanistan and was under heavy surveillance by Italy's intelligence agency.



Prosecutors said he was nabbed by a CIA team working with Italian intelligence officials.



The verdict "shows governments and institutions that the fight against terrorism has to be carried out in accordance with the law. There are no shortcuts," Spataro told CNN.



Those who were found guilty were ordered to pay Abu Omar 1 million euros ($1.48 million) and his wife 500,000 euros.



A total of 22 Americans were each sentenced to five years in prison for their role in his abduction. Another -- Robert Seldon Lady, whom prosecutors said was the CIA station chief in Milan -- was sentenced to eight years in jail, prosecutor Armando Spataro told CNN.



Cases were dismissed against three other Americans, including Jeff Castelli, the man assumed to be the CIA station chief in Rome at the time, because they had diplomatic immunity from prosecution. Spataro said he may appeal that ruling.



Cases were also dismissed against the former head of Italy's intelligence service and his deputy because of state secrecy provisions.



Two other Italians were sentenced to three years in jail for aiding the plot.



Sabrina De Sousa, one of the American defendants, was "saddened, angered and dismayed" by the ruling, her lawyer told CNN.



She felt the U.S. government had "stabbed her in the back," Mark Zaid said. "We understand why the Italians did what they did. They were following their laws. But at the end of the day, representatives of our United States government abroad were let down and left alone by their own government."



De Sousa, a career diplomat, is suing the State Department over the case, Zaid confirmed. She has never said she worked for the CIA.



CIA spokesman George Little said Wednesday: "The CIA has not commented on any of the allegations surrounding Abu Omar."



But U.S. officials confirmed to CNN when the case first broke that the CIA was involved in the rendition of Abu Omar from Italy to Egypt. The officials never disclosed the number of Americans involved or their names.



Pentagon spokesman Geoff Morrell responded to the verdict as it applied to an Air Force officer, Lt. Col. Joseph Romano III, who was among the Americans sentenced.



The Pentagon had asserted jurisdiction over the incident under the NATO Status of Forces Agreement, a position that the Italian minister of justice supported, Morrell said.



"We are clearly disappointed by the court's ruling," Morrell said. "Our view is that the Italian court has no jurisdiction over Lt. Col. Romano and should have immediately dismissed the charges."



The American Civil Liberties Union, a persistent critic of Washington's extraordinary rendition program, demanded the United States match Italy's actions.



"The decision in Italy underscores the need for the United States to hold its own officials accountable for crimes committed under the 'extraordinary rendition' program. It is shameful that the first convictions of this kind came from a foreign justice system, where those convicted are not likely to serve their time," said Steven

***

(CNN) -- South Africa pace bowler Dale Steyn ripped through India's batsmen on the third day of the first cricket Test in Nagpur, taking eight wickets as the hosts were forced to follow on.



Steyn took a career-best 7-51 as India, resuming on 25-0 overnight, were skittled for just 233 to concede a massive first-innings deficit of 325 runs.



The 26-year-old, whose previous best figures were 6-49, then took the wicket of first-innings centurion Virender Sehwag as India reached 66-2 at stumps on Monday.



The haul took Steyn to 193 wickets in his 37th Test and gave South Africa a great chance of winning the two-match series against a side who usurped their No. 1 ranking in the five-day format late last year.



He claimed five wickets in less than four overs after tea as India collapsed from 221-4.



"We actually had the ball changed when we came out after tea because the seam had popped open on the old one," Steyn told reporters. "We hoped to get a bit of reverse swing -- it worked in our favor."



Steyn's strike partner Morne Morkel set the tone when he had Gautam Gambhir caught by wicketkeeper Mark Boucher with his first delivery of the day, with the opener not adding to his overnight score of 12.



Steyn then bowled Murali Vijay for four as the No. 3 failed to play a stroke, and he took the vital wicket of Sachin Tendulkar, the highest run-scorer in Test history, when he tempted the veteran to edge a drive to Boucher for just seven.



The belligerent Sehwag then added 136 with debutant Subramaniam Badrinath as he smashed his 18th Test ton before giving away his wicket to Wayne Parnell with an easy catch to J.P. Duminy deep in the cover field.



Sehwag hit 15 boundaries in 139 deliveries -- the same amount that the 29-year-old Badrinath faced in making 56, who took India safely to tea along with captain Mahendra Singh Dhoni.



But Dhoni fell to left-arm spinner Paul Harris in the first over of the final session, and Steyn had Badrinath caught at midwicket before running through the tail.



Proteas captain Graeme Smith made the Indians bat again, despite Boucher not being able to take the field due to a back injury.



Morkel again accounted for Gambhir as the opener misjudged an inswinger and had his castle wrecked after shouldering arms, and Steyn had Sehwag caught by Smith at slip for 16.



Vijay (27) and Tendulkar (15) added 44 in the remainder of the 23 overs scheduled to be bowled before stumps, but will face a massive task to prevent India going 1-0 down in the series.



Meanwhile, New Zealand took an unassailable 2-0 lead in the one-day series against visiting Bangladesh, winning the second match by five wickets in Dunedin on Monday.



The tourists managed only 183-8 in their 50 overs as Mushfiqur Rahim top-scored with 86, and the Kiwis reached their target from only 27.3 overs with Ross Taylor smashing 78 off in a 52-ball innings featuring five sixes.

***

London, England (CNN) -- Katie Piper had everything going for her -- a blossoming career, a wonderful life and a beautiful face. But that all changed after a horrific acid attack in March 2008 destroyed everything as she knew it.





The young model and television presenter, who was 24 years old at the time, was leaving her apartment in a London suburb when she was attacked by a stranger waiting for her with a cup of sulfuric acid.





Stefan Sylvestre threw the cup of corrosive liquid on Piper, burning the skin on her face, neck, chest and hands. She was also left blinded in one eye.





Sylvestre was asked by Piper's former boyfriend, Danny Lynch, to throw the acid on her face because she ended their short relationship.





To make matters worse, two days before the attack, Piper was raped by Lynch in a London hotel room after ending the partnership.





"It wasn't a random attack and there was a motive if you like," Piper told CNN's Becky Anderson on Connect the World.





Meanwhile Piper's parents were called by the police to tell them what had happened. "I can remember going 'not her face, please not her face'," Piper's mother Diane wrote on The Katie Piper Foundation web site.





"I knew if anything happened to her face as far as she was concerned it would be the end of everything."





Piper spent nearly two months in hospital and was placed in an induced coma for 10 days.





The attack also severely damaged Piper's throat and she was forced to be fed through a tube in her stomach.





Today, Piper now wears a special plastic pressure mask for 23 hours a day, in an effort to flatten her scars.





"You can see looking at me that it physically changed my appearance, but it goes a lot deeper than that."





"It changed my life as I know it -- it changed my career, it changed my relationships with people.





Lynch was found guilty of inciting the acid attack in October 2008 and subsequently convicted on the rape charge in April 2009. He was given two life sentences, and will serve at least 16 years in jail.





Sylvestre received a 12-year sentence for throwing the acid.





With her attackers behind bars, Piper is determined to get her life back on track and rebuild what she can.





"Time was a great healer and I've managed to not get my old life back, but I can  rebuild. And I think I've stayed focused and determined."





"It was an attack with the intent to destroy me, and I decided that it wouldn't destroy me and that I would still have a life. I try to stay positive."





Piper has told her story around the world and has started the Katie Piper Foundation to help raise money for burns victims across the UK.





Since the attack Piper has made remarkable progress.





Surgeons took the drastic measure to remove the skin from Piper's entire face and use a skin substitute called Matriderm to re-build the foundations before grafting skin from her back and buttock onto her face -- it's the first operation of its kind to be done in one operation, according to Piper's Web site.





Piper plans to continue her work raising money for burn victims and to help spread the message that there is life after difficult challenges.





"I think it's important to try and set yourself many goals -- try to take each day as it comes," Piper said.





"I think there's a lot of strength that can be gathered from support."

***

(CNN) -- The U.S. State Department said Sunday it was "deeply disturbed" at the deportation of 20 Uyghur asylum seekers from Cambodia back to China.



The deportation "will affect Cambodia's relationship with the U.S. and its international standing," said acting State Department spokesman Gordon Duguid in a statement.



It occurred on Saturday at the request of China, the U.S. said.



"The United States is deeply concerned about the welfare of these individuals, who had sought protection under international law," Duguid said.



"We are also deeply disturbed that the Cambodian government decided to forcibly remove the group without the benefit of a credible process for determining refugee status and without appropriate participation by the Office of the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees."



Kitty McKinsey, a coordinator with the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees agency in Asia, told CNN on Saturday that the refugees had been seeking asylum. China's northwestern region was wracked by ethnic violence between Han Chinese and Uyghur Muslims earlier this year, and the Uyghurs fled to Cambodia to escape the unrest.



McKinsey said the UNHCR considers the deportation a breach of international law, and Uyghur human rights activists have expressed concern about the move. The Uyghur American Association also expressed concern in a statement.



The 20 were held in handcuffs and leg shackles and were not given any food to eat on Friday, according to the association. They were part of a group of 22 Uyghurs seeking refuge in Cambodia, all of whom were under UNHCR protection when taken into custody.



"The United States strongly opposed Cambodia's involuntary return of these asylum seekers before their claims have been heard," the State Department said.



Duguid urged the Chinese government to "uphold international norms and to ensure transparency, due process and proper treatment of persons in its territory" now that the Uyghurs have been returned.



Cambodian and Chinese officials could not immediately be reached for a response. But a Cambodian state media outlet, Agence Kampuchea Presse, reported that Chinese Vice President Xi Jinping is to arrive in Cambodia on Sunday for a three-day visit.

***

(CNN) -- Atlanta Falcons quarterback Michael Vick is expected to plead guilty to federal conspiracy charges involving an illegal dogfighting operation, according to one of his attorneys.



Leah Perry, who sent this photo of son Bobby and dog Rosie, thinks Vick should not be allowed back on the field.



The plea deal may include prison time, but the NFL has not yet decided what football sanctions, if any, it should impose on Vick, a spokesman said.



We asked CNN.com readers whether they thought Vick would -- or should -- play professional football again as well as their opinions on the case.  Below is a selection of those responses, some of which have been edited for length and clarity.



Stephanie King of Arlington, Washington Michael Vick is a disgrace. For anyone thinking he should be let off easy for admitting his guilt -- think again. The only reason he did that was because he knew the evidence against him was so great. Remember only shortly ago he was stating vehemently that he "only owned" the property and had no idea what was going on there. It wasn't until the eyewitness accounts were brought to light that he "apologized."



One cannot be "sorry" for torturing and killing animals. As you know it's been proven that those with the ability to do so also have a stronger chance of being abusive to humans. How can we allow someone like that to be a role model for children? If we do we're degrading our society and shame on us.



Patricia Reese of Paola, Kansas Yes, I think Mr. Vick should be allowed to play football again. He is a talented individual and it would be a shame to waste that talent. I also believe he should be able to rebuild his life. However, as part of his restitution to society, I believe he should contribute at least 40% of his salary for what could have potentially been his maximum jail sentence to the Humane Society to help abused and abandoned animals.



Debbie Clayton of Greensboro, North Carolina He should never be allowed to play [in the] NFL or earn a dime associated with the NFL. He should be made to work so many hours per week, every week, at minimum wage at an Animal Shelter.



Jeff Wise of Atlanta, Georgia Why not give him a chance to play again? Seriously how many chances has the NFL given to Ricky Williams? Smoking pot is against the law, but he's been given a number of chances, and STILL isn't banned from the NFL!



Jeremy Montgomery of Mount Laurel, New Jersey I think that Vick should not be allowed to step on the field again and any endorsement deals revoked. What he did was reprehensible. He is in a spotlight where he should be held at a higher standard for a role model.



Josh Hebert of Loganville, Georgia He should take whatever punishment our government gives him, but when he has done his time (if he does do time) he should be able to continue playing football. The charges against him are not football related in any way.



Angela Ziegler of Cleveland, Ohio The NFL needs to "step up to the plate" and be the man that Michael Vick is not. Allowing him in their league gives a signal that animal abuse is OK with them. Remember Jeffrey Dahmer started as an animal abuser! Want him as your role model or a spokesman?



Kelly Koch of Holland, Michigan The NFL and all sponsors should refrain from any future contact with Michael Vick. I, for one, will boycott those with future dealings with him.



John Robinson of Redmond, Washington Pro athletes are constantly getting in trouble with the law. Unless we make a policy that all players who are convicted of a felony are banned from the league, then Vick should be allowed to play after a suspension.



Randy Jonson of Stamford, Connecticut Until I know the depth of the gambling angle it's hard to be certain. Dog fighting is brutal but if it's only dog fighting/killing, he should get whatever the feds give him and be able to return to

***

(Mental Floss) -- People have been eating pickles ever since the Mesopotamians started making them way back in 2400 B.C.E. Here are some even more important things you should know about them.



Pickles have gotten credit for health and beauty and winning football games.



1. In the Pacific Islands, natives pickle their foods in holes in the ground lined with banana leaves, and use them as food reserves in case of storms. The pickles are so valuable that they've become part of the courting process, helping a man prove he'll be able to provide for a woman. In Fiji, guys can't get a girl without first showing her parents his pickle pits.



2. Cleopatra claimed pickles made her beautiful. (We guess it had more to do with her genes.)



3. The majority of pickle factories in America ferment their pickles in outdoor vats without lids (leaving them subject to insects and bird droppings). But there's a reason. According to food scientists, the sun's direct rays prevent yeast and mold from growing in the brine. Mental Floss: 8 disastrous product names



4. In the Delta region of Mississippi, Kool-Aid pickles have become ridiculously popular with kids. The recipe's simple: take some dill pickles, cut them in half, and then soak them in super strong Kool-Aid for more than a week. According to the New York Times, the sweet vinegar snacks are known to sell out at fairs and delicatessens, and generally go for $.50 to a $1.



5. Not everyone loves a sweet pickle. In America, dill pickles are twice as popular as the sweet variety.



6. The Department of Agriculture estimates that the average American eats 8.5 lbs of pickles a year.



7. When the Philadelphia Eagles thrashed the Dallas Cowboys in sweltering heat in September 2000, many of the players attributed their win to one thing: guzzling down immense quantities of ice-cold pickle juice. Mental Floss: 31 unbelievable high school mascots



8. If it weren't for pickles, Christopher Columbus might never have "discovered" America. In his famous 1492 voyage, Columbus rationed pickles to his sailors to keep them from getting scurvy. He even grew cucumbers during a pit stop in Haiti to restock for the rest of the voyage.



9. Speaking of people who get credit for discovering America, when he wasn't drawing maps and trying to steal Columbus' thunder, Amerigo Vespucci was a well-known pickle-merchant.



10. Napoleon was also a big fan of pickle power. In fact, he put up the equivalent of $250,000 as a prize to whoever could figure out the best way to pickle and preserve foods for his troops.



11. During the 1893 Chicago World's Fair, H. J. Heinz used pick-shaped pins to lure customers to his out of the way booth. By the end of the fair, he'd given out lots of free food, and over 1,000,000 pickle pins.



12. Berrien Springs, Michigan, has dubbed itself the Christmas Pickle Capital of the World. In early December, they host a parade, led by the Grand Dillmeister, who tosses out fresh pickles to parade watchers. Mental Floss: Curious, bizarre and storied state symbols



For more mental_floss articles, visit mentalfloss.com

***

Baghdad, Iraq (CNN) -- A series of bomb attacks disrupted voting as the polls opened in Iraq's national elections Thursday, leaving a total of 12 people dead and another 47 wounded.





There had been warnings of insurgent attacks around the vote, which is intended to install a 325-member parliament and select Iraq's next government.





Early voting began Thursday for those who will be unable to cast their ballots in Sunday's election, including thousands of army and security personnel.





In the first of three attacks, five civilians were killed and 22 injured when a bomb went off in the Hurriya neighborhood of northern Baghdad, an interior ministry official said.





The bomb had been placed about 500 meters (546 yards) away from a polling center that was going to be used Sunday, but was not open for Thursday's early voting, the official said. It was not clear whether the polling center was the target, as hundreds of them will be open Sunday, most within 500 meters of each other.





Are you voting in Iraq? Send us your story, images





In the al-Mansour district of western Baghdad, at least three people were killed and 25 wounded in a suicide bombing outside a polling center, an interior ministry official said. Most of the casualties were Iraqi army soldiers, the official said.





The suicide bomber struck the forces as they were assembling outside the polling center to vote, the official said.





The bomber was disguised as an Iraqi police officer and stopped before reaching the polling center, according to a U.S. military statement.





A second suicide attacker struck another Iraqi army gathering on its way to vote in the Bab Al-Muadham area of central Baghdad, the ministry said. Four soldiers were killed and 10 others wounded in the attack.





Thousands of army and security personnel are among those taking part in Thursday's voting, which is for those who will unable to cast their ballots Sunday. Others voting Thursday include detainees, hospital staff and patients.





As many as 700,000 security forces are expected to vote, according to the U.N. Assistance Mission to Iraq.





There was heavy security around polling centers Thursday, with Iraqi forces blocking streets around them and not allowing any vehicles in.





At one polling center, voters and personnel entering on foot had to go through a number of body searches. Iraqi Air Force helicopters have been active in the skies all day and snipers can be seen on rooftops near polling centers.





A public holiday began Thursday and will run until Monday because of the elections.





U.S. and Iraqi officials had warned of expected violence ahead of the vote.





On Wednesday, three suicide attacks in Baquba, northeast of the capital, killed at least 33 people and wounded dozens more.





It is Iraq's fifth nationwide vote since 2003, but only the second for a full four-year-term parliament with its 325 seats.





"The conduct and outcome of the election will be the most decisive moment for Iraqis' future since 2003," Ad Melkert, the head of the U.N. mission in Iraq, said Monday.





Authorities on Iraqi state television announced special measures for the days surrounding the vote. Since Monday, there has been a ban on motorcycles and bicycles in Baghdad until further notice, and a two-day ban on any vehicles in cities begins Sunday, they said.





Provincial borders will be sealed, preventing movements between provinces, from Saturday to Monday. And international borders and all airports will be shut from midnight Saturday.





A curfew will be in place in cities from midnight to 5 a.m. on Saturday, Sunday and Monday, officials said. Civilians may not carry weapons on those days, they said.





CNN's Jomana Karadsheh and Yousif Bassil contributed to this report.

***

ROME, Italy (CNN)  -- The murder trial of American student Amanda Knox in the death of her housemate two years ago resumed Monday in Italy after a summer break.



The trial of American college student Amanda Knox, 22, resumes Monday, September 14.



Knox, 22, and her Italian ex-boyfriend Raffaele Sollecito also face charges of sexual assault.



They are accused of killing British student Meredith Kercher, Knox's housemate in Perugia, a scenic university town north of Rome.



Kercher, 20, died in what prosecutors called a "drug-fueled sex game." She was found half-undressed in bed, with a stab wound to her neck on November 2, 2007.



Knox and Sollecito were both present at Monday's court session, Kercher's attorney Francesco Maresca said. Sollecito's defense attorneys requested the annulment of DNA analysis, which investigators say shows Sollecito's genetic material on the clasp of the victim's bra. The judge rejected the request.



The next hearing is scheduled on Friday, Maresca said.



Knox, from Seattle, Washington, took the stand in June and testified that she was not at the girls' villa the night her roommate died, which authorities think was the evening of November 1.



She said she was visiting her then-boyfriend, Sollecito, at his home, where the two watched a movie, smoked marijuana, had sex and went to bed.



On her return to their villa the next morning, Knox said, she noticed "strange things," such as the front door left open, dried blood in the bathroom sink and a locked door to Kercher's room.



When Knox returned to Sollecito's house, he suggested they call police in case the house had been burgled, she said. Police found Kercher's body in the house.



Prosecutors say evidence places the defendants at the scene. They also said the suspects gave investigators confusing and contradictory statements about their whereabouts the night Kercher died.



Knox said she gave conflicting answers at the interrogation on November 6 because of police pressure and her confused state.



"When I would say that I was with Raffaele, they would say, 'You are a liar,' and they repeated this," she said in June, speaking about the police. "'You will go to prison for 30 years. ... You must remember.'"



During the trial, she said police had slapped her on the head during questioning, a charge she had made before.



The case has attracted worldwide media attention. During her testimony in June, cameras were barred from the courtroom because the prosecutor said he wanted to avoid sensationalism.



A third person, Ivory Coast native Rudy Hermann Guede, was convicted of murder in the case in October and was sentenced to 30 years in prison. He is appealing his conviction.