PARIS, France -- AC Milan's Brazilian midfielder Kaka has been named European player of the year, lifting France Football's Ballon d'Or award.



Kaka has already claimed all of the game's major prizes.



His success comes two years after his fellow countryman, Barcelona's Ronaldinho, claimed the award



The 25-year-old Kaka was a major factor in AC Milan's triumphant Champions League campaign.



The runner-up was Manchester United's Portuguese winger Cristiano Ronaldo with Barcelona's Argentinian midfielder Lionel Messi finishing third.



"This is very special for me - it culminates an astonishing year for me," Kaka said.



"It's the top prize around and the only way to win something like this is to play for a team like AC Milan. It's great to be part of a team that wins."



At 25 years old, he has already won all the game's major prizes, individually and collectively.



He was part of Brazil's 2002 World Cup winning squad, although he was limited to just 19 minutes as a substitute against Costa Rica.



He was top scorer in last season's Champions League, helping Milan to avenge their loss to Liverpool in the 2005 final.



He won the Italian domestic title in his first season at Milan having joined from Brazilians Sao Paulo for$ 8.5 million, a sum that Milan president Silvio Berlusconi then described as peanuts. E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- China's space program has really taken off in the last six years.



Back to Earth: Yang Liwei faces the cameras on returning to Earth in 2003.



In 2003 Yang Liwei became a national hero when he became the first Chinese man in space, followed five years later by Zhai Zhigang who became the first "taikonaut" to make a spacewalk.



"The moment I stepped out of the hatch and entered space, the sensation of completely becoming one with space was a feeling I had never felt before on Earth," Zhai told CNN.



"I deliberately looked into outer space, looking past my toes and deep into outer space. The differing brightness and distances of the celestial bodies really brought out the deepness of outer space. The vast , boundless expanse of outer space stirred my soul."



View the photo gallery to learn more about the history of China's space program.



From out of this world moments to their place in Chinese history, these two pioneering spacemen tell CNN's John Vause about their missions, how they had prepared for the worst should things go wrong and if China and other nations with the moon in their sights are creating a new international space race.

***

BAGHDAD, Iraq (CNN) -- At least seven Iraqis were killed and 23 wounded when a bomb exploded near a Shiite holy shrine in northern Baghdad on Wednesday morning, an Interior Ministry official said.



The Imam Musa al-Kadhim shrine in Baghdad, Iraq, seen in 2007, is holy to Shiite Muslims.



The bomb detonated near the Imam Musa al-Kadhim shrine in the Kadhimiya district, the official said.



The Kadhimiya shrine is one of the holiest shrines for Shiite Muslims around the world.



On Tuesday, a parked car bomb killed at least nine people and wounded more than a dozen others, also in Kadhimiya.



This is the third straight day of deadly attacks in the capital, striking mostly Shiite areas.



On Monday, seven bombings in Baghdad left at least 32 people killed and more than 130 wounded.



Iraqi officials have warned that they expect a rise in attacks. The country's president and his deputies urged security forces to intensify their efforts to secure the country.



The government has blamed the ousted Baath party and al Qaeda in Iraq for Monday's attacks, saying they were meant to create sectarian divisions.



The U.S. military also pointed the finger at al Qaeda.



"The nature of the attacks and targets are consistent with past al Qaeda in Iraq attacks. We see this as coordinated attack by terrorists against predominantly Shia targets that they gauge as vulnerable to instigate sectarian violence," the U.S. military said.

***

(CNN) -- The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame on Monday welcomed its newest inductees:Jimmy Cliff, ABBA, Genesis, The Hollies and the Stooges.





Other inductees this year include individual recipients of the Ahmet Ertegun Award -- record executive David Geffen and songwriters Jeff Barry, Otis Blackwell, Ellie Greenwich, Barry Mann, Mort Shuman, Jesse Stone and Cynthia Weil.





The induction ceremony was being held Monday night at the Waldorf Astoria Hotel in New York.





The inductees "represent a great cross-section of artists that define the broad spectrum and history of rock 'n' roll and people that have contributed immeasurably to our business," Joel Peresman, president and CEO of the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Foundation, said when they were named last year.





The inductees were chosen by a voting committee of the foundation. Artists are eligible 25 years after their first recording is released.





An exhibit featuring all the inductees opened Monday at the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and Museum, in Cleveland, Ohio. Their stage outfits, instruments, handwritten lyrics, photographs and more will be on display through March 14, 2011.





The museum -- which says it "exists to collect, preserve and interpret the impact the Rock has made on our world" -- features seven floors of exhibition space, spanning 150,000 square feet.

***

(CNN) -- Tests detected low levels of radioactivity on 17 U.S. Navy helicopter crew members when they returned to the USS Ronald Reagan after conducting disaster relief missions in Japan, the military said Monday.





No further contamination was detected after the crew members washed with soap and water, the Navy said.





In addition, the Navy said the U.S. 7th Fleet has temporarily repositioned its ships and planes away from the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant after detecting low-level contamination in the air and on its planes in the area, the Navy said.





One ship was operating about 100 miles northeast of the power plant when "airborne radioactivity" was detected, the Navy said.





The Navy's statement, however, provided some perspective, noting that the maximum potential radiation dose received by personnel when the ship passed through the area was "less than the radiation exposure received from about one month of exposure to natural background radiation from sources such as rocks, soil, and the sun."





On Sunday, the USS Ronald Reagan started delivering aid in the coastal regions of Japan's Miyagi prefecture.





Crew members, in conjunction with the Japan Maritime Self Defense Forces, conducted 20 sorties delivering aid pallets.





Eight U.S. and Japanese helicopters were used to distribute the pallets, according to Sgt. Maj. Stephen Valley of U.S. Forces Japan.





Workers are scrambling to cool down fuel rods and prevent a full meltdown in three reactors at the earthquake-hit plant. Radioactive steam has been released, intentionally to lessen growing pressure in the reactors.

***

Tehran, Iran (CNN)  -- Iran plans to launch satellites into orbit early in the new year, its defense minister told the semi-official Fars news agency Wednesday.



"This satellite, which was built by Iranian scientists, is a big step for the continued presence of Iran in space and for taking advantage of the opportunities offered in this field," Gen. Ahmad Vahidi said.



The launches of the Tolou satellites -- which means "sunrise" in Farsi -- are scheduled to take place in February and March, according to Fars.



Iran launched its first satellite, Omid, in February, an event that President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad hailed at the time as a "source of pride" for the Islamic republic.



The U.S. State Department expressed "grave concern" over the launch.



"Developing a space launch vehicle that could ... put a satellite into orbit could possibly lead to development of a ballistic missile system," State Department deputy spokesman Robert Wood told reporters. "So that's of grave concern to us."



The Pentagon called the February launch "clearly a concern of ours."



"Although this appears to be satellite, there are dual-use capabilities that could be applied to missiles, and that's a concern to us and everybody in region," Defense Department spokesman Geoff Morrell said at the time.



For Iran, the planned launches are an important step for its military.



"Using these modern technologies, Iran's armed forces are capable of catching the enemies off guard, identifying their software and hardware potential and depriving the enemy of movement and maneuverability," Vahidi told Fars.



The development comes as the international community considers additional sanctions against Iran should Tehran not answer questions about its nuclear program. Western powers fear Iran is intent on developing nuclear weapons, an allegation Tehran denies.

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN) -- Liv Tyler doesn't like to be bothered by her agents at night. But it's a good thing she took their call pitching her "The Incredible Hulk."



Liv Tyler plays Betty Ross, a colleague of Edward Norton's Bruce Banner, in "The Incredible Hulk."



"My agent called me one night ... I had just put [son] Milo to bed. It was like 9 o'clock at night, and I always get grumpy with them when they call me really late," she told CNN. "They said, 'Marvel would like to fly you to Los Angeles tomorrow. Will you get on a plane to come and meet for 'The Hulk'? And I said I can't come tomorrow, but I can come the next day."



The flight turned out to be well worth it -- though Tyler said she was discombobulated by the speed of it all.



"I went and met with [director] Louis [Leterrier] and they offered me the part that day," she said. "I was kind of floored because it just happened so quickly and I didn't get to read the script. ... [But] it was kind of a no-brainer."



In the new "Hulk," "The Lord of the Rings" actress plays Betty Ross, a former colleague of scientist and Hulk alter ego Bruce Banner (Edward Norton). She said working on the film brought back memories of her childhood watching the TV show starring Bill Bixby and Lou Ferrigno. (Ferrigno has a cameo in the new film.)



"I loved the TV show when I was a kid," she said. "I used to watch it all the time with my mom. It was our favorite show."



Tyler, 30, said that she felt a tremendous sense of responsibility to the "Hulk" mythology, particularly since a 2003 film on the character met with mixed reviews.  Watch Tyler, Norton and Leterrier on the latest "Hulk" »



"Well, a lot of people would say -- even I said -- 'Oh, they're making "The Hulk"?' Didn't they do that already?" she said.



But she added, "The fans love this so much ... and there's so much detail to the story, I always feel quite stressed about that, like I really want to do the part justice. ... I definitely feel that responsibility and want to do the best job that I can."



CNN's KJ Matthews contributed to this report.

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN) -- For most people life can be boiled down to a few major decisions and a list of truly memorable events.



Eric Bana and Rachel McAdams hope love conquers all in "The Time Traveler's Wife."



Typically, these are first words, first steps, graduations, births, weddings and -- of course -- marriage proposals.



More than a few of these milestone moments take place in the new romantic drama "The Time Traveler's Wife."



Of all of them, perhaps the most memorable is a scene in which Henry DeTamble (Eric Bana) asks Clare Abshire (Rachel McAdams) to be his wife.



It's a complicated request because Henry, a kind man, also has the uncanny and often unfortunate ability to be transported suddenly and unexpectedly from one time period to another, leaving Clare on her own.



It's a peculiar set of circumstances that would give most women understandable hesitation when contemplating a marriage partner. But Clare is a woman in love, an emotion that tends to trump all others.  Watch how Bana and McAdams found humor in the scene »



Bana and McAdams sit down with CNN to discuss this scene, its comedic elements and what it means to both their characters.

***

(CNN) -- Ferrari president Luca di Montezemolo expects the Italian team to improve on their record of just one grand prix win in 2011 when the Formula One season resumes later this month.





Montezemolo watched his charges struggle in the opening rounds of this year's championship, with Fernando Alonso's victory at the British Grand Prix in July giving Ferrari their only maximum-points haul of the campaign so far.





But the Maranello-based outfit have experienced an upturn in form of late, with two-time world champion Alonso finishing on the podium at each of the last four races -- including a third-place finish at Sunday's Hungarian Grand Prix.





Despite recent results Spaniard Alonso, 30, still trails current standings leader and reigning world champion Sebastian Vettel of Red Bull by 89 points and sits fourth in the drivers' championship.





Button: "Red Bull should be worried"





"I can see the right spirit in the team after a very difficult start to the season," Montezemolo, 63, told the team's official web site.





"[Team principal Stefano] Domenicali and his crew seem very determined, concentrating fully on their tasks for the second part of the year which I am sure will feature Ferrari in the role of a key player.





"I expect we will pick up wins to add to the important and historically very significant victory achieved at Silverstone," he added.





Latest F1 standings after the Hungarian Grand Prix





Formula One is at the start of a three-week mid-season break, with teams required to cease work on their cars for part of that time.





The 2011 season will resume with the Belgian Grand Prix at Spa on August 28.

***

(CNN)  -- A man dressed as a priest caught at Amsterdam's airport with three kilos of cocaine under his vestments claimed to police that his packages contained "holy sand", Dutch police said.



Security officials conducting a normal security check at Schiphol airport last year.



Police stopped the man at Amsterdam's Schiphol airport as he was transiting on a flight from South America, Robert Van Aapel, a spokesman for the Dutch Royal Military Police told CNN by phone Saturday.



"He refused to be searched saying that he was a religious person and it was not allowed," Van Aapel said.



"However, this is normal procedure so our officers insisted. They asked him again and after the second time they carried out the search and discovered the man had packs strapped to his legs below his priest's clothes. He told us they contained holy sand," he said.



He said the man, who is aged around 40 and a Bolivian national, was arrested Thursday after arriving in to the airport on a flight from Lima, Peru. He was attempting to transit on a flight to Milan when he was apprehended with the cocaine, worth around €105,000 ($155,000).



The Bolivian appeared in court Friday on charges of drug smuggling, Van Aapel said.



Dutch police are trying to establish if the man is a real priest after he claimed to be a senior member of the clergy in the Bolivian capital La Paz, he added. E-mail to a friend

***

ORLANDO, Florida (CNN) -- The mother of missing Florida toddler Caylee Anthony was arrested and charged Friday with forgery, fraudulent use of personal information and petty theft, the Orange County Sheriff's Department said.



Casey Anthony was taken into custody Friday night at her parents' home in Orlando, Florida.



The charges relate to Casey Anthony's use of "some monies and checks in an account that did not belong to her and she knew that," Orange County Capt. Angelo Nieves said.



Orange County Sheriff's Department officers ushered a handcuffed Anthony through a crowd of protesters that had gathered outside her parents' Orlando home.



The protesters cheered as Anthony -- wearing a T-shirt with Caylee's picture and the words "Have you seen me?" -- was taken to a unmarked police car.



The dramatic scene played out live on CNN Headline News' "Nancy Grace."  Watch Casey Anthony being taken into custody »



Anthony had been out on bail after being charged with child neglect, making false official statements and obstructing a criminal investigation into her daughter's disappearance. On Thursday, a bounty hunter who had posted bond for Anthony said he planned to revoke the bond.  Watch bounty hunter Leonard Padilla explain why he wants to revoke bond »



The new charges carry an initial $3,000 bail, Nieves said.



Anthony reported her 3-year-old daughter missing in July, a month after the last known sighting of her.



Law enforcement sources said DNA evidence suggested that a strand of hair in the trunk of a car linked to Casey Anthony was Caylee's.



Nieves confirmed reports that tests had "indicated human decomposition was present and located in the defendant's vehicle."



After holding onto "high hopes" that Caylee could be found alive, Nieves said Friday, "that hope is somewhat diminished."



Anthony told police that a babysitter kidnapped Caylee, but police found inconsistencies in her story, according to police reports.



Police learned of the car from Anthony's mother, Cindy Anthony. At that time, Cindy Anthony told authorities that it smelled as if a dead body had been in the trunk.



Cindy Anthony has since said she believes that her granddaughter is alive.

***

(CNN) -- A man died after his car plunged 600 feet off the edge of the Grand Canyon's South Rim, authorities said Tuesday.



About 5 million people visit the Grand Canyon in Arizona each year.



The Arizona park's regional communications center received several reports of a car driving off the edge about 6 a.m. Monday, according to a written statement.



"Upon arriving at the scene, investigators found tire tracks leading to the edge behind the Thunderbird Lodge and received reports of a single occupant in a blue passenger car driving over the edge," the statement said.



Rescue personnel descended on ropes and found the vehicle about 600 feet into the canyon. The man's body was recovered shortly afterward, the statement said.



The incident occurred near the El Tovar hotel in a village on the canyon's South Rim, park spokeswoman Shannan Marcak said.



Authorities have not ruled the death a suicide, she said. "It has not been ruled anything at this time."



The statement said the National Park Service is investigating. Typically, Marcak said, such investigations take at least a few days.



The man has not been identified, she said.



Marcak said that within the past five years, she knows of only one other time a car was driven off the edge of the canyon.



The Monday statement said plans were being made to retrieve the vehicle and the body.



The Grand Canyon, a world famous landmark, receives close to 5 million visitors yearly, according to the National Park Service Web site.

***

(CNN) -- An ancient race that lived 2,700 years ago in the Gobi Desert may have been among the first to use cannabis for medical or religious purposes.

Researchers believe an ancient Gushi shaman may have consumed or burned pot for medical or religious purposes.

Nearly two pounds of the plant was found stashed in the tomb of a Gushi shaman. It was high in the chemical compounds that provide its psychoactive properties.

"It had evidence of the chemical attributes of cannabis used as a drug," said Dr. Ethan Russo, an author of a study published in the Journal of Experimental Botany. "It could have been for pain control. It could have been for other medicinal properties. It could have been used as an aid to divination."

The Gushi people were a Caucasian race with light hair and blue eyes who likely migrated thousands of years ago from the steppes of Russia to what is now China. A nomadic people, they were accomplished horsemen and archers.

Chinese archaeologists excavating a network of 2,500 tombs near the town of Turpan in the Xinjiang-Uighur Autonomous Region unearthed the shaman's grave, which contained the cannabis, along with a trove of artifacts such as bridles, archery equipment and a rare harp.

The shaman is thought to have been about 45 years old when he died. Many of the bodies recovered in the area were found in an incredibly well-preserved, almost mummified condition. The shaman, however, was a skeleton.

"The deceased was laid out on the bottom of this tomb on a little bier," Russo said. "This individual seemed to be very high status because of the variety and quality of the grave goods, including the equestrian equipment, the archery equipment and the large amount of cannabis."

Russo said no pipe for smoking the cannabis was found in the shaman's tomb. Researchers think he might have eaten the cannabis or possibly put it on a burning fire to create fumes.

They don't think it was used to make hemp clothing or rope, as some other early cultures did. Genetic analysis of the plant suggests it was cultivated rather than gathered from the wild.

This find is not the first or the oldest example of ancient people using cannabis, but it may be the best studied.

"There may have been older finds of cannabis, but not with this level of scientific investigation attached to them," Russo said.

***

(CNN) -- Two Italians, a Dane, a German, a Frenchman and a Brit walk into a space station... or will, in 2013, if all goes according to European Space Agency plans.



Europe's six new astronauts hope to join their American counterparts on the Internation Space Station.



The six new astronauts named Wednesday were chosen from more than 8,400 candidates, and are the first new ESA astronauts since 1992, the space agency said in a statement.



They include two military test pilots, one fighter pilot and one commercial pilot, plus an engineer and a physicist.



"This is a very important day for human spaceflight in Europe," said Simonetta Di Pippo, Director of Human Spaceflight at ESA.



"These young men and women are the next generation of European space explorers. They have a fantastic career ahead, which will put them right on top of one of the ultimate challenges of our time: going back to the Moon and beyond as part of the global exploration effort."



Humans have not walked on the moon since 1972, just over three years after the first manned mission to Earth's nearest neighbor.



The six will begin space training in Germany, with an eye to being ready for future missions to the International Space Station and beyond in four years.



They are: Samantha Cristoforetti of Italy, a fighter pilot with degrees in engineering and aeronautical sciences; Alexander Gerst, a German researcher with degrees in physics and earth science; Andreas Mogensen, a Danish engineer with the private space firm HE Space Operations; Luca Parmitano of Italy, an Air Force pilot with a degree in aeronautical sciences; Timothy Peake, an English test pilot with the British military; and Frenchman Thomas Pesquet, an Air France pilot who previously worked as an engineer at the French space agency.

***

(CNN) -- The driver who collided with a vehicle driven by Olympic swimmer Michael Phelps will be cited for failure to stop at a red light, police said Friday.



Michael Phelps' black Cadillac Escalade collided with another vehicle at an intersection, police say.



But the gold medal winner will also be cited -- for failure to present a valid driver's license and for failure to establish a Maryland residency and obtain a Maryland driver's license -- in connection with his involvement Thursday in a car wreck, police said Friday.



At the scene, he presented a Michigan driver's license, which police determined "was not valid," said Baltimore, Maryland, police spokesman Anthony Guglielmi.



Phelps was driving one of two vehicles that collided at an intersection about 9 p.m., Guglielmi said.



The female driver of the second vehicle was transported to a local hospital as a precaution, Guglielmi said. Phelps and his two passengers were uninjured.



Video from CNN affiliate WBAL showed Phelps' black Cadillac Escalade at the crash site.  Watch wrecked cars at the intersection »



Phelps won a record eight gold medals at the 2008 Olympic Games in Beijing, China. Earlier this year, he was suspended from organized competitive swimming after a photo of him holding a bong -- a device commonly used to smoke marijuana -- surfaced in February.



CNN's Scott Spoerry contributed to this report.

***

ISTANBUL, Turkey (CNN)  -- The governments of Armenia and Turkey will sign a peace agreement in Zurich on Saturday that would normalize relations after nearly a century of animosity between the neighboring nations, the Swiss government said Friday.



The Swiss-mediated peace deal would also open the border between the countries, which has been shut since 1993.



The signing ceremony comes more than a month after Armenia and Turkey announced they had agreed to start six weeks of "internal political consultations" on two protocols aimed at establishing diplomatic and bilateral relations.



The Swiss-mediated peace deal would also open the border between the countries, which has been shut since 1993. The border was closed after Turkey objected to Armenia's war with Turkish ally Azerbaijan over the disputed territory of Nagorno-Karabagh. Neither country has an embassy in the other's capital.



Turkish-Armenian relations have often been overshadowed by the dispute over the massacre of ethnic Armenians in the final days of the Ottoman Empire, more than 90 years ago. Armenians accuse Ottoman Turks of committing genocide, killing more then a million Armenians starting in 1915. Modern-day Turkey vehemently rejects the allegations.



The proposed protocols for normalizing relations call for creating a committee of international experts to research archives and "restore mutual confidence between the two nations." There is no mention of the disputed territory of Karabagh, which Armenian troops have controlled since the 1993 Armenian-Azerbaijan war.



But the success of the protocols is still uncertain, as the parliaments of both countries still must ratify the agreement.



A senior U.S. State Department official -- authorized to brief reporters without attribution because of diplomatic sensitivities -- said the situation remains "difficult."



"There's opposition both in Turkey and in Armenia," the senior official said Thursday, "but both governments realize ultimately it's in their interest to have normalized relations and an open border after years of tension and the economic isolation, particularly of Armenia."



U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton will attend the signing, along with dignitaries from several other countries, including the European Union, according to the Swiss government.

***

(The Frisky)  -- Virgin Airlines heir Sam Branson was hanging out with Andy Roddick, and couldn't resist challenging him to a bet.



Andy Roddick played left-handed against Sam Branson and still won.



Branson wagered $150 that he could beat Roddick in a tennis match, as long as the right-handed sports star played with his left hand. Even as a leftie, Roddick cleaned up. They played one set and Branson didn't score a single point.



Since celebrities have so much money to throw around, they often amuse themselves by placing weird bets. Peep a few more who've put their money where their mouth is.



1. George Clooney was so convinced he'd still be childless and unmarried when he hit 40 that in 2001, he bet Nicole Kidman and Michelle Pfeiffer $10,000 each. The two gals just couldn't believe that this hunky dude wouldn't be tied down. But they were wrong. That's $20,000 for bachelor George! The Frisky: They dated? Hollywood's oddest hookups



2. Bruce Willis and Matthew Perry made a bet on the set of "The Whole Nine Yards." Perry allegedly thought the film would open at the top of the charts in the U.S. but Willis wasn't feelin' it.



When Bruce lost, he had to do a cameo on "Friends." Doesn't sound so bad, right? Well, he had to give away all the money he made. The good news is, he gave it to charity. The Frisky: Celebs whose new loves look just like their exes



3. Tobey Maguire and Leonardo DiCaprio each bet $25,000 that the other would become a father first. The Frisky: Hollywood hotties set to play historical figures



When Maguire's fiance had their first kid, the actor had to pay up. He gave DiCaprio the cash, but didn't mind. Cause, uh, he was a dad.



TM & © 2009 TMV, Inc. | All Rights Reserved

***

LOS ANGELES, California (Reuters)  -- "To insure or not to insure?" It isn't Shakespeare, but it is the dramatic question Hollywood filmmakers are asking about Lindsay Lohan following her legal troubles this week.

Lindsay Lohan may still get work after her legal problems are settled, but the cost will be high.

It is an important question, too, because whether companies insure Lohan's future movies may determine whether she will quickly fall off Hollywood's A-list.

But Lohan fans have little to fear because no actor is uninsurable, say underwriting experts. While some producers may balk at conditions for hiring problematic stars, experts say that unless an actor is serving time in prison, even the most volatile can be covered -- albeit at a high cost.

"For a price, anything can be done, although an insurance carrier can make things so unpalatable that at times the makers of the film just won't be interested," said Ross Miller, partner with insurance brokerage D.R. Reiff & Associates Inc.

Lohan's arrest this week in Los Angeles on suspicion of drunken driving and cocaine possession has left Hollywood wondering if the actress, who shot to fame as a child in Disney films like "The Parent Trap," is too risky to cast in a film.  Timeline: Lindsay Lohan's troubles »

It remains to be seen whether her latest relapse and brush with the law will cost her a role in "Poor Things," a film produced by and starring Oscar-winner Shirley MacLaine.  See a gallery of Lohan's films »

A statement was expected early next week on whether the movie, already delayed this spring due to an earlier rehab stint by Lohan, will proceed with or without her.

Insurance experts say the industry has long dealt with similar situations, although they may seem more frequent with the recent heavy media scrutiny of Lohan and fellow troubled party girls Paris Hilton and Britney Spears.

"I don't think it (a problematic artist) is any more of an issue," said Wendy Diaz, entertainment underwriting director at Fireman's Fund Insurance Co., the leading film underwriter. "It's pretty standard year to year."

But Diaz did say the terms for covering Lohan would likely be "serious at this point."

She said Fireman's Fund, in such a case, would likely put in higher deductibles, or ask the star to put their salary into escrow to pay for any losses if production was disrupted.

Last July, a producer on Lohan's last film, "Georgia Rule," scolded her publicly for repeatedly showing up late on the set, costing the movie's makers hundreds of thousands of dollars.

Brian Kingman, a managing director with entertainment insurance broker Aon/Albert G. Ruben said covering situations like Lohan's required a lot of calculation and risk management.

Insurance rates for errant actors can range anywhere from 1 percent to 3 percent of a movie's production budget, which can range from $5 million to $100 million or more, he said.

"Filmmakers fall in love with certain actors for certain roles and my job is to find risk-takers to take on the risk," Kingman said.

He said actors were always required to undergo a medical exam before getting insurance. In certain circumstances, drug screening is conducted and actors are required to provide blood and urine samples. In cases of known drug abuse, "minders" are sometimes required on set to keep an eye on the actor.

Kingman said he had even helped craft policies for actors in the event they risked the possibility of incarceration.

"I have been successful in finding and creating incarceration coverage for certain actors on probation which can be revoked if they break certain rules," he said, citing the case of Robert Downey Jr., another high-profile star with a history of legal, drug and alcohol problems. E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- A high school dropout who stole the identity of a missing South Carolina woman and used it to gain admission to two Ivy League colleges has been arrested, police said Sunday.

Esther Reed, who allegedly used a missing woman's ID to get into colleges, was arrested by U.S. Marshals.

A fugitive for more than a year, Esther Reed was arrested Saturday by U.S. Marshals in suburban Chicago, said Clark Brazier, a spokesman for the police department in Traveler's Rest, South Carolina.

Reed is scheduled to have a bond hearing this week in Illinois. South Carolina authorities are seeking to extradite her on charges of aggravated identity theft and wire fraud.

Reed assumed the identity of Brooke Henson, who was 20 years old when she disappeared more than eight years ago from Travelers Rest, investigators say.

It's unclear how Reed obtained Henson's personal information, but Reed used Henson's identity to take the SAT and GED, and then applied to the schools, said Jon Campbell, a Travelers Rest Police Department investigator who spoke to CNN last year.

Officials at Harvard University and Columbia University have acknowledged that a Brooke Henson was enrolled at their schools, but said privacy laws prevent them from discussing details.

"There's a little relief that goes with [the news of Reed's arrest]," Brooke's aunt Lisa Henson told CNN Sunday. "But [Brooke] is still missing. I'd like to have some answers. I would love to see [Reed] and look her in the eye and say, 'You're a horrible person.' "

Police say they're confident Reed was not involved in Henson's disappearance.

Authorities believe Henson was killed by someone who knew her. However, no body has been found and no arrests have been made.

Henson's family had heard nothing about their missing relative for years until the summer of 2006, when New York City authorities told police in Travelers Rest that they had found her, alive and well, in Manhattan.

The police relayed that message to Henson's family. "I was jumping for joy," said Lisa Henson. "It was incredible."

But the family's joy was short-lived when it was revealed that the woman found was actually Reed.

An ex-boyfriend told CNN that Reed -- posing as Henson -- often bragged about being a world-class chess player who earned a living playing the game competitively.

The man told CNN that he believed her until he challenged her to a game and beat her.

Originally from the tiny town of Townsend, Montana, Reed had been reported missing by her family in 1999, around the same time that Henson disappeared.

In high school in Montana, Reed earned poor grades.

"Esther was the kind of kid who would have been invisible," her English teacher James Therriault said. "If you didn't take pains to notice her presence." E-mail to a friend

CNN's Gary Tuchman and Ashley Fantz contributed to this report.

***

ATLANTA, Georgia (CNN) -- Sixty-four cases of measles have been diagnosed in the United States this year, the most in seven years, according to the Center for Disease Control and Prevention.



Measles is a respiratory disease whose familiar symptom is red blotches on the skin.



In all but one of the cases, the people who contracted measles had not been vaccinated. Some were too young to have gotten the shots, which are administered from 12 to 15 months of age.



The CDC released the statistics Thursday to "serve as a reminder that measles can and still does occur in the U.S. Ongoing measles virus transmission was declared eliminated in the U.S. in 2000, but the risk of cases and outbreaks from imported disease remains," the organization said in a news release.  Interactive: More about measles »



In 54 of this year's cases the victims imported the measles from other countries, the CDC said.



Dr. Anne Schuchat, the director of the CDC's National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, said many of the imported cases came from European nations and Israel.  Watch more on the measles outbreak »



"Many people have forgot about measles in the United States," she said Schuchat at a news conference Thursday. "It is very important for travelers heading off to Europe to make sure their immunizations are up to date."



The cases were reported in nine states, it said, and cases are being treated in Wisconsin, Arizona, Michigan and New York.



Measles is a viral disease that can be deadly if not treated. The 64 patients ranged in age from 5 months to 71 years. Fourteen patients were hospitalized but no deaths were reported. E-mail to a friend

***

1. "Für Elise"

Bob Dylan wrote "It Ain't Me, Babe" for Joan Baez.

Written by: Ludwig van Beethoven

Written for: Some girl probably not named Elise. In fact, as far as most historians can tell, Beethoven didn't even know an Elise. Instead, the song was originally titled "Bagatelle in A minor" based on some handwritten notation a Beethoven researcher claimed to have seen on a now-lost copy of the sheet music.

Further complicating things, Beethoven had hideous handwriting -- to the point that some scholars speculate the song was actually written "for Therese," as in Therese Malfatti, one of several women who turned down a marriage proposal from the notoriously lovesick maestro.

2. "Philadelphia Freedom"

Written by: Elton John & Bernie Taupin

Written for: Billie Jean King, as a thank-you for a tracksuit she gave Elton. And what a tracksuit it must have been! The 1975 song remains one of the most popular disco hits ever, leaving thousands of Hustle enthusiasts wondering just what Billie Jean King had to do with Philadelphia, anyway.

Turns out, the song was a reference to King's pro tennis team, The Philadelphia Freedoms. Prior to 1968, tennis players were all considered "amateurs" and weren't eligible to receive prize money. So, if you didn't have the wealth to support yourself, you couldn't play. Billie Jean King fought against those constraints, ultimately founding Professional World Team Tennis in 1974 and turning tennis into a paid league sport.

3. "Lola"

Written by: The Kinks' Ray Davies

Written for: A transvestite. But the question is, which one? According to Rolling Stone, "Lola" was inspired by Candy Darling, a member of Andy Warhol's entourage, whom Ray Davies briefly (and cluelessly) dated. If that's the case, then "Lola" is just another notch on Darling's song belt -- she's also referred to in Lou Reed's "Walk on the Wild Side." ("Candy came from out on the Island/ In the backroom she was everybody's darlin'.")

But, in the Kinks' official biography, Davies tells a different story. He says "Lola" was written after the band's manager spent a very drunken night dancing with a woman whose five o'clock shadow was apparently obvious to everyone but him.

4. "867-5309/Jenny"

Written by: Jim Keller (of Tommy Tutone) and Alex Call

Written for: Unknown, as the songwriters apparently make up a different story about its inspiration every time they're asked. While the woman continues to remain a mystery, however, the phone number is all too real. In fact, it's been wreaking havoc ever since 1982 and the passage of time hasn't quelled of the number of crank calls. In 1999, Brown University freshman roommates Nina Clemente and Jahanaz Mirza found that out the hard way, when the school adopted an 867 exchange number for its on-campus phone system. Immediately, the girls' innocuous Room No. 5309 became a magnet for every drunk college kid with a 1980s fetish.

Other unfortunate phone customers have fought back with creative and profitable solutions, like the holder of 212-867-5309, who put his phone number up for auction on eBay in 2004. Bids approached $100,000 before eBay pulled the item at the request of Verizon, the number's actual owner.

5. "Oh, Carol"

Written by: Neil Sedaka

Written for: Carole King, naturally. Sedaka and King actually dated briefly in high school -- a romance Sedaka was able to successfully milk with "Oh, Carol," a then top-10 (if now somewhat forgettable) 1959 pop song.

However, the real success of "Oh, Carol" came a few months later, when it inspired King to write a rebuttal entitled "Oh, Neil." At the time, King and her husband, Gerry Goffin, were fledgling songwriters in need of a hit tune. "Oh, Neil

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Football fans are set to benefit from the recession as clubs slash season ticket prices to keep supporters coming back.



Some Premier League fans will save on season tickets after five clubs cut prices.



Price cuts have been announced at five English Premier League clubs. Manchester City, Sunderland, Everton, Portsmouth and Newcastle United have cut prices, while five further clubs announced price freezes on their season tickets.



Bolton dropped their season ticket prices last season.



Manchester City have taken an average of seven percent off their prices, while at Everton the cheapest adult season ticket will now be £399 ($550). At Sunderland under-16 season passes will be just £1($1.39) per home match for the 19 matches (£19 [$26] total) when purchased with an adult pass.



The move comes amid a slight decline in Premiership football crowds this season. The average attendance at Premier League matches is down about 800 per match compared to the 2007/2008 season -- however, on average the stadiums are still at almost 92 percent capacity.



Outside the United Kingdom, fans also stand to benefit from lower ticket prices.



In the U.S. Major League Soccer side Kansas City Wizards recently announced they would drop ticket prices for the coming season.



Wizards president Robb Heinemann was quoted in the Kansas City Star saying; "We understand these are tough economic times."



Other countries in Europe have maintained lower prices in recent years, with single tickets available for about 10 Euros in club games in Italy and Germany. Tickets in Australia's A-League tended to be cheaper yet, while South America and Africa/Middle East remained the cheapest.



In England's League One and League Two competitions crowds had dropped more significantly.



Dan Johnson of the Premier League told CNN the clubs cutting ticket prices were simply responding to the financial climate.



"Given the economic situation, there will be pressure on fans' ability to spend and the clubs have acted accordingly.



"It's a very real way that they can help at this time," Johnson said.



Johnson said the drop in crowds this season was not significant and may be made up towards the end of the season when attendances are traditionally higher.



Sport business expert Professor Simon Chadwick, founder of the Center for the International Business of Sport (CIBS) at Coventry University, told CNN recessions could have a strong impact on football crowds.



"In previous recessions there is evidence to suggest that as unemployment rises, the attendance at football matches decreases," he said.



However, Chadwick said English football fans shouldn't hope for significant price reductions.



"Some Premier League clubs are running at nearly 100% capacity and there's excess demand ...so in the short-to-medium term they should be able to continue at premium prices," Chadwick said.

***

(CNN) -- The gigolo former lover of Germany's richest woman has been jailed for six years after confessing to blackmailing her and other women out of millions of dollars, a court official said Monday.



Helg Sgarbi has admitted blackmailing Germany's richest woman, Susanne Klatten.



Susanne Klatten, the BMW heiress, complained to police last year that Helg Sgarbi had threatened to release pictures of them if she did not pay him nearly $60 million.



Munich's state prosecutor Anton Winkler said Sgarbi, who was accused of blackmailing several wealthy women, had made a written confession which was read by his lawyer to the court.



"He confessed that he blackmailed the victims, told them untrue stories," Winkler told CNN.



However, Sgarbi had not revealed what had happened to the estimated $12.5 million he had taken from his victims nor where the pictures had gone.



"It is really only half a confession. We asked him about where the money is, about accomplices and videos... and he refused to say anything about that," Winkler said.



Authorities said Klatten, who is married with three children, had an affair with Sgarbi.



He started to ask her for money, and she paid several million at first, but when she refused to provide more he threatened to send compromising videos to her husband and the media.



Klatten went to the police in January 2008, telling them she was the victim of a fraud and blackmail.



At the time, her spokesman, Joerg Appelhans, told CNN that Sgarbi's goal had always been to con her.



"She rigorously notified authorities even in light of the uncomfortable public repercussions this would have for her," Appelhans said.



Sgarbi's lawyer, Egon Geis, said he was surprised by all the media attention.



"This is all because of Mrs. Klatten, take the same amount of money and any other person and no one would care."



Sgarbi allegedly maintained relationships with a number of women, telling them he was a special Swiss representative in crisis zones.



Klatten, the daughter of the late BMW chief Herbert Quandt, holds a 12.5-percent stake in the German carmaker and a 51.1-percent share of chemical company Altana.



Forbes magazine lists her as the world's 55th richest person, with a personal fortune of $13.2 billion.



CNN's Fred Pleitgen contributed to this report.

***

EDINBURGH, Scotland -- Hibernian have named former striker Mixu Paatelainen as their new manager in succession to John Collins -- who resigned last month in frustration at the lack of funds available to buy new players.



Paatelainen was a popular playing figure in the distinctive green of Hibernian.



The Finn, who enjoyed two playing spells with the Scottish Premier League club, joins from Finnish side TPS Turku.



The 40-year-old, who also played for Dundee United, Aberdeen, St Johnstone and St Mirren in Scotland -- as well as Bolton and Wolverhampton in England, confirmed he is relishing the challenge of his new job.



"I am very happy to take up this opportunity," Paatelainen said. "Everyone knows of my great affection for this club and I believe my desire to see teams play exciting, attacking and intelligent football fits well with the club's philosophy.



"I will bring energy, hard-work and leadership to the squad. I am also committed to working with players, as individuals and groups, to help them to improve.



"If I can help one player improve, the team is better. If I can help all players improve, we are much better."



Capped 70 times by Finland, Paatelainen helped Turku finish third in the Veikkausliiga last year. Compensation for his release has been agreed.



His two playing stints with Hibernian were from 1998-2001 and 2002-2003, either side of a spell with French side Strasbourg.



Paatelainen may know some of the Hibernian players who have come through the youth set-up, having been involved in coaching of the club's youngsters during his second playing spell.



Hibernian chairman Rod Petrie said: "We are delighted Mixu has agreed to take up the challenge and opportunity of managing Hibernian. We are convinced that he was the strongest candidate, and he impressed us a great deal during his interview.



"He has a clear vision of the type of football he wants to play, has strong ideas on man-management and demonstrates excellent leadership qualities. I am sure he will further enhance his growing reputation."   E-mail to a friend

***

BAGHDAD, Iraq (CNN) -- The top court in Iraq sentenced two of Saddam Hussein's half-brothers to death Wednesday for crimes against humanity.



Tariq Aziz, seen in 2002, was sentenced Wednesday to 15 years in jail for crimes against humanity.



The court also sentenced former Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz and a former senior official known as "Chemical Ali" -- Ali Hassan al-Majeed -- to 15 years in custody for crimes against humanity, an official with the Iraq High Tribunal told CNN.



The men were sentenced for their roles in the 1992 execution of 42 merchants.



In an unrelated trial last week, Al-Majeed was sentenced to death for his role in putting down an uprising in Baghdad a decade ago, Iraqi state TV reported.



It was the third death sentence for al-Majeed, a cousin of Hussein, the former dictator of Iraq who was toppled from power by the U.S.-led coalition in 2003.



Al-Majeed and other former members of Hussein's regime remain in U.S. custody. His execution has been delayed for political rather than legal reasons.



In last week's trial, Aziz was acquitted.  Aziz, one of the best-known faces of the Hussein regime, was Iraq's deputy prime minister from 1981 to 2003 and also served as minister of foreign affairs for part of that time.  He was captured by U.S. forces in April 2003, shortly after the U.S. invasion of Iraq.



Meanwhile, car bombs in the northern Iraqi cities of Mosul and Kirkuk killed six people on Wednesday, officials told CNN.



The Mosul car bomb, which targeted troops, killed four people and wounded 14 others, an Interior Ministry official said. The car, parked near the city's medical college, blew up near an Iraqi army patrol. Of the dead, three were soldiers. Four other soldiers were among those wounded. Mosul, which has long been a volatile city, has had a strong militant presence.



In Kirkuk, a parked car bomb exploded near a police patrol, killing two civilians and wounding seven others. The oil-rich and ethnically diverse city is known for sectarian and political tension.



People were injured in wo other incidents in Iraq on Wednesday. In Baghdad, mortar fire in a residential area wounded four civilians. And a roadside bomb in the largely Kurdish town of Jalawla in Diyala province wounded four police officers.



CNN's Mohammed Tawfeeq contributed to this story

***

NEW YORK (CNN)  -- Spiritual leaders of New York's African-American Muslim communities lashed out Friday at a purported al Qaeda message attacking President-elect Barack Obama and, using racist language, comparing him unfavorably to the late Malcolm X.



Ayman al-Zawahiri said Obama was the "direct opposite of honorable black Americans" like Malcolm X.



The imams called the recorded comments from al Qaeda second-in-command Ayman al-Zawahiri "an insult" from people who have "historically been disconnected from the African-American community generally and Muslim African-Americans in particular."



"We find it insulting when anyone speaks for our community instead of giving us the dignity and the honor of speaking for ourselves," they said in a statement read during a news conference at the Malcolm X and Dr. Betty Shabazz Memorial, Educational and Cultural Center.



The al Qaeda statement, an 11-minute, 23-second audio message in Arabic with subtitles in English, appeared on the Internet on Wednesday. Its authenticity has not been confirmed.



The message said Obama represents the "direct opposite of honorable black Americans" like Malcolm X.  Watch al Qaeda official criticize Obama »



The speaker also said Obama, former and current Secretaries of State Colin Powell and Condoleezza Rice and "your likes" fit Malcolm X's description of "house slaves."



An English translation of the message used the term "house Negroes," Malcolm X's term for blacks who were subservient to whites. The term refers to slaves who worked in white masters' houses. Malcolm X said those slaves were docile compared with those who labored in the fields. iReport.com: Should Obama react to comments?



Malcolm X, the fiery African-American Muslim activist from the 1950s and 1960s, was an early member and leader of the Nation of Islam. He left that group in 1963 over disillusionment with its then-leader, Elijah Muhammed, but remained a Muslim.



After months of death threats, he was assassinated in 1965 by members of the Nation of Islam, who shot him 16 times at close range. The three men who were convicted of the crime have been paroled.



On Friday, Imam Al-Hajj Talib 'Abdur-Rashid, recalling Malcolm X's legacy, said that he "stood for human rights and the principle of self defense ... international law. He would have rejected, and we who are Muslim African-Americans leaders reject, acts of political extremism."



The Council on American-Islamic Relations also condemned Zawahiri's comments in a statement issued Thursday.



"As Muslims and as Americans, we will never let terrorist groups or terror leaders falsely claim to represent us or our faith," the statement said. "We once again repudiate al Qaeda's actions, rhetoric and world view and re-state our condemnation of all forms of terrorism and religious extremism."

***

(CNN) -- The most compelling action during Michigan's primary Tuesday will be on the Republican side. The Democratic Party has stripped the state of its delegates for moving up its primary date so early, and top-tier Democratic candidates have taken their names off the ballot, except for Sen. Hillary Clinton.



The struggling auto industry has been a drag on Michigan's economy.



In many ways, the Republican battle for Michigan will be similar to last week's New Hampshire contest. The primary is open, and any registered voter -- including independents and Democrats -- can participate.



Sen. John McCain won New Hampshire with the help of independent voters, and he is campaigning hard to re-create that success in Michigan.



In 2000, McCain defeated then-Texas Gov. George W. Bush in the Michigan primary. In that vote, more than half -- 52 percent -- were either independents or Democrats. Among Republican voters, McCain lost to Bush 29 percent to 66 percent. In that contest, almost three out of every 10 voters identified themselves as members of the religious right.



Overall, Michigan is a swing state, producing narrow margins of victory for presidential candidates and statewide officeholders. However, voting trends favor the Democrats.



Michigan's governor, Jennifer Granholm, is a Democrat, as are the state's two U.S. senators -- Carl Levin and Debbie Stabenow. The Democratic presidential nominee has carried Michigan in the last four elections. Sen. John Kerry, the Democrats' 2004 standard bearer, won Michigan 51 percent to 48 percent over President Bush.



The state's economy is powered by the automotive industry, which has experienced its fair share of struggles. Michigan's unemployment rate, 7.4 percent, is higher than the national average of 5 percent.



Region by region



Wayne County, in the southeastern corner of the state, contains the economically depressed Detroit, Michigan's largest city. Detroit is predominantly black and solidly Democratic.



North of Wayne County are the more-affluent suburban counties of Oakland and Macomb, which have grown in population in the last two decades. These two counties have been the state's central political battleground in recent elections.



West of Wayne is the "university belt," home to the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor and Michigan State University in East Lansing. The area also includes the industrial cities of Saginaw and Flint, where unions remain strong, as well as Jackson and Bay City. The state's capital, Lansing, and the sparsely populated upper peninsula are also part of this region.



The southwest part of the state is dominated by Grand Rapids, Michigan's second-largest city. Grand Rapids is traditionally Dutch-American and has many Christian conservatives and generally votes Republican. The area also contains smaller industrial cities and farming communities.



The economy of the sparsely populated north and northwest is based on agriculture, tourism and timber. It traditionally votes Republican.



Endorsements



The Detroit Free Press has endorsed McCain. "While the Free Press differs with McCain on a number of issues, the Arizona senator is a smarter, more tested and pragmatic leader who has shown since 2000 that he knows how to build bipartisan alliances around issues," the newspaper said in an editorial.



The Detroit News also endorsed McCain, citing his fiscal conservatism and command of military and foreign affairs, over Michigan native Mitt Romney.



"Other GOP contenders, most notably former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney, are capable figures with impressive resumes and a solid grasp of the issues. But McCain's longtime presidential ambitions are at last aligned with the needs of the nation," the newspaper said. E-mail to a friend

***

JAKARTA, Indonesia (CNN) -- A U.S. mining company has denied a report by Indonesia's state media that a convoy of its buses came under fire in the province of Papua Wednesday.



Indonesian soldiers provide security near a PT Freeport-owned gold mine in Timika, Papua province, on July 18.



The state-run Antara News Agency had said that two people were reportedly killed when a 12-bus convoy carrying employees of PT Freeport was attacked by unidentified gunmen in the country's eastern-most province.



The company clarified that a vehicle was wrecked in the province, killing one person and wounding several others. When police and mechanics drove to the area to assist, shots were fired at them. Three people were hurt in the shooting, the company said.



"No shots were fired at the PT-FI bus convoy as earlier reported," the company said.



Following the company's comments, Antara's Web site changed its report to reflect the new information.



PT Freeport is the largest copper and gold mining company in the province.



Attacks directed at the company killed an Australian mine technician and two Indonesians on July 11 and 12.



And two directors of the company were wounded Friday in a twin attack at the Ritz Carlton and JW Marriott hotels in the capital Jakarta.



Papua residents have long resented the presence of PT Freeport in the province. They have criticized the environmental impact of the mining operations and the small share of revenues the province receives.



In 2008, a separatist group claimed responsibility for a series of bomb attacks in the area. No one died in the attacks, Antara said.



In 2002, two American teachers and an Indonesian colleague who worked at the mine were shot dead in an attack, the news agency said.



Meanwhile, authorities on Wednesday released sketches of two men believed to have carried out the bombings at the luxury hotels in Jakarta.



One was about 40; the other 17, officials said. Analysis of their DNA matched those obtained from a homemade explosive found in a room at the Marriott where they had checked in, police said.



But authorities still do not know their identities.



CNN's Andy Saputra contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- World record holder and Olympic champion Usain Bolt added yet another title to his tally after racing to victory in the Bupa Great CityGames 150 meter sprint in a new best time in Manchester on Sunday.



Usain Bolt smashed the world 150m record in his first race of the season in Manchester on Sunday.



The Jamaican, who broke both the 100m and 200m records before anchoring his country to the 4x100m relay title in Beijing, clocked 14.36 seconds -- smashing the previous world's best by 0.39 seconds.



Bolt, in his first competitive outing of the season, finished well ahead of Britain's Marlon Devonish, who ran 15.07.



The 22-year-old, who was only passed fit on Monday after a car crash which required minor surgery on his foot just over a fortnight ago, was given a bye into the final.



But he did not disappoint and the breakdown of times in his sprint were staggering.



He covered the first 100m in 9.90, which although well short of his record-breaking 9.69 in Beijing, was still impressive on a very damp temporary track constructed in the city center.



Even better was his speed over what is termed "the flying 100" -- from 50-150m -- which he covered in just 8.72 seconds.



It all added up to a run which eclipsed the previous best of 14.75 by American Tyson Gay, whose time was recorded during a 200m race and not a straight 150m sprint.



"It is one more to the tally," Bolt told reporters when told of his world-best time. "I thought I would just go out there and run a good time. I am not in the best shape and I still have a lot of work to do but I am getting there," he added.



Debbie McKenzie Ferguson of the Bahamas won the women's race in 16.54 seconds ahead of Olympic and world 400m champion Christine Ohuruogu, who finished in 17.10.

***

(CNN) -- Former Serbian President Milan Milutinovic was Thursday found not guilty of war crimes  and crimes against humanity in Kosovo by a U.N. tribunal.



Milan Milutinovic had was cleared of war crimes in Kosovo.



Five other former high-ranking Serb officials -- Nikola Sainovic, Dragoljub Ojdanic, Nebojsa Pavkovic, Vladimir Lazarevic and Sreten Lukic -- were found guilty on all or some of the same charges.



The judgment was the first by The Hague, Netherlands-based tribunal for crimes by the former Yugoslav and Serbian forces during a military campaign against Kosovo's ethnic Albanians in 1999.



Their crimes took place during a Serb-led military campaign against Kosovo's ethnic Albanian population during the first six months of 1999 before a NATO bombing campaign forced a halt to the operation.



Sainovic, former Yugoslav deputy prime minister and Pavkovic, a former Yugoslav army general were each sentenced to 22 years in prison for crimes against humanity and war crimes.  Watch Milutinovic receive not guilty verdict »



Lazarevic, another ex-general and Ojdanic, who was chief of general staff, were each sentenced to 15 years on charges of forced deportation of Kosovo's ethnic Albanian population.



The International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia had heard during the two year tribunal how military forces of the former Republic of Yugoslavia and Serbia waged a campaign of terror against Kosovo Albanians.



The court said Milutinovic didn't have "direct individual control" over the army and that "in practice" then-Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic "exercised actual command authority" over the army during the NATO campaign.



Milosevic eventually surrendered to Serbian authorities in 2001 and had been extradited to The Hague, where he was on trial between 2002 and 2006 for the alleged offences in Kosovo and for alleged crimes in Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina.



He died from natural causes in March 2006 before the trial ended and before a judgment was made. He was the first sitting head of state to be charged for war crimes when he was indicted in 1999.



Kosovo's government declared its independence from Serbia in February 2008 after being administered by the United Nations since 1999. The U.S., Britain and France have recognized Kosovo's independence, but China and Russia joined Serbia in opposing the move.

***

ISLAMABAD, Pakistan (CNN)  -- About 200 people have been arrested in a flare-up of anti-Christian violence in Gojra that left seven dead, a government minister said Monday.





Christians in Karachi, Pakistan, on Monday protest the slayings of seven Christians in weekend violence.





Rana Sana Ullah, Punjab's provincial law minister, told CNN that the paramilitary Rangers force was helping police and maintaining law and order.





Seven people were killed and 20 injured Saturday when Muslim demonstrators set fire to houses in a Christian enclave and fighting broke out, authorities said. Police said the Muslims were protesting an alleged desecration of pages in the Quran, the Muslim sacred text, at a Christian wedding.





At a news conference in Islamabad carried on local TV, Shehbaz Bhatti, federal minister for minorities, said an investigation determined there was no desecration of the Quran in village 95 Gill near Gojra City, and the allegations were baseless. He also said the government will rebuild all the burned houses.





Bhatti told CNN that four women, two men and a child, all Christians, were either shot to death or killed when their houses were burned. About 50 houses were burned down, and more than 100 were looted by the protesters, Bhatti said. The incident occurred in Gojra City, about 160 kilometers (100 miles) southwest of Lahore.





Kamran Michael, Punjab provincial minister for human rights and minority affairs, who is a Christian, told CNN after meeting with Pakistan's Christian leaders in Gojra that a consensus had been reached to observe three days of mourning, from Monday to Wednesday, for the attack on the Christians.





On those three days, all schools, colleges, missions and educational institutions run by Christians will remain closed. Christian schools in Karachi, which were due to open for the new term Monday, remained closed. However, schools in most other areas of Pakistan are still on summer vacation.





Michael also criticized Pakistan's "law of offenses relating to religion," which has a penalty of life imprisonment for desecration of the Quran and even death for defiling the name of the prophet Mohammed. He called the law unjust and misused, and he strongly condemned it, demanding that it be amended because of its misuse against minorities.





Journalist Nasir Habib contributed to this report.

***

(CNN)  -- Despite acknowledgment from the White House a day earlier that a peace deal between Israel and the Palestinians is unlikely before a new U.S. president takes office, Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice said Friday she is confident that ongoing efforts would produce success.

Israeli Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni, right, and U.S.  Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice speak Thursday.

"Carried to its state of conclusion, it will produce a state of Palestine," Rice, referring to negotiations in the wake of last year's U.S. summit on Israel-Palestinian peace in Annapolis, Maryland, said at a joint news conference with Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas in Ramallah, West Bank. Rice is on her eighth trip to the region since the Annapolis summit.

On Thursday, White House spokeswoman Dana Perino said the Bush administration does not "think that it's likely that it (a peace agreement) would happen before the end of the year."

Rice said Friday that she realizes the lack of a peace agreement in the months following the Annapolis summit had caused some concerns that talks had stalled or might fail, but "it's quite the opposite -- the Annapolis process has laid the foundation for the eventual establishment for the state of Palestine."

The purpose of her current trip, Rice said, was "to advance the Annapolis process," and while she did not speculate on a timetable for the future of the process or offer specifics on peace talks, she added, "I've seen them move forward a great deal in the past year."

Both Israeli and Palestinian officials have expressed doubts about achieving a peace agreement before President Bush leaves office, but until this week U.S. officials had been more optimistic in their public comments.

Speaking in Israel on Thursday, Rice blamed part of the inability to secure a deal on recent political changes in Israel, which she noted is "in the midst of elections."

With Abbas on Friday, she emphasized that the commitment expressed by Abbas and Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert when they signed an agreement to work toward a peace deal by the end of 2008 is still strong.

"I hope that the tremendous commitment (by both sides) is fully understood," Rice said.

While Rice did not discuss any impact a new administration in Washington might have on the process, she said, "The United States really does understand why the Palestinian people want unity."

Israel in recent months has seen political upheaval.

Olmert resigned in September amid allegations of corruption.

Kadima Party leader and Israeli Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni gave up efforts to form a new coalition government late last month and is seeking to hold early general elections, which could be held in February, Livni's spokesman has said.

Olmert will continue to lead as Israel's interim prime minister until a successor assumes power either by forming a coalition in the current Knesset or through general elections. However, it is unclear whether he will be able to strike a deal with the Palestinians before Israel forms its new government.

Last month, Rice postponed a trip to a Middle East conference because of the global crisis in financial markets.

***

(CNN) -- If you thought it was difficult managing your own money in 2007, consider the pressure of the task when you're dealing with $1.8 trillion of client assets.

Sallie Krawcheck has made Fortune's list of the World's Most Powerful Women every year since 2002

That's what Sallie Krawcheck does as Chairman and Chief Executive of Citi Global Wealth Management.

She joined the banking industry as a research analyst, but quickly rose through the ranks, gaining a reputation for honesty and integrity along the way.

Dubbed the "Mrs Clean" of Wall Street, Ms Krawcheck was credited with restoring investors' faith in analyst reports while head of retail brokerage firm Smith Barney.

She joined Citigroup in 2002, and spent some time as Chief Financial Officer before taking up her current role in March 2007.

Sallie Krawcheck has been a regular entrant on Fortune's list of the World's Most Powerful Women in Business -- in 2007, she made number 12.

John Defterios caught up with Ms Krawcheck in Dubai. He asked her for her views on the movement of capital outside the G8 (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Russia, the United Kingdom and the United States).

Sallie Krawcheck (SK): I think what's happening right now, it's fascinating because in the United States and in developed Europe we're having a liquidity crunch -- someone might argue a liquidity crisis. And in fact, we are awash with liquidity in the Middle East and in Asia as well, so there's really a bifurcation that's occurring in the world.

And if you think about, oil doesn't even have to stay at the 90-plus dollar level it is; even at levels in the 70's, 60's, 50's, 40's, a tremendous amount of liquidity is being generated in these markets which is really being put back into the market. Yes, the investments are going up globally, but the governments here really are investing back in the infrastructure and the economies of this region. And so over time, you're really going to see... I think continue to see... a shift in economic activity on a relative basis from the more developed economies here to the Middle East as well as to Asia.

John Defterios (JD): It's coming almost as a perfect storm; we have a sub prime crisis, a 20 percent fall in the dollar in the last two years. In this window of time, is there a danger that the financial capitals build outside of Wall Street and it undermines its role?

(SK): I think there is no doubt that New York is losing its status as a financial capital of the world. If you think about some years ago, if you think about the internet bubble for example, where it was New York and California wasn't it? And you look at a whole range of reasons for it, and the sub prime crisis perhaps, the decline of the dollar perhaps. But you have overlapping regulators in the United States, you have very high taxes in the United States, you have a very litigious environment in the United States, and you have the emerging markets coming up, so capital is being raised outside of the United States. These things, some of which are negative for the United States, some of which are positive for the other regions, is accelerating a shift that was underway from New York, to London, to Hong Kong, to Singapore, and potentially to Dubai as well.

(JD): Some of the wealth funds are now on the radar of both Wall Street and Capitol Hill in Washington. You can't have your cake and eat it too. You can't say I want some of that liquidity but I only want part of that liquidity. What is the result of that do you think? Can you over-regulate the sovereign funds?

(SK): Oh, I think you can over-regulate the sovereign funds. I think the same question can be asked of the private equity funds and the hedge funds as well; where in a lot of countries

***

DALLAS, Texas (CNN) -- A police officer was killed Friday morning in a motorcycle accident as Sen. Hillary Clinton's motorcade made its way through downtown Dallas, police said.



The Dallas Police Department said Senior Cpl. Victor Lozada-Tirado was traveling southbound on the Houston Street viaduct when he struck a curb, lost control of the motorcycle and went down.



Lozada-Tirado was transported to Methodist Central Hospital, where he was pronounced dead.



A Dallas police officer since December 1988, Lozada-Tirado was married with four children, according to police. CNN affiliate WFAA-TV in Dallas/Fort Worth reported he was 49.



There were no other vehicles involved in the accident, police said, and the motorcade was able to continue to the site without further incident.



Clinton said she called the Dallas police chief and would contact the officer's family at an appropriate time.



The Democratic presidential candidate said she is "greatly heartsick over this loss of life in the line of duty."



"I just want to express my deepest condolences to the family and to the Dallas Police Department on this tragic, tragic loss," she said.



"I am certainly grateful for all they do for me and more importantly what they do for the citizens of cities like Dallas."  Watch Clinton offer her condolences »



Clinton is attending rallies Friday in Texas and Ohio ahead of those states' primaries on March 4.



In the past 18 months, there have been two fatal accidents involving motorcycle officers escorting President Bush.



On August 27, Germaine Casey, an officer from Rio Rancho, New Mexico, died when his motorcycle crashed as the motorcade approached the airport in Albuquerque. The 40-year-old had been the lead motorcycle in the motorcade when the crash occurred.



On November 21, 2006, Steve Favela, a Honolulu police motorcycle officer, crashed on wet roads in Hawaii while part of the president's motorcade.



Favela, 30, died of his injuries a week later. Two other officers were injured in the crash. E-mail to a friend



CNN's Sasha Johnson and Mike Roselli contributed to this report.

***

PARIS, France (CNN) -- France is sending four state police units to its overseas department of Guadeloupe after a month of sometimes violent demonstrations, Interior Minister Michele Alliot-Marie said Thursday.



French gendarmes face-off against Guadeloupe protesters.



"The pillaging ... the violence against people, are not tolerable and will not be tolerated," Alliot-Marie told the French radio station RTL. "It's no longer simply a question of containing the protests. ... This mission of honor will continue to be undertaken, but we also have to fight against the violence."



French President Nicolas Sarkozy planned to meet with elected officials from overseas departments, including Guadeloupe, Thursday afternoon, his office announced.



A general strike over low wages and living conditions in the Caribbean island has included demonstrations and clashes with police. At least one civilian has been killed in the riots, officials said.



Hospitals and emergency services continue to function and the main international airport is open, but petrol stations, schools, and most businesses -- including supermarkets and car rental offices -- are closed, the British Foreign Office said in a travel advisory.



Hotels are open, but the strike is causing daily cuts to electricity and water supplies, the Foreign Office said.



French Prime Minister Francois Fillon said Thursday he is ready to approve a compromise that would give nearly a €200 ($254) monthly supplement to workers in Guadeloupe with low-paying jobs.



"This crisis is serious, and profound, but it's not new," Fillon said, adding that it's linked to "the lifelessness of the economy in the Antilles, aggravated by the global economic crisis."



Sending supplementary police forces is justified, Fillon said, because "we cannot accept what has happened" in the department.



He was referring to the attacks on businesses, the roadblocks in the streets and above all, the death of the civilian, who he said was a union leader.



Agence France-Presse identified the victim as union representative Jacques Bino. He was shot dead Tuesday night when he drove past a roadblock manned by armed youths in the city of Pointe-a-Pitre. His car was hit three times by shotgun fire, prosecutors told AFP.



Three police who accompanied emergency services trying to help the dying man were lightly wounded, officials said, according to AFP.



Speaking with RTL on Wednesday, one demonstrator denied he was fanning the flames of unrest.



"We have always called for calm," Elie Domota, leader of the Coalition against Exploitation, said.



"We have told the young people to go to their homes and continue to protest peacefully, but the police yesterday beat protesters and called them racist names, so the situation escalated."



CNN's Alanne Orjoux in Atlanta, Georgia, contributed to this report

***

(CNN) -- The remains of a woman who disappeared 22 years ago in northern California have been found after the son of the woman's purported killer guided police to the site where her body was dumped, investigators announced Thursday.





The alleged killer's son told authorities that he watched his father kill 27-year-old Lysandra Marie Turpin in 1988 and that his dad forced him to help dispose of the body, the Humboldt County, California, Sheriff's Office announced.





Ernest Samuel Christie III, who was 16 at the time, told authorities that his now-dead father, Ernest Samuel Christie Jr., made him help dump Turpin's body in a ditch near their home in Fieldbrook, California, about 80 miles south of the Oregon border. Christie said his father forced him to help cover the body with tires, douse it in gasoline and set it on fire, Humboldt County Sheriff Gary Philp said in a statement Thursday.





Christie's dad had held and abused Turpin at his house for several weeks before killing her, Christie told the sheriff's office. She had been reported missing to Humboldt County law enforcement on April 8, 1988.





After Christie supplied the sheriff's office with a map of where the body had been dumped, a team of detectives, evidence technicians, and sheriff's deputies found teeth, clothing and charred bones. A forensic odontologist positively identified the remains as Lysandra Turpin on Wednesday, according to Philp.





Ernest Samuel Christie Jr. died in 2006, according to the sheriff's office. His son, now 38 and living in North Carolina, contacted the sheriff's office in February. He is not facing criminal charges, Philp said.





Christie told authorities that his father had abused other women, once holding a woman prisoner in a hollowed-out redwood tree stump. The woman escaped and declined to report the incident to law enforcement, the sheriff's office said.





Using a description provided by Christie, sheriff's personnel located the stump and found a carpet, plastic jugs, a hypodermic syringe and clothing there, Philp said Thursday.





Christie related other instances of his father -- who he said frequently used methamphetamine -- terrorizing women, Philp said.





Christie told authorities that his dad once took a woman on his fishing boat, tied her up and told her he was going to kill her. The woman managed to escape, and detectives were recently able to find her and corroborate Christie's account, Philp said.

***

(CNN) -- Brazilian star Kaka has agreed to join Real Madrid from Italy's AC Milan in a $92 million deal, the Spanish radio station Cadena Ser reported on Tuesday.



Former World Player of the Year Kaka has agreed to join Real Madrid in a $92m move according to reports in Spain.



Cadena Ser claimed that Real president Florentino Perez had thrashed out a deal with AC Milan vice-president Adriano Galliani and Bosco Leite, Kaka's father and agent.



Kaka is currently in Brazil with the national team ahead of a World Cup qualifier against Uruguay and earlier in the day had appeared to rule out a move from Italy's Serie A.



"I'll say it for the last time. The last time. I don't want to leave Milan," he told Gazzetta dello Sport. "In this period I prefer to remain silent because I don't want to be misunderstood. Or, worse still, to be used.



"To the millions of Milan supporters, I say that I have made my choice. I have said what I want to stay. Leave me in peace, please."



However, AC Milan owner Silvio Berlusconi also hinted at Kaka's departure just before Cadena Ser's claim.



"I do not know if we can keep Kaka at Milan because they (Real) have offered him so much money," Berlusconi was quoted as saying by Italian press agency Ansa.



Spanish reports said Kaka will sign for five years with a salary worth nearly $13 million a year.



Former team-mate Paolo Maldini, who retired at the end of the season, admitted he still had doubts about Kaka's future at the San Siro.



"I don't know if he'll still stay at Milan," Maldini told Gazzetta dello Sport. "Ancelotti might have been cryptic about his future but Kaka has been even more so."



Last January, Kaka rejected a move to Premier League Manchester City who were prepared to pay the 2007 world player of the year $750,000 per week.



Kaka's coach at Milan Carlo Ancelotti was on Monday appointed manager at Premier League Chelsea who have also been linked with a bid for the Brazilian.

***

(CNN) -- China's figure skating pair of Shen Xue and Zhao Hongbo capped an emotional comeback to the Winter Olympics on Monday by capturing the pairs figure skating gold.





By winning the event, Shen and Zhao captured their country's first gold medal in figure skating and fulfilled a quest that had previously eluded them. The husband-and-wife team had retired from Olympic competition, but was coaxed back by the hope of claiming gold.





China made it a 1-2 finish in pairs skating after Pan Qing and Tong Jian claimed silver, according to the Vancouver Olympics Web site. Germany's Aliona Savchenko and Robin Szolkowy claimed third place and the bronze medal in the event.





Elsewhere at the Olympics, South Korea's Mo Tae-Bum captured the gold medal in the men's 500-meter speed skating event. Japan's Keiichiro Nagashima and Joji Kato captured silver and bronze, respectively.





In figure skating, China's Shen and Zhao had retired in 2007 after capturing three world championships and two Olympic bronze medalists, making them the most decorated figure skaters in their country's history.





Shen and Zhao were also newlyweds after Zhao proposed to Shen on the ice following a stunning 2007 World Championship performance in Tokyo.





Headlining the popular Stars on Ice tour in the United States, retirement seemed like a natural step for Zhao and Shen. But after just two years away, they declared they would return for the Vancouver Olympics, presumably to capture the gold medal that eluded them.





CNN memories: What was it like to train with Olympic champs?





Zhao and Shen kicked off their comeback fittingly by winning the Cup of China last season. They won all three of their events and set a new world record at the Grand Prix Final.





The pair, formerly ranked number one in the world, opened the Vancouver Olympic figure skating competitions by performing first of the 20 competing pairs. Their draw was considered bad luck, especially because Shen and Zhao currently rank 29th in the world after being away from competition.





Zhao and Shen delivered a near flawless performance in the short program on Sunday, what many skating analysts called their strongest program ever.





"We wanted the program to show all that we have, and we made it," Zhao told the Xinhua news agency in Vancouver following the short program on Sunday. "It's the best gift for the Valentine's Day," Shen added.





CNN's Jo Ling Kent contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Brazil has confirmed 557 deaths caused by H1N1 flu, the highest total in the world, the nation's Health Ministry says.



A vaccine against H1N1 is being tested but is not expected to be available until at least mid-October.



The United States has counted 522 fatalities through Thursday, and nearly 1,800 people had died worldwide through August 13, U.S. and global health officials said.



In terms of mortality rate, which considers flu deaths in terms of a nation's population, Brazil ranks seventh, and the United States is 13th, the Brazilian Ministry of Health said in a news release Wednesday.



Argentina, which has reported 386 deaths attributed to H1N1 as of August 13, ranks first per capita, the Brazilian health officials said, and Mexico, where the flu outbreak was discovered in April, ranks 14th per capita.



Brazil, Argentina, Chile, Mexico and the United States have the most total cases globally, according to the World Health Organization.



The Brazilian Ministry of Health said there have been 6,100 cases of flu in the nation, with 5,206 cases (85.3 percent) confirmed as H1N1, also known as swine flu.



The state of Sao Paulo had 223 deaths through Wednesday, the largest number in the country. In addition, 480 pregnant women have been confirmed with H1N1, of whom 58 died. Swine flu has been shown to hit young people and pregnant women particularly hard.



Many schools in Sao Paulo have delayed the start of the second semester for a couple of weeks, and students will have to attend classes on weekends to catch up. Schools also have suspended extracurricular activities such as soccer, volleyball and chess to try to curtail spread of the disease.



Flu traditionally has its peak during the winter months, and South America, where it is winter, has had a large number of cases recently. The World Health Organization said this week that the United States and other heavily populated Northern Hemisphere countries need to brace for a second wave of H1N1 as their winter approaches.



Officials at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and other U.S. health agencies have been preparing and said this week that up to half of the nation's population may contract the disease and 90,000 could die from it.



Seasonal flu typically kills about 64,000 Americans each year.



A vaccine against H1N1 is being tested but is not expected to be available until at least mid-October and will probably require two shots at least one week apart, health officials have said. Since it typically takes a couple of weeks for a person's immunity to build up after the vaccine, most Americans would not be protected until sometime in November.



The World Health Organization in June declared a Level 6 worldwide pandemic, the organization's highest classification.

***

(CNN)  -- Husbands are allowed to slap their wives if they spend lavishly, a Saudi judge said recently during a seminar on domestic violence, Saudi media reported Sunday.



It is OK to slap Saudi women who spend too much, a judge has told an audience.



Arab News, a Saudi English-language daily newspaper based in Riyadh, reported that Judge Hamad Al-Razine said that "if a person gives SR 1,200 [$320] to his wife and she spends 900 riyals [$240] to purchase an abaya [the black cover that women in Saudi Arabia must wear] from a brand shop and if her husband slaps her on the face as a reaction to her action, she deserves that punishment."



Women in the audience immediately and loudly protested Al-Razine's statement, and were shocked to learn the remarks came from a judge, the newspaper reported.



Arab News reported that Al-Razine made his remark as he was attempting to explain why incidents of domestic violence had increased in Saudi Arabia. He said that women and men shared responsibility, but added that "nobody puts even a fraction of blame" on women, the newspaper said.



Al-Razine "also pointed out that women's indecent behavior and use of offensive words against their husbands were some of the reasons for domestic violence in the country," it added.



Domestic violence, which used to be a taboo subject in the conservative kingdom, has become a hot topic in recent years. Groups like the National Family Safety Program have campaigned to educate the public about the problem and help prevent domestic abuse.



Saudi women's rights activist Wajeha Al-Huwaider told CNN that Saudi women routinely face such attitudes.



"This is how men in Saudi Arabia see women," she said in a telephone interview from the Saudi city of Dahran. "It's not something they read in a book or learned from a friend. They've been raised to see women this way, that they're less than a person."



Al-Huwaider added that "I'm not surprised to see a judge or a religious man saying that - they've been raised in the same culture - a culture that tells them it's ok to raise your hand to a woman that this works."



Another Saudi judge, in the city of Onaiza, was the source of a separate recent controversy: he twice denied a request from the mother of an 8-year-old girl that the girl be granted a divorce from her 47-year-old husband.



Last month, after human-groups condemned the union, the girl was granted the divorce.

***

Tripoli, Libya (CNN) -- For the first time in more than 40 years, dawn in Libya rose on Friday without the dictator and his shadow.





Libyans awoke to empty Friday streets, typical for the holy day of the Muslim week, and engaged in somber reflection about Moammar Gadhafi's life and death. That solemnity followed a wave of unbridled joy Thursday as people exulted over the news of Gadhafi's death and fired their guns in celebration.





After Friday prayers at the Salahaddin Mosque in Tripoli, worshippers said their imam had given thanks during his sermon for Gadhafi's downfall.





"Today is a special day at the mosque," said Sala Mersal after prayers. "Since 42 years, we cannot say anything. ... Nobody could say anything inside the mosque. Today it is free, and anybody can say anything they want."





A small crowd gathered outside the mosque, with bullet casings littering the streets, and chanted "God is great" and "One, two, three ... Libya is free!"





Amid the smiles and victory signs, Hisham Boaishi conceded that he did not approve of the "un-Islamic way" that Gadhafi was killed.





"We would have liked to take him to court and have his judgment," said Boaishi, 33, an information technology specialist who sported a long beard. "But not this way. We are Muslims; we don't support this way."





Not all residents of Tripoli welcomed Gadhafi's bloody death.





One young man, who asked not to be identified for fear of reprisal from anti-Gadhafi forces, said he was "ashamed" at the way the former dictator died. He said his mother cried in front of the television Thursday night upon seeing images of the bleeding leader.





"He should have been taken to court," the man said.





"I'm not ashamed. I'm proud that we captured him ... no matter how many soldiers he hired," said Mohamed Saya, a member of the media committee for Libya's new governing National Transitional Council.





NTC officials insist shortly after his capture by rebel forces, the ousted leader was killed in a crossfire between pro- and anti-Gadhafi fighters.





With Gadhafi dead, Saya said Libya's de facto government was preparing to hold a "Liberation Day" celebration in the eastern city of Benghazi this weekend. Benghazi was the launching point of Libya's uprising in February.





In the meantime, some Libyans continued to hold their own smaller festivities.





On one Tripoli street, fighters and residents gathered beneath the tri-color banner of Libya's anti-Gadhafi flag next to a camel they planned to slaughter in honor of the dictator's death.

***

(CNN) -- A self-help expert said Tuesday that he has hired his own investigators to determine what happened at his Arizona retreat last week, when two people died after spending considerable time in a sweat lodge.



Self-help author James Arthur Ray has hired investigators to investigate two deaths at an Arizona sweat lodge.



Tuesday's tearful speech before about 200 supporters was the first time that best-selling self-help author James Arthur Ray had publicly discussed the case.



Authorities said James Shore of Milwaukee, Wisconsin, and Kirby Brown of Westtown, New York, died Friday at the Angel Valley Resort after spending up to two hours in the sauna-like sweat lodge. Nineteen others were treated for injuries.



"I have no idea what happened. We'll figure it out," Ray said, adding that he had hired investigators. "I've lost people I love and really care about."



Police are also investigating the incident at the central Arizona resort, located in a secluded valley 20 minutes from Sedona.



Ray is the author of the best-selling book "Harmonic Wealth: The Secret of Attracting the Life You Want." Ray, described on his Web site as a "personal success strategist," has appeared on CNN's "Larry King Live" and the "Oprah Winfrey Show," and is featured in the self-empowerment film "The Secret."



On Tuesday, Ray told the crowd that he is struggling with the deaths.



"These are challenging times," he said. "I've faced many; none like this. I don't know how to deal with it really."



The use of sweat lodges for spiritual and physical cleansing is a part of several Native American tribes' cultures.



A traditional Native American sweat lodge is a small dome-like structure made up of willow branches carefully tied together and covered in canvas. Rocks are heated in a nearby fire pit and placed inside the lodge, and water is poured over them to create steam.



CNN's Sara Weisfeldt contributed to this report.

***

Philadelphia (CNN) -- The pilot of a tugboat towing a barge that crashed into a sightseeing "duck boat" -- killing two tourists -- intends to plead guilty to a charge stemming from the July 2010 accident, federal prosecutors said Thursday





Matthew R. Devlin, 35, of Catskill, New York, has agreed to plead guilty to one count of misconduct of a ship operator causing death, according to a statement from the office of the U.S. attorney for eastern Pennsylvania. He also will surrender his ship¹s mate license, the statement said.





Devlin could be sentenced to up to 46 months in prison, the statement said. No sentencing date was given. The plea agreement closes the case, the statement said.





Two tourists from Hungary -- one 16 years old, the other 20 -- died when a 250-foot sludge barge towed by the tugboat overran a disabled 33-foot "Ride the Ducks" tour boat on the Delaware River, plunging the amphibious vessel and its 35 passengers and two crew members underwater.





According to National Transportation Safety Board findings, tugboat pilot Devlin made and received 21 cell phone calls in addition to surfing the web using a company laptop during his more than two hours at the wheel.





The NTSB released its final report on June 21.





The incident was "another tragic example of the deadliness of distraction," Deborah Hersman, chairwoman of the NTSB, said after the final report showed several people involved were on the cell phones or computers.





After the accident, Devlin initially told his superiors and the Coast Guard that he was dealing with a serious family medical emergency involving his 6-year-old son.





The sightseeing duck boat was anchored in the shipping channel after being shut down because the boat's operator saw smoke and feared an on-board fire.





Lawyers who represented the families of the two victims released a statement Thursday saying the families "are gratified that Federal prosecutors have acted to hold one of the responsible parties accountable in this tragedy that should have been avoided."





The statement from attorneys Robert J. Mongeluzzi, Andrew Duffy, Peter Ronai and Holly Ostrov Ronai added that the families "expect the corporations who were involved to acknowledge their roles and act accordingly." The statement did not elaborate.

***

(CNN) -- Britain's Amir Khan has lost his International Boxing Federation (IBF) and World Boxing Association (WBA) world light-welterweight titles after a controversial split points decision defeat to American Lamont Peterson in their showdown at the Washington Convention Center.





Khan was given the fight 115-110 on one of the judge's scorecards. However, the other two judges awarded local fighter Peterson the decision by scores of 113-112, enough for Khan to lose his belts.





The result proved contentious with referee Joe Cooper twice deducting Khan a point for pushing, in the seventh and 12th rounds, decisions that ultimately turned the fight in Peterson's favor.





A stunned Khan was clearly frustrated with the decision, saying in his post-fight interview: "It was like I was fighting two people in the ring, the referee and Lamont.





"I can see why there hasn't been a big fight in Washington in the last 20 years, because of decisions like this," added 25-year-old Khan -- who suffered only his second defeat from 28 professional bouts.





Meanwhile, Peterson, who improved to 30-1-1 after his win, said: "A lot of people thought I was the underdog but I followed my game plan the entire time and it worked.





"It was a long road but all the hard work paid off for me and it couldn't have been a better night."





Khan dominated the early stages of the fight, knocking down the challenger with a fierce right hand with just 28 seconds remaining of the opening round.





However, the fight began to harder to call as it progressed, and the moment when Khan was deducted a point for repeated pushing with his left forearm in round seven proved pivotal.





"Every time I tried to keep him away from me he kept coming in low," Khan continued. "I was the cleaner fighter. He was either going to head butt me or push me all night and the referee wasn't giving me a chance."

***

(RealSimple.com) -- Why shoes are called "pumps" and other strange-but-true stories behind the clothes and accessories you know and love.

So, how did the trend for pointed-toe shoes start?

Manolo who? Long before they ever made an appearance on the TV show "Sex and the City," pointed shoes were favored by Polish nobles, who introduced the fashion to England on a diplomatic visit in the 1300s.

The shoes, dubbed "crackowes" or "poulaines" -- after Kraków, Poland -- were so long that a chain running from the toe to the knee was often required to keep them from dragging.

In 1363 the English attempted to rein in the look by law, assigning shoe spans to social classes. Commoners could sport footwear with toes of up to six inches, while those in the royal ranks were allowed a full two feet in length.

Who invented the sports bra?

In 1977 University of Vermont student Lisa Lindahl was running 30 miles a week -- and her bra wasn't holding up. With the help of two classmates, Lindahl sewed together two jock straps and -- presto! -- the sports bra was born.

The coeds founded the company Jogbra a year later, garnering eternal gratitude from exercise-loving women everywhere. Almost 40,000 sports bras are now sold annually. Real Simple: Best bras for every figure

Is there a real Mary Jane behind Mary Jane shoes?

Not quite: The most widely held theory is that the single-strapped footwear was named for a character in "Buster Brown," a children's comic strip that was popular in the early 1900s. Mary Jane was either Buster Brown's sweetheart or sister, depending on which source you consult.

What's the connection between Shakespeare and raincoats?

Gabardine, a water-repellent fabric invented by Burberry, got its first mention from Shakespeare. The Bard used the word in The Merchant of Venice to refer to a coarse cloak worn as protection from storms.

During World War I, British officers on the front lines kept warm and dry in a uniform coat made of the material -- the original Burberry trench.

Who was the first person known to have pierced ears?

No one knows who originated the style, but there's evidence that as early as 2500 B.C. Sumerian women wore pierced earrings -- gold half-moon hoops.

And guys tired of defending their diamond studs can rest easy: Men have been wearing earrings since ancient Egypt, where the jewelry was introduced in 1500 B.C. Real Simple: Best way to clean jewelry

What was the inspiration for Lilly Pulitzer's colorful printed dresses?

Bored Palm Beach socialite Lilly Pulitzer opened a juice stand in 1959 to pass the time, but she found one drawback: The citrus concoctions discolored her clothes.

She instructed her dressmaker to create a uniform that would camouflage the bright stains, and the "Lilly" design -- sleeveless cotton shifts in vibrant prints -- was born. The style was an instant hit with customers, who soon began placing more orders for dresses than juice.

How did pumps, stilettos, and sneakers get their names?

The term pump first popped up in 1550 in England, where male servants sported the style. It is said that the noise they made while wearing the loose-fitting shoes resembled the sound of a water pump.

The word sneaker entered the language in the 1870s; the rubber soles made the shoes quiet and therefore "sneaky."

The modern usage of stiletto, a Renaissance-era Italian word for an assassin's narrow-bladed knife, made its debut in 1953. The word turned out to be especially appropriate, because the shoes' pointy heels were murder on wooden floors.

When did folks start toting around umbrellas?

For thousands of years, in such places as Egypt, China, Japan, Mesopotamia, and India, umbrellas were used exclusively to shade the heads of dignitaries from the broiling sun. (When it rained, the well-to-do stayed dry in covered carriages and sedan chairs.)

Umbrellas weren't employed in inclement weather until

***

(CNN) -- This spring break, thousands of college students will ditch the bars and the beaches to do something more meaningful with their vacation time.



Brad Vonck (bottom, left) and other student volunteers worked with the Cherokee Nation in Stilwell, Oklahoma.



Brad Vonck is one of them. A sophomore at the University of Illinois, Vonck will travel to San Juan, Texas, in a group of 13 students to volunteer with La Union del Pueblo Entero, an organization that helps strengthen the communities and lives of farm workers and their families.



"Learning about different cultures is very important to me," Vonck said. "I like to engage in different areas of life that I don't really understand."



Every year, more and more college students, like Vonck, are choosing to spend their valuable time off from school participating in "alternative spring break" programs -- community service-based opportunities dealing with the most pressing issues of the day, including hunger and homelessness, disaster relief and global warming.



"If you can name a social issue, then students are doing trips around it," said Jill Piacitelli, executive director of Break Away, an organization that trains and helps colleges across the United States promote alternative break programs.



For the past six years, these programs have been growing in popularity among college students. Break Away estimated that this year, nearly 65,000 students will participate in its alternative break programs, an 11 percent increase from 2008.



"It's a student-led social movement. ... This is a group that very much wants to be involved in the world around them," Piacitelli said of the volunteers. "They're solution-oriented. They want to innovate and lead and involve their peers."



The average domestic trip costs around $250 or $300, Piacitelli said, which includes "housing, travel, social activities, food and often a donation to the community."



Many university programs offer financial aid and the option to raise money to help pay for trips. "It is rare that anyone who wants to go on a trip cannot go," Piacitelli said. The affordability is part of the reason why so many students return for second or third trips.



Nikunj Shah, a graduate of Arcadia University, has taken several alternative spring break trips volunteering in the United States and Mexico. This year, he will be traveling as an alumnus to Jean Lafitte, Louisiana, a city that has been largely ignored by disaster relief efforts in the wake of hurricanes Katrina, Wilma and Rita.



"I've always had an interest in helping people. I've always been really involved in community service," Shah said. "So I saw this as an opportunity to go places I haven't been before, to get a feel for different cultures and to help people there that truly need help."



In an effort to expand their alternative spring break options, universities across the United States partner with humanitarian organizations like the United Way of America. Randy Punley, director of corporate and media partnerships at the United Way, oversees the organization's Alternative Spring Break programs. After Hurricane Katrina, the United Way partnered with MTV to engage young people in the response effort.



"We knew there was an interest and a passion in young people for the work we were trying to achieve," Punley said.



Since then, the United Way has evolved and expanded, establishing chapters on college campuses. The organization has also developed an Alternative Spring Break Social Media Challenge, encouraging young people to be active in their communities and use social media Web sites, like Facebook or Twitter, to involve other people.



"Whether it started with the first Gulf War, punctuated by the September 11 attacks and Katrina and the economic meltdown, young people have a very different perspective about what's going on in the world," Punley said.



At the end of the weeklong trip, most students say it was the best week of their lives, Punley said. The increasing interest in these programs, Punley believes, speaks volumes about the attitudes of Generation Y

***

(CNN) -- A pregnant bartender says she is fighting to keep her job at a gentlemen's club in New York.





Jennifer Paviglianiti, of Centereach, N.Y., claims her employer, Café Royale, discriminated against her because of her pregnancy. She filed a claim with the EEOC earlier this month.





Paviglianiti says she feared how her boss would react to her pregnancy and wanted to wait a few months to tell him. However, John Doxey found out before she could tell him, and that's when Paviglianiti claims her job became threatened.





Up until she became pregnant, the 29-year-old says she had been one of the club's most popular bartenders. Read the complaint





She says she "bonused 9 times" since August and it was only toward the end of her pregnancy that she asked for different hours.





Due to the tough economy, Paviglianiti says she needed this specific bartending job and feared she'd soon be out of work. To protect herself, she decided to secretly record her boss on tape.





On those recordings Doxey can be heard saying, "Customers don't wanna come in and see a pregnant woman behind the bar!" These recordings were also submitted in her EEOC discrimination claim.





In other recordings, Doxey is heard suggesting that Paviglianiti's appearance is hurting business. "Maybe they don't go there because the bartender is pregnant and doesn't look sexy."





Workplace attorney Robin Bond said it's within Doxey's right to do this if employees were informed that they had to maintain a specific "sexy look" to qualify for the job.





In this case, that means Paviglianiti would have had to be hired as a "model and a bartender" and get a written agreement to this -- as is done in the casino industry, Bond said on HLN Prime News with Mike Galanos.





When asked by Galanos if she signed any paperwork of that sort, Paviglianiti said, "not at all ... nothing."





Paviglianiti was taken off the bartending schedule for a few weeks, during which she hired an attorney. She later returned to the club as a cashier but claims she made much less than she did as a bartender.





However, Doxey's attorney says this proves she was never fired and her job duties were only adjusted to accommodate her pregnancy.





"My client declines to comment on pending legal action except to say it considers that Ms. Paviglianiti allegations are without merit," attorney Robert F. Milman said in a statement. "Ms. Paviglianiti was not terminated from her employment, she presently is on maternity leave and she has the right to return to work upon the conclusion of her leave."





Paviglianiti is due to have a baby girl this week.

***

(CNN) -- Singer Natalie Cole told CNN's Larry King she is searching for a kidney after an illness caused both of her kidneys to fail.

Singer Natalie Cole continues to tour, despite being on dialysis three times a week.

Before she finished telling King Tuesday night about her battles with drugs, illnesses and her search for a kidney, dozens of e-mails flooded the CNN studio.

They were all offers from people saying they would get tested to see whether their kidney could be donated.

King handed a thick stack of paper to Cole.

"These are all e-mails from dozens -- dozens of people offering to be tested to see if they can match, who want to give you a kidney," King said.

Cole stared at the papers for a moment.

"There are some great human beings out there. That's all I can say," Cole said.  Watch Natalie Cole's interview  with Larry King »

"I'm on a very long list, which is why we are looking to donors," said Cole, the daughter of legendary crooner Nat King Cole.

Cole said her kidney troubles date back to February 2008 when she was diagnosed with hepatitis C. Cole said she attributes the hepatitis C from her well-publicized struggles to stop using cocaine and heroin. Cole said she has been sober for some time now after two stints in a rehabilitation clinic.

Cole said she underwent chemotherapy in an aggressive way to fight the virus. Within four months of getting chemotherapy, both of Cole's kidneys failed.

"I couldn't breathe. I -- I went into -- literally, my kidneys stopped functioning. They stopped, you know, processing the fluid that was starting to build up in my body."

Since then, Cole has been on dialysis three days a week and has been searching for a kidney, she told King in one of the first public interviews about the issue.

Cole won six Grammy awards for her 1991 critically acclaimed album "Unforgettable ... With Love ," a jazzy tribute to her father. She won a Grammy this year for her new album "Still Unforgettable" and another Grammy for her work on another album.

Cole said that she has still been able to tour this year even with her kidney ailment.

"I have been on dialysis in Istanbul, Milan, Indonesia, Manila, London. It's -- it's amazing," Cole said.

***

(CNN) -- World champion Lewis Hamilton has been disqualified from last weekend's Australian Grand Prix in Melbourne after presenting "misleading" evidence to stewards.

Hamilton has been disqualified from the Australian GP after presenting "misleading" evidence to stewards.

The McLaren driver and Toyota's Jarno Trulli were called to an FIA hearing in Malaysia -- the site of this weekend's grand prix -- on Thursday to discuss an incident during Sunday's race.

Trulli finished third at Melbourne's Albert Park, only to later be handed a 25-second penalty by race stewards which relegated him to 12th position and saw Hamilton lifted into third.

However, following Thursday's hearing, Trulli has been reinstated in third position.

McLaren had complained that veteran Italian Trulli had illegally passed Hamilton under yellow flags following an accident late on involving Red Bull's Sebastian Vettel and Robert Kubica in his BMW Sauber -- who were running second and third at the time.

Trulli had decided not to appeal the original decision but the FIA, the sport's governing body, said it had received new information and pressed ahead with a second hearing.

"The stewards, having considered the new elements presented to them from the 2009 Australian Grand Prix, consider that Lewis Hamilton, and the Vodafone McLaren Mercedes team, acted in a manner prejudicial to the conduct of the event by providing evidence deliberately misleading to the stewards at the hearing on Sunday 29th March 2009," the FIA said in a statement.

It said Hamilton and McLaren had violated its rules and retrospectively disqualified him from the race.

Meanwhile, Trulli believes justice has been served after Thursday's decision. "I am happy because I wanted some justice and I got it," he told PA Sport.

"I am happy for myself and the team and I have to thank the FIA because it does not happen very often they reconsider something.

"It must have been really hard for them, but they had common sense to really try and understand what was going on. I have always been honest and it has paid off."

***

BEIJING, China (CNN) -- Police in Tibet have arrested 16 Buddhist monks and are seeking three more for their alleged involvement in one bombing and two attempted bombings, authorities in Tibet told state-run media.



Chinese People's Liberation Army soldiers are shown in the streets of Lhasa, Tibet, on March 14.



All three cases occurred in Tibet's Mangkam county during the first half of April, according to the Tibet Autonomous Regional Department of Public Security.



The suspects confessed, police said, saying they had listened to foreign radio and were following separatist propaganda from the Dalai Lama, China's Xinhua news agency reported.



CNN could not confirm whether the suspects confessed.



The Dalai Lama has said he does not advocate violence or a separate and independent Tibet. He has said he wants a genuine autonomy that preserves the cultural heritage of Tibet.



Beijing blames the Dalai Lama and his followers for violence that erupted March 14 amid anti-Chinese demonstrations in Tibet. Some protesters advocated independence from China while others demonstrated against the growing influence of ethnic Han Chinese in Tibet and other regions of China with ethnic Tibetan populations.



The Chinese authorities cracked down on the protests, which began peacefully on the 49th anniversary of a failed Tibetan uprising.



Widespread violence broke out across China's Tibetan region, especially in the Tibetan capital of Lhasa, following a week of protests by hundreds of Buddhist monks.



"Real Buddhists should learn Buddhist scriptures by heart, love their country and their religion, abide by the law, and bring happiness to people," said Dainzin Chilai, vice-chairman of the China Buddhist Association and vice-chairman of the People's Political Consultative Conference of Tibet Autonomous Region. "They should not involve themselves in cruel killing and sabotage."



Both groups Chilai represents are affiliated with the Chinese government.



The unrest resulted in the deaths of at least 18 civilians and one police officer, according to government figures. It also injured 382 civilians and 241 police officers and led to the looting of businesses and home and the burning of shops and vehicles.



Tibet's self-proclaimed government-in-exile put the death toll from the protests at 140.



At the time of the unrest, roughly 1,000 people hurled rocks and concrete at security forces, demolishing military trucks and pushing back riot police, a witness told CNN, and Tibetans seemed to be targeting shops and vehicles owned by Han Chinese, the predominant ethnic group in China.

***

EL CALABOZ, Texas (CNN)  -- Eloisa Tamez said she isn't scared anymore, just determined. "I am not backing down," she said.

The U.S. government wants to build a border fence like this one. About 100 landowners are fighting it.

Tamez owns three acres of land along the Texas-Mexico border where the Department of Homeland Security would like to build a border fence. The property is a remnant of a 12,000-acre grant from Spain to her family in 1767, before the United States even existed.

"It is my history. It is my heritage," Tamez said.

This week, the Justice Department began legal action against landowners and municipalities who have refused to give government surveyors access to their land.

Tamez expects she will be sued sometime soon, but she is not intimidated.

Asked how long she will fight, she said, "As long as I have to."

Michael Chertoff, the Secretary of Homeland Security, said the fence will not be stopped by opponents like Tamez.

"Can we simply abandon an enterprise because it is a problem for a particular individual?" Chertoff told CNN. "I don't think I can accept that."  Watch Chertoff say it's "civic responsibility" to give up land »

Chertoff believes a fence would curb the steady stream of illegal immigrants making their way across the border and lessen the flow of drugs. He also argues it will increase the safety of Border Patrol agents who have faced increasing violence.

The government wants to build 700 miles of fence along the Mexican border, including 370 miles of it by the end of this year. About 70 miles of fence is to be built in the Rio Grande Valley by year's end, if the government gets its way.

The Rio Grande forms a natural barrier along this stretch of the border, but in some places it is narrow enough to swim across.

On the banks of the river there is ample evidence that people do so. Piles of underwear lie discarded by swimmers after they make it across. The swimmers change into dry clothes they have carried across in plastic bags. Then they disappear into the United States.

The Border Patrol has stepped up its efforts in the Rio Grande Valley with more lights, and sensors to pick up movement. A levee built along the river has a muddy road on top used by Border Patrol vehicles to patrol the area.

Richard Cortez, the mayor of the border town of McAllen, Texas, believes hiring more Border Patrol agents, deepening the Rio Grande, and clearing its banks of tall vegetation would provide better border protection than the fence.

Cortez calls the fence "a multibillion-dollar speed bump," which will slow, but not stop, illegal immigration.

"It is a false sense of security," he said. "America will not be safe. America will continue to waste resources on something that is not going to work."

Cortez and other border mayors who oppose construction of the fence formed a group called the Texas Border Coalition. The coalition wrote to Chertoff asking for further consultations on the fence, but this week the Department of Homeland Security turned them down.

While expressing support for open dialogue with residents and officials, David Pagan of U.S. Customs and Border Protection wrote in an e-mail, "We do not plan to suspend work on the construction of fence in order to hold a series of additional consultation meetings."

Cortez said his city is contemplating a court test of the law that mandated the construction of the border fence.

And so a battle is being waged by about 100 landowners, those like Eloisa Tamez who are standing firm.   "I will not allow them to come and survey my land. I have an American-given right to protect my property," she said. E-mail to a friend

***

New York (CNN) -- A man federal authorities say is part of a Brooklyn husband-and-wife identity theft team has been charged with killing two of their victims.





Dmitriy Yakovlev, 42, is scheduled to be arraigned Monday in U.S. District Court in Brooklyn. The more serious charges were included in a supserseding indictment unsealed Thursday.





Yakovlev was charged with the murder of Irina Malezhik, a Russian language translator who lived in Brooklyn and worked in the federal courts. She vanished in October 2007.





He also is accused in the slaying of Viktor Alekseyev, who disappeared in December 2005 and whose remains were found in New Jersey in 2006, according to federal authorities.





A third identity theft victim, Brooklyn resident Michael Klein, disappeared in November 2003 and has not been seen since.





In addition to Yakovlev's murder charges, the new indictment charges him and wife Julia Yakovlev, 36, with 17 counts of identity theft, bank fraud, credit card fraud and "effecting fraudulent transactions."





Julie Yakovlev was not charged in connection with the slayings but she has been accused of cashing $40,000 drawn from one victim's account, according to Robert Nardoza, spokesman for the U.S. Attorney's Office for the Eastern District of New York.





The couple was originally charged in August 2009 with illegally using the identities of three people between 2003 and 2007. Julie Takovlev is free on bail while her husband remains in custody, their attorneys said.





"Identity theft victims usually lose their money," NYPD Police Commissioner Ray Kelly said in a statement, "In this case, they allegedly lost their lives, too."





Malezhik was last seen on October 15, 2007, leaving her apartment on a security video camera. Immediately after her disappearance, the couple began withdrawing money and purchasing various items in Malezhik's name, according to court documents.





"I'm skeptical as to the foundation and nature of charges," said Ken Russo, attorney for Dmitriy Yakovlev.





Julia Yakovlev's attorney, Alexei Grosshtern, would only tell CNN that there are "no new charges" against his client. He said any charges in the superseding indictment already existed in August 2009's original indictment.

***

LONDON, England (CNN)  -- A Russian naval ship rescued a Dutch container vessel under attack by suspected Somali pirates in the Gulf of Aden, the head of the International Maritime Bureau said Wednesday.



The Liberian-flagged oil tanker Sirius Star was recently released by pirates off Somalia.



Two or three pirate speedboats were chasing the Dutch ship, with the goal of boarding it, when the Russians intervened, said Capt. Pottengal Mukundan, director of the International Maritime Bureau in London.



He said the pirates fired two rocket-propelled grenades at the Dutch ship, but no injuries were reported.



The incident occurred about midday Tuesday.



The Russians chased one of the speedboats but the pirates got away, Mukundan said. He said he did not know where the Dutch ship was headed.



"It is important that the naval vessels continue to respond robustly to these pirates," he said.  Watch how attacks peaked in 2008 »



Hijackings off the coast of East Africa have become a growing international concern, prompting a number of foreign navies to patrol the Gulf of Aden and neighboring coastal areas.



The Gulf of Aden links the Indian Ocean and the Red Sea. About 20,000 oil tankers, freighters and merchant vessels pass along the crucial shipping route near Somalia each year.



Most of the attacks are blamed on pirates based in largely lawless Somalia, a country racked by poverty and conflict. Watch CNN's exclusive interview with a pirate



According to the United Nations, there were 115 reported pirate attacks off the Somali coast in 2008, including 46 successful hijackings. Read blog on how CNN contacted a pirate



The troubling rise in Somali piracy has led the United Nations to step up efforts to tackle the crime.



The first U.N. group to address piracy met Wednesday in New York.



Mark Kimmitt, U.S. assistant secretary of state for political-military affairs chaired the "contact group" of two dozen nations and five multi-national organizations.



He said the group was formed to "establish a counter-piracy coordination mechanism," and the members believe more can be done to halt piracy.



Still, Kimmitt noted that less than one percent of manifests off the Somali coast are attacked by pirates and only 50 percent of those have crew and passengers taken hostage.



The U.N. Security Council adopted a resolution in December expanding counter-piracy measures off the Horn of Africa, including a stipulation that allows national and regional military forces to chase pirates onshore in Somalia when in "hot pursuit."

***

(CNN) -- Fire, the wheel and even cup noodles were among the varied answers to the question posed by CNN: "What is man's greatest achievement?"



Man set foot on the moon on July 20, 1969. Was that man's greatest achievement? Have your say.



CNN producers armed with cameras put the puzzler to passersby in Berlin, Madrid, Rome, Bangkok, Tokyo, New Delhi and Paris.



In the lead-up to the 40th anniversary of NASA's Apollo 11 mission, more people might have been expected to nominate the moon landing as one of man's greatest feats. Alas not.



One woman in Germany suggested the computer. "It has opened up my world. I can stay in my house and travel all over the world," she said.



Another suggested the airplane. "It's the easiest way to get from one country to the other. Imagine if you would be able to only take the ship. It would take you ages to go somewhere, so it makes humanity more flexible."  See what they said »



Fire also got a look-in. "Everything started there right?" said one man in Spain. There was agreement in Italy: "I think the most important is that man discovered fire because it's bringing a lot of life."



The written word was also nominated in Italy, as were architecture and sanitation.



"The biggest achievement of mankind? Music, right?" suggested one woman in Spain.



In New Delhi, video games got one man's vote. "It allows you to be whomever you want, in whichever world you want, and lets you live an alternate fantasy life," he said.



One hopeful businessman in Italy told us, perhaps prematurely: "Peace, I'd say peace. That would be the greatest achievement for all."



What do you think is man's greatest achievement? Where does the moon landing fit in?

***

(CNN) -- From the time she was an 11-year-old, blue-eyed, freckle-faced blonde until she was a 29-year-old woman with two children, Jaycee Dugard was kept locked away in a backyard compound of sheds and tarps by a couple who police say abducted her.



Jaycee Dugard was locked in a shed tucked under a blue tarp in her alleged captor's backyard.



She was more than 160 miles from home, and her family had no idea where she was.



Nobody else knew she was there except the couple who snatched her off the street in front of her house in South Lake Tahoe, California, in 1991, and took her straight to the soundproof shed, police said.



Dugard's pocket of Phillip and Nancy Garrido's backyard in Antioch, California, was so overgrown no one even knew it existed.



The details about Dugard's time in captivity emerged Thursday after one of Northern California's most enduring mysteries was solved and the Garridos were arrested and accused of her kidnapping.



Anyone who came across the couple's backyard, littered with garbage cans and a dishwasher, would assume that it ended at a 6-foot fence.  Watch aerial images of the backyard compound »



"You could walk through the backyard and never know there was another set of living circumstances," said Fred Kollar, undersheriff of El Dorado County. "There was nothing that would cause you to question it. You can't see it from either adjoining property. It was presumably well arranged."



But tucked away beyond the tangle of bushes, high grass and trees was a blue tarp that concealed the only world Dugard had known since her abduction.



Kollar said the property had "a hidden backyard within a backyard." It included several sheds no taller than 6 feet, two tents and several outbuildings, "where Jaycee and the girls spent most of their lives."



It also held a vehicle that matched the description of the car used in Dugard's kidnapping, Kollar said.



The "secondary" backyard was inside the first and was "screened from view." One of the sheds was soundproof, he said.



In it were sheds and tarps, a makeshift bathroom and shower, along with electricity supplied by extension cords. Kollar compared the primitive conditions to camping.



Dugard lived for several years there by herself. The sheds were locked from the outside.



She grew up and had her captor's children there, and raised them there.



"None of them have ever been to school, they've never been to a doctor," Kollar said. "They were kept in complete isolation in this compound, if you will, at the rear of the house," he said. "They were born there."



The children, both girls, are now 15 and 11.



"They are all in good health," Kollar said in response to a question about how Dugard and her children are doing. "But living in a backyard for the last 18 years does take its toll."

***

(CNN) -- Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad said Thursday that a new Middle East -- one "without Zionists and without colonialists" -- was quickly emerging as regional bonds grow stronger by the day.





The hard-line leader made the comments after a meeting with Syrian President Bashar al-Assad in Damascus on Thursday.





"The whole world should know that Iran will stand behind the Syrian nation to the end," Ahmadinejad said in remarks aired on Iran's state-run Press TV. "Regional bonds are very strong."





His comments came during a two-day visit to Damascus that follows efforts by the United States to weaken ties between Iran and Syria.





President Obama recently nominated veteran diplomat Robert Ford to be the new ambassador in Damascus, ending a five-year diplomatic hiatus there and sparking talk of a renewed relationship. But Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has tempered the thawing of relations by saying that Washington remains concerned with Syria's close ties to Iran.





"No one has enlightened her to comment on regional issues," Ahmadinejad said, slamming Clinton's statements as interfering. "The whole U.S. government has no impact whatsoever on regional relations."





Tensions between Washington and Tehran have risen over Iran's nuclear program, which Iran insists is intended for civilian use but the United States believes is intended for developing weapons.





Assad voiced strong support for Iran and brushed off U.S. sentiment.





"I find it strange how they talk about Middle East stability and at the same time talk about dividing two countries," he said.





The meeting between Assad and Ahmadinejad sparked a harsh reaction from Israeli President Shimon Peres.





"The time has come to speak the truth," he said in a written statement. "The problem in the Middle East is not the Palestinians. The Palestinian problem will be resolved through the peace process in Israel. The central problem in the Middle East is Iran's attempt to reach hegemony over the Arab lands."





"The source of the problem is Ahmadinejad's megalomania. Assad must choose what he wants -- to join the Iranian camp of evil and terror or to make peace with Israel," he said.





He called on Assad to sit down with Israel to reach a peace agreement.

***

ASUNCION, Paraguay (CNN) -- The World Health Organization plans to send 2 million vaccines to Paraguay by Sunday after yellow fever emerged there for the first time in 34 years.



Anxiety has gripped the South American nation of 7 million since authorities confirmed the first cases of yellow fever there last month. The disease has killed seven people and prompted the government to declare a three-month state of emergency.



The government's health ministry is scrambling to find doses for a massive vaccination campaign. Nearby Brazil already has sent 1 million vaccines.



The World Health Organization's shipment of 2 million doses is scheduled to arrive on Saturday or Sunday, according to a report Friday in the Paraguay's national news agency, Jakueke.



Protesters have closed roads and started fires amid news reports that health workers were vaccinating certain politicians in their homes.



"I categorically reject these kinds of irresponsible allegations," said Health Minister Oscar Martinez Doldan.



Meanwhile, some people have endured long waits for vaccines in sweltering heat.



"Citizens pay taxes for our health and education, but there are no vaccines here," Cynthia Shaerer, told CNN. "We don't need speeches here. We need vaccines."



"I want the president to tell me," another said. "If we are going to die, who is responsible?"



People contract yellow fever from the bite of an infected mosquito. The disease causes fever, muscle pain, headaches, shivering, nausea and vomiting, the World Health Organization says.



Most people improve after three or four days, but some enter a second "toxic" phase that causes fever, jaundice and blood in the vomit, the health organization says. About half of the people who enter the second phase of yellow fever die within 10 days.



There is no treatment, so medical authorities recommend vaccinations.



Yellow fever typically is found in tropical regions of Africa and Latin America.



Most of the seven deaths in Paraguay happened in the town of San Lorenzo, about 12 miles (20 km) from the capital city of Asuncion.



The public-health crisis comes two months before scheduled elections in Paraguay. Some analysts say it presents a delicate situation for the ruling Colorado Party, which has held power for 60 years. E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- A day before Democratic Illinois Gov. Rod Blagojevich was busted by federal investigators on corruption charges, he dared authorities to tape his phone calls if they thought he was guilty of anything.

Illinois Gov. Rod Blagojevich, shown here in 2003, was known as a tireless campaigner.

"If anybody wants to tape my conversations, go right ahead, feel free to do it," Blagojevich said Monday outside a Chicago window factory where workers were protesting their layoffs. His comment came in response to a reporter's question about corruption allegations.

Authorities had indeed bugged the governor's campaign office and tapped his home phone, catching him talking about alleged plans to sell the U.S. Senate seat left empty by President-elect Barack Obama.

During his political career, Blagojevich made headlines. A native Chicagoan, he was thought of as a charismatic guy who always liked to ingratiate himself to the working man. But he was never considered a natural politician, particularly when he first began exploring a run for the governorship in 2002.

His father, Rade Blagojevich, was a Yugoslavian immigrant who came to America after World War II. The elder Blagojevich worked in a steel mill to support his family, which was then living on the city's then-downtrodden northwest side.

As a boy, Blagojevich held odd jobs -- shining shoes, delivering pizzas -- and worked in Alaska for two summers in his teens. He used the money to enroll in Northwestern University, a prestigious school in Evanston, Illinois, just outside of Chicago. He went on to law school at Pepperdine University, then went back to Chicago after graduation to be a lawyer.

Blagojevich later joined the State's Attorney Office in Cook County -- the county in which Chicago is located -- and built a reputation for prosecuting domestic violence cases.

During his time as a lawyer, where Blagojevich grew to enjoy the increasing public spotlight, he began flirting with the idea of running for office. He met his wife, Patricia Mell, in 1988 at a political fundraiser for her father, well-known Chicago Alderman Richard Mell. Blagojevich started working in the father's office, married Patricia Mell and had a daughter, Amy. They had another daughter a few years later.

He served in the Illinois House from 1992 to 1996, representing the North Side Chicago district before moving on to Congress in 1997.

During his three terms in Congress, he helped bring $240 million in federal funds to the Chicago Transit Authority and an additional $10 million to help protect Lake Michigan's shoreline. He grabbed headlines in 1999 when he traveled to Yugoslavia with the Rev. Jesse Jackson to negotiate the release of three American soldiers. Blagojevich met with then-President Slobodan Milosevic, who later faced a war crimes tribunal but died of a heart attack before the proceedings were concluded.

Blagojevich set his sights on the governorship in 2002 with an aggressive appeal to the workaday Illinoisan. He portrayed himself as a regular guy who wanted to do right by the middle class.

Tirelessly campaigning, knocking on doors and running down-home-flavored television ads, Blagojevich jokingly told voters not to worry about pronouncing his last name right. Just call me Rod, he said.

At one point, a staunch supporter of his Republican opponent, Michael P. Flanagan, marveled to the Chicago Sun-Times that he was impressed by the number of appearances Blagojevich was making during the campaign.

"He is one of the most energetic guys in politics today," Flanagan said in a Sun-Times profile. "If he was an athlete, they would test him for amphetamines. He would come up clean -- but they would test him."

Blagojevich was able to leverage a string of endorsements from popular figures like Chicago Mayor Richard M. Daley. He also got the support of the Service Employees International Union, the Illinois Federation of Teachers, the American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees, and the International Brotherhood of Teamsters.

In the 2002 governor's race, Blagojevich rode to victory 7 points ahead of opponent Jim Ryan.

Blagojevich commenced his re-election campaign in 2006 by

***

WASHINGTON (CNN)  -- Control tower tapes reveal that the pilot of presidential hopeful Barack Obama's plane told air traffic controllers there was an emergency when he made an unscheduled landing last month in St. Louis, Missouri.



Barack Obama's plane had to make an unscheduled landing on July 7 in St. Louis, Missouri.



On July 7 the Midwest Airlines MD-81 made an unscheduled landing during the flight from Chicago, Illinois, to Charlotte, North Carolina. The owner of the plane initially said the landing was not caused by an emergency.



However the tapes, released to ABC News through a Freedom of Information Act request, contradict that report. ABC first reported on the tapes on Thursday.



Federal Aviation Administration spokeswoman Laura Brown told CNN Thursday evening that preliminary information for incidents is often incomplete or incorrect.  Watch what the tapes revealed »



According to the tapes, the pilot told an FAA air traffic controller that he had limited ability to move the plane's nose up and down.



"We have limited pitch authority at flight levels; we're descending to see if we can regain pitch authority," the pilot told the air traffic controller.



"At this time we would like to declare this an emergency and also have CFR (fire and rescue equipment) standing by in St. Louis," the pilot said. The pilot remained calm throughout the recording.



Midwest Airlines acknowledged at the time that the pilot had detected a control problem in the pitch of the plane after an emergency evacuation chute opened in the aircraft's tail cone while in flight. Normally, the chute deploys only after landing and after the tail cone pops off.



The pitch, or angle of the nose of an airplane, affects the pilot's ability to control the plane.



The airline said the pilot had "full authority of the aircraft."



According to the tapes, the pilot said he regained control as the plane began to descend into St. Louis.



"We had a pitch authority problem, now that we have come down to a lower altitude it seems to have rectified itself. We do have pitch control of the aircraft at this time," he said.



Fire trucks met the aircraft when it landed at Lambert-St. Louis International Airport.



After the plane landed, Obama told reporters the plane landed because of a mechanical problem and noted it marked the first time he had had to do so.



"Just thought we'd spice things up a little bit today," he joked. "Anytime a pilot says that something's not working the way its supposed to, then, you know, you make sure you tighten your seat belt. Everything seemed under control, the pilots knew what they were doing."



The National Transportation Safety Board, which is investigating the incident, said last month that there was no evidence of tampering.



An "examination of the hardware did not reveal any evidence of missing components, nor any evidence of tampering," the board said.



CNN's Jeanne Meserve and Mike Ahlers contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- It has been more than 65 years, but for 93-year-old Anthony Snetro, the image of a Japanese torpedo bomber closing in on him will never go away.





Snetro still has vivid memories of the day his life flashed before his eyes.





"Our ship was starting to swing around," Snetro softly recalls. "All of a sudden, here comes a Jap torpedo bomber all aflame right at my eye level. I could have reached out and touched the wing."





Snetro joined the U.S. Navy in 1942 and was immediately assigned to serve aboard the USS Boston in the South Pacific. He hoped enlisting in the Navy would prevent his younger brother from being drafted.





"Let him stay home to help the family," Snetro recalls. "That's why I joined the Navy, I was 25 years old. But finally near the end, they drafted him. He was wounded in Germany but made it home OK."





Snetro was a machinist in the Navy during World War II. Although he had experienced many terrifying moments during his four years in the service, nothing compared to that October night during the Battle of Formosa in 1944.





Up until now, the World War II veteran has shared the experience of that frightening night with only one other person, his son.





"Plainly, I saw the pilot and the gunner in there," Snetro explains as his voice gets louder. "The plane was afire. Good thing we were swinging. It just missed us and went along and crashed in the ocean and exploded."





Two other cruisers, the Canberra and the Houston, had already been aerial torpedoed the previous two nights.





"I know one thing, I was really scared there," Snetro recalls, slowly shaking his head as his eyes grow wider. "I couldn't do anything. I was stupefied. I was frozen."





iReport and Facebook team up to honor veterans





The four years that Snetro served were extremely stressful, he says. The heavy cruiser would be at sea for months at a time before finally pulling into port for supplies. When out at sea, there was always a concern, especially during war time.





"We never knew how close we came to being torpedoed, " Snetro says. "The engine room was down below the water. You get hit with a torpedo and you're done."





Snetro realized he needed something to help cope with the dangers of war. He decided to turn to a sport he had been playing since age 10.





"We'd get a few hours off on the beach," Snetro says. "We had equipment, softballs, bats, different things. A bunch of guys would get together and we'd start a little game. It was just for fun. You got a little relaxed."





Playing ball helped him during the unnerving days of World War II and it has helped him ever since. Snetro hopes to continue playing ball for at least a couple more years.





"I enjoy playing ball. It makes me feel good. Seeing my age, I can still run around." he says, smiling. "I can't play like I used to, but I get a hit once in a while."





"Baseball was something that you could keep playing. Just my luck, I came down here (Coral Gables, Florida) and they had a team and I've been playing ever since. It's been great! Otherwise, I'd be sitting at home in a rocking chair!"

***

JERUSALEM (CNN)  -- Israel on Monday restated its long-standing policy regarding Iran after Russia's president indicated that Israel had taken the military option off the table.



The Israel Defense Forces chief of staff, Lt. Gen. Gabi Ashkenazi, says, "Israel has the right to defend itself."



"Contrary to reports, all options [are] on the table on the issue of preventing Iranian nuclear weapons capability," Israeli Deputy Foreign Minister Danny Ayalon posted on his Twitter account.



The Israel Defense Forces chief of staff, Lt. Gen. Gabi Ashkenazi, also weighed in, telling Israel Army Radio that "Israel has the right to defend itself, and all options are open."



"The IDF's working premise is that we have to be prepared for that possibility, and that is exactly what we are doing," he said.



The issue stems from reports that Israel may have struck a deal with Russia regarding Iran and its controversial nuclear program.



Russian President Dmitry Medvedev told CNN's Fareed Zakaria last week that Israeli President Shimon Peres told him in a recent visit to the Russian leader's vacation home that "Israel doesn't intend to deliver any strike against Iran."



"[Peres] said we are a peaceful country, we will not deal such a blow," Medvedev said in the interview, broadcast Sunday on "Fareed Zakaria GPS."



"Therefore any deliveries of systems -- defensive systems -- which are aimed at protecting cannot increase danger, they should reduce it."



Medvedev was referring to Russia's agreement to sell Iran its S-300 anti-aircraft missile system, which he said is in keeping with international law.



The Israeli newspaper Maariv reported Monday that Peres used his influence to persuade Washington to abandon its plans to base a missile defense shield system in Poland and the Czech Republic, a proposal that had rankled Moscow.



In exchange, Moscow agreed to support "imposing sanctions on Iran," Maariv reported.



The United States and Russia have disagreed over Iran and over possible steps the U.N. Security Council may take -- including imposing sanctions -- to push Tehran to comply with U.N. demands concerning its nuclear program.



President Obama told CBS' "Face the Nation" that his objective in revamping the U.S. defense shield plan "was not to negotiate with the Russians."



"The Russians don't make determinations about what our defense posture is," Obama said in the CBS interview shown Sunday.



"If the byproduct of it is that the Russians feel a little less paranoid and are now willing to work more effectively with us to deal with threats like ballistic missiles from Iran or the nuclear development in Iran, you know, then that's a bonus."



CNN's Kevin Flower and Michal Zippori contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- After deliberating for more than four hours, a jury convicted a Nevada man of 22 counts Tuesday for videotaping himself sexually assaulting a toddler, CNN affiliates report.



Chester Arthur Stiles has been convicted of videtaping a sexual assault on a child.



Chester Arthur Stiles, 38, faces a maximum sentence of life in prison. He was convicted of lewdness with a child, sexual assault with a minor, attempted sexual assault with a minor and other related charges.



He showed no reaction as the verdict was read after more than four hours of jury deliberations, according to KLAS. Sentencing was set for May 8.



The crime triggered a national manhunt and search for the girl when the tape surfaced in 2007.



Jurors in Stiles' trial viewed the videotape, but the judge would not allow members sitting in the gallery to view it, and a screen was put up to block the jury box, said Michael Sommermeyer, spokesman for Clark County, Nevada, courts. Some members of the media were allowed to view the tape as well, but the judge did not want the reactions of reporters or the public to influence jurors, he said.



The charges also related to another girl who Stiles was accused of sexually assaulting on videotape.



The tape was given to authorities in September 2007 by a man who said he had found it in the desert five months before. On it, police found images of the small girl being sexually assaulted.



After attempting unsuccessfully to find out the girl's identity, authorities turned to the media for help and released a picture of the girl, and the case drew nationwide attention. She was found in October 2007. An attorney for her mother said she was 7 years old and safe and healthy.



The rape occurred before the girl's third birthday, while she was in the care of a baby-sitter her mother had hired, he said. The mother did not know the girl had been victimized. After the girl was found, authorities asked CNN and other news organizations to stop showing her picture.



In an appearance on "The Dr. Phil Show," the girl's mother said the girl has no recollection of the assault.



Stiles, a resident of Pahrump, Nevada, was arrested in a traffic stop in October 2007. Police said at the time they pulled Stiles' car over because it had no license plate, and became suspicious when the driver displayed an expired California license with a photo that did not match his appearance.



Stiles eventually admitted who he was and that he was being sought, authorities said.



The man who turned the tape over to authorities, Darrin Tuck, faced criminal charges because of the delay in turning it over, during which authorities alleged he showed it to others.



A judge gave Tuck a one-year suspended sentence and three years of probation in April after he pleaded guilty to conspiracy to obstruct a public officer, according to the Las Vegas Review-Journal. He initially had faced a felony count of possession of child pornography.

***

London, England (CNN) -- The iconic Abbey Road Studios made famous by the Beatles are being declared a national historic landmark, British Culture Minister Margaret Hodge announced Tuesday.





"My favorite song of all time, 'If I fell' by the Beatles, was recorded there in 1964, and to have played a part in preserving this world-famous venue is as exciting for me as hearing that song for the first time. Well, almost!" Hodge said in a statement.





"Whether your tastes are for classical, hard rock or pop music, one of your favourites is more than likely to have recorded at Abbey Road," she added.





The studios became an international cultural touchstone when the Beatles were photographed crossing the road there for the cover of their album "Abbey Road."





But it's not only where the Beatles recorded "All You Need is Love" and numerous other songs, but where much of Britain's best known music of the 20th century was laid down.





Rock stars Pink Floyd and Cliff Richard, composer Sir Edward Elgar, and the movie soundtracks for "Star Wars" and the "Harry Potter" films were recorded there.





Hodge declared the site in west London a Grade II listed building based on its "outstanding cultural interest." The classification means that "although changes to the interior are not prohibited, care must be taken to ensure that any alterations with respect to its character and interest are fully considered," the ministry said.





There was intense speculation last week that the studios were for sale, but the owner shot down the notion on Sunday.





The music label that owns them is seeking a partner to help pay for upgrades, according to Terra Firma, which controls record label EMI, the owner of the recording studios.





"EMI confirms that it is holding preliminary discussions for the revitalization of Abbey Road with interested and appropriate third parties," Terra Firma said Sunday.





But that does not mean the studios are for sale, it added.





"In mid-2009, we did receive an offer to buy Abbey Road for in excess of £30 million (currently about $46 million), but this was rejected since we believe that Abbey Road should remain in EMI's ownership," the music company said in a statement.





The company said Sunday it supported the listing of the building as a historic landmark, before the culture ministry's announcement.





Terra Firma bought EMI in 2007.





Andrew Lloyd Webber, the composer of "Phantom of the Opera" and "Cats" and one of Britain's richest men, is "very interested" in buying the studios, a representative said Friday.





"He first recorded there in 1967 with Tim Rice. Andrew has since recorded most of his musicals there," said the representative, Jenni Pain.





"He thinks it is vital that the studios are saved for the future of the music industry in the UK. Abbey Road has such great facilities, with three major recording studios, and Andrew has probably brought more musicians to record there than anyone else, because it has the capacity to record large orchestral productions."





CNN's Per Nyberg and Morgan Neill contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- A Florida TV anchor became an Internet sensation this week when she pressed Democratic vice presidential candidate Sen. Joe Biden about whether Sen. Barack Obama's policies were Marxist.



WFTV-TV anchor Barbara West tells Larry King  she was doing her job as a reporter when she interviewed Sen. Joe Biden.



Critics said WFTV-TV anchor Barbara West of Orlando had an agenda and was asking biased questions. Biden responded, "Is this a joke?"



CNN's Larry King on Monday talked with West about the interview on "Larry King Live."



Larry King: Your recent grilling of Joe Biden has stirred up a lot of controversy. Let's take a look at part of it, and we'll get your comments. Watch.



[Video clip begins]  Watch as West interviews Biden »



Barbara West: You may recognize this famous quote. "From each according to his abilities, to each according to his needs." That's from Karl Marx. How is Sen. Obama not being a Marxist if he's intending to spread the wealth around?



Sen. Joe Biden: Are you joking? Is this a joke?



West: No.



Biden: Or is that a real question?



West: That's a question.



Biden: He is not spreading the wealth around. He's talking about giving the middle class an opportunity to get back the tax breaks they used to have.



I know this has been a pretty mean campaign. I was on a television station the other day and doing a satellite feed to a major network in Florida. And the anchor quotes Karl Marx and says in a sense, "Isn't Barack Obama Karl Marx?" You know I mean folks, this stuff you're hearing, this stuff you're hearing in this campaign, some of it's pretty ugly. [Video clip ends]



King: All right, Barbara, what were you getting to, since generally the redistribution of the wealth is a graduated income tax?



West: Well, Larry, no, I don't believe that it is just a graduated income tax. I think a lot of people who are talking to me out on the street are saying they are very, very concerned that this idea of redistributing the wealth means taking it out of somebody's pocket who is a wage earner and putting it in somebody's pocket who refuses to work. And they're asking about. That's what they don't want. That is what they want to know, what does this really mean? My job as a journalist is to ask those questions and get those answers, and I don't believe I got answers at all.



King: Was the implication in the question that Barack Obama is a Marxist?



West: I was asking him to tell us about how Barack Obama's redistribution of wealth was different from that quote by Karl Marx, that's all I wanted to know.



... I'm not here to debate the issues. I am not a political pundit. ... I'm a journalist.  Watch as West defends her questions »



And I -- my job is to ask tough, probing questions of the candidates. I had a very short time to be able to do that, only about four minutes. There were issues that I wanted to cover, including the issues about ACORN and the abuses that they've done with voter registration, particularly here in Florida, and Florida is such a key state.



And also this issue of the redistribution of wealth, as well as Sen. Biden's comments about "You mark my words, in six months, Barack Obama will be tested."



King: I got you.



West: But it was his caveat afterward that was the issue that I was questioning, and that is it may not be readily apparent as to what, as to whether or not the actions or whatever he does are in fact the appropriate ones. And so America, stand with him and trust him.



King: I got you.



West: I just wanted answers to those questions

***

(CNN) -- French shoemaker Christian Louboutin is seeing red -- and will likely be seeing a lot more of it -- after a  judge in Manhattan denied an injunction that would have kept fellow designer Yves Saint Laurent from selling shoes with red soles.





The lawsuit, filed in June, takes issue with four specific shoes from YSL's Cruise 2011 Collection: the Tribute, Tribtoo, Palais and Woodstock models, claiming the shoes violate Louboutin's trademarked "lacquered red sole."





"Everyone sees the flash of red and associates the red with Louboutin," attorney Harley Lewin said Thursday about his client.





In fact, Louboutin's red soles have graced many a red carpets, adorning the feet of celebrities Oprah Winfrey, Heidi Klum and Sarah Jessica Parker. In 2009, Jennifer Lopez wrote a song about them, "But it's the last time, I'm movin' on, I'm throwing on my Louboutins."





In his decision Wednesday, U.S. District Judge Victor Marrero acknowleded that in choosing a red sole for his shoes, Louboutin had "departed from longstanding conventions and norms of his industry," to create a product, "so eccentric and striking that it is easily perceived and remembered."





However, Marrero went on to say that, "Louboutin's claim to the 'the color red' is, without some limitation, overly broad and inconsistent with the scene of trademark registration."





"This was a trademark that never should've been issued," David Bernstein, attorney for the defendant, Yves Saint Laurent said.





He adds, "YSL has been using red since the 1970s, other designers have used red on the soles of their shoes. They aren't doing so to confuse people, but because it's a design aesthetic."





Lewin thinks the judge went too far.





"This is no longer about the case," he said.





Judge Marrero's decision drew parallels between painters and fashion designers, calling them both members of a creative industry where no one should be barred from using color to achieve their aesthetic. Doing so could, "interfere with creativity and stifle competition."





Bernstein agrees. "No designer should be able to monopolize a color."





There have been cases when companies have copyrighted color.





Owens Corning, for example, has the trademark for pink fiberglass. Marrero said industrial products are different because the application of color is simply to distinguish one manufacturer from another.





Lewin says his client "separated his shoes from everyone else's by using a red sole."





Lewin said he's never had such an outpouring from his fellow attorneys, law professors and members of the fashion industry, telling him, "This [verdict] is an abomination. Tell your client to appeal."





On August 17, both sides will meet for a case management conference, and Lewin says he will announce his plans to do just that.





"This is not over," Lewin said, "Not by a long shot."

***

(CNN) -- Three women who were seized along with six other foreign workers in Yemen have been killed, Yemeni government officials said Monday.



South Korean officials discuss the kidnappings Monday. A South Korean woman reportedly was killed.



"It is with profound sorrow that the Yemeni government reports finding three bodies," according to a statement from Mohammed Albasha, a spokesman for Yemen's Embassy in the United States.



The statement said the dead were identified as a South Korean teacher and two German nurses in training, all in their 20s. They were found in the Noshour Valley in Safrah district in the province of Saada.



The women were abducted Sunday along with five other Germans, including three children, and a Briton, according to Yemen's state-run SABA news agency. Earlier, the Yemen Post said seven of the nine hostages were killed, citing the country's interior ministry.



But SABA reported later Monday the remaining six were believed to be alive, and security forces were searching for them



Albasha said the nine foreigners left the city of Saada without police escorts that are required due to the "heightened security situation" in the area.



"This event was a heinous crime and constitutes not only a violation against the peaceful principles of Islam, but also the precepts of humanity," the embassy spokesman said. "Moreover, it does not reflect the good traditions and culture of Yemen."



The Germany Foreign Ministry said it is in close contact with the German Embassy in Yemen but couldn't confirm any details at this stage.



Initial official statements said the group was apparently seized by Houthi rebels, Shiite militants who have been fighting the government for years, according to SABA. The militants are hoping to derail the peace and reconstruction process in Saada, which has been rocked by war in the past year, according to SABA.



However, the news agency later reported Houthi rebels accused drug cartels of abducting the group and killing the three. In addition, SABA said a spokesman for the rebels accused regional tribes of being behind the kidnappings and slayings.



Sunday's abduction was the latest in a string of kidnappings of foreign workers in Yemen this year. All the previous hostages had been released unharmed, including 24 medical workers whom armed tribesman seized last week in Yemen's Amran province.



CNN's Caroline Faraj, Diana Magnay and Mohammed Jamjoom contributed to this report.

***

CNNU campus correspondent Brandon Gates is a junior at University of South Carolina. CNNU is a feature that provides student perspectives on news and trends from colleges across the United States. The views expressed in this article are not necessarily those of CNN, its affiliates or the schools where the campus correspondents are based.



Some of the students killed were affiliated with the Delta Delta Delta sorority, whose house is pictured above.



COLUMBIA, South Carolina (CNN) -- At the University of South Carolina, the campus is quiet, but students were still heading to their classes after six students were killed in a beach house fire during the weekend.



The school is planning a short ceremony Monday evening to honor the six students who were killed Sunday morning in Ocean Isle Beach, North Carolina.



A seventh person killed is believed to be a student at Clemson University. Their identities had not yet been released Monday afternoon.



The USC students were affiliated with the Delta Delta Delta sorority and the Sigma Alpha Epsilon fraternity.



"The fraternities are praying for them and their families for the loss. It's something we're all affected by," Jay Laura, student president of the USC chapter of Sigma Alpha Epsilon.



In a later news conference, Laura said the outpouring of condolences was a testament to the character of the fraternity brothers who died. He also said he was proud of the way the university was coming together to support each other.



Lauren Hodge, the chapter president of Delta Delta Delta, said the sorority would have ministers and counselors at the sorority house to help USC students.



"We're trying to everything we can right now to help people cope," she said.



"We've spent a lot of time (counseling) with the students from the sorority and fraternity," said Dennis A. Pruitt, the vice president for student affairs. "We encourage any student who is just learning of the situation and is a member of Tri-Delta or SAE to contact their parents and let them know they're OK."



The school decided against canceling classed on Monday.



"Going back to normal, everyday activities may be the best way for some to mourn and grieve," Pruitt said.



A weekly concert that is typically a well-attended event failed to bring out students on Monday. Most students appeared to be spending time in their dorm rooms where counseling was offered.



"I feel shocked that something like that could happen here. You always see stuff like that happening at other schools, but you never it can happen to your school," said Artifa Ricks, a sophomore majoring in broadcasting.



Six other University of South Carolina students were treated for injuries at a local hospital and released, the school said. The university is providing counseling and assistance to students who have requested it.



"When any one member of our family is lost, every one of us is diminished. I'm profoundly saddened, as are all members of Gamecock Nation, by these tragic deaths," said Dr. Andrew Sorensen, the university president.



The students were on a weekend getaway at Ocean Isle Beach, a popular resort destination along the southern coast of North Carolina. E-mail to a friend

***

TEHRAN, Iran (CNN)  -- Iran's president said Tuesday his country welcomes talks with the United States "in a fair atmosphere with mutual respect."

Women in Tehran celebrate the 30th anniversary of the Islamic revolution Tuesday.

Mahmoud Ahmadinejad made the remarks a day after President Barack Obama said the United States is looking for opportunities for "face to face" dialogue with Iran, even though he has "deep concerns" about Tehran's actions.

"Right now, the world is entering the era of dialogue," Ahmadinejad told hundreds of thousands of people in a celebration of the 30th anniversary of the Islamic revolution.

"The new U.S. administration announced that it's willing to bring about a number of changes and is now taking the course for dialogue. It's quite clear that real change should be fundamental, not just a tactical change, and it is quite clear that the Iranian nation will greet real changes.  "The Iranian nation is ready to hold up talks, but talks in a fair atmosphere with mutual respect," Ahmadinejad said.

In Washington, Obama was asked about U.S. relations with Iran during his first prime-time news conference on Monday night. Watch news conference in full Â»

"There's been a lot of mistrust built up over the years, so it's not going to happen overnight," Obama said.

He said his administration is reviewing existing U.S. policy toward Iran, which supports groups Washington has branded terrorist organizations, such as Hezbollah and Hamas, and has defied U.N. demands to halt its uranium enrichment program.

Despite those concerns, Obama said his administration wants to use "all the resources at the United States' disposal" to resolve those concerns.

"My expectation is, in the coming months, we will be looking for openings that can be created where we can start sitting across the table, face-to-face diplomatic overtures, that will allow us to move our policy in a new direction," Obama said.

"So there are going to be a set of objectives that we have in these conversations, but I think that there's the possibility at least of a relationship of mutual respect and progress."

The United States and Iran have not had diplomatic relations since 1979. During that year, the Shah of Iran was forced to flee the country and the Ayatollah Khomeini took power. Later that year, Iranian students took over and seized hostages at the U.S. Embassy. Relations have been cut since then. U.S. President George W. Bush labeled Iran as a member of the "axis of evil" after the Sept. 11, 2001 attacks.

Iran celebrated the 30th anniversary of the revolution Tuesday with crowds chanting "Death to America."  Watch the parade in Iran Â»

Tensions have rippled over issues such as Iran's nuclear program, Israel, and Iraq, and have been aggravated since the outspoken Ahmadinejad came to power in 2005.

Western nations believe Iran is intent on building a nuclear weapon. Ahmadinejad has been criticized for his vehemence against and provocative remarks toward Israel and for Iran's support of Hamas militants in Gaza and the Hezbollah movement in Lebanon -- militants groups that Israel has battled. Also, the United States has accused Iran of backing Iraqi insurgents.

In recent years, the Iraq conflict has provided an opportunity for Iran and the United States to cooperate since both countries support the Shiite-dominated Iraqi government and Iraqis have urged both countries to put aside their differences in helping Iraq. In 2007, U.S. and Iraqi envoys met several times in Baghdad.

Ahmadinejad addressed the conflict in Iraq, saying that 1 million people have been killed and others have been displaced because of the "Bush administration war on Iraq."

"To deal with the root cause of insecurity I think that we should go and find the main culprits, including Bush himself and his administration. They must be put on trial," said Ahmadinejad.

"The world does not want to see the dark age of Bush being repeated."

Addressing the issue of terrorism, Ahmadinejad said Iran has been fighting terror for 30 years and that Iran

***

(CNN) -- A Texas inmate in a wheelchair, who escaped on foot from two armed guards as he was being transferred between prisons, is now on the U.S. Marshals' list of the 15 most-wanted fugitives.





Arcade Comeaux Jr., 49, "produced a weapon and fired upon two correctional officers, took them hostage and forced them to drive to Baytown, Texas," the U.S. Marshals Service said in a statement.





He then put the officers in the back of the van and took their weapons and one of their uniforms, the statement said.





Comeaux was serving three life sentences for aggravated sexual assault and two counts of aggravated assault with a deadly weapon. He escaped Monday during transport from Huntsville, Texas, to Stiles, Texas.





The 6-foot, 200-pound man was shackled and in a wheelchair, "which he had claimed was needed for mobility," Michelle Lyons, director of public information for the Texas Department of Criminal Justice in Huntsville, said in a statement.





About 45 minutes into the trip, as they were driving through Conroe, 40 minutes north of Houston, the prisoner pulled out a pistol and ordered the guards to drive south to Baytown, east of Houston.





He fired once, but hit no one during the escape about 9 a.m., officials said.





Law enforcement officers found the unharmed officers an hour later.





Comeaux was being transferred so he could be near John Sealy Hospital in Galveston for treatment of the supposed paralysis he had suffered during a reported stroke, officials said.





At least $16,000 in reward money has been offered for information leading to Comeaux's rearrest and a task force of more than 100 investigators is searching for him, focusing on the Houston area, where he grew up and has family.





His escape has led the man who oversees Texas' criminal justice system to call for a shakeup of the prison system.





"I just think enough's enough," said Sen. John Whitmire, the Texas Democrat from Houston who is chairman of the state Senate's Criminal Justice Committee.





"We need a complete shakeup of the leadership of our prison system and/or an outside review by third parties," he told CNN by phone Wednesday. "We just can't have security breaches of this nature."





Whitmire said the guards had failed to pat down Comeaux while he was in his wheelchair and before they began the trip.





"Sure enough, he has a firearm," he said. "The question is, are there others (in the prison system)? I think you have to assume that there are until you find out differently."





So far this year, more than 900 cell phones have been confiscated from the 112 locations that house the state's 158,000 prisoners. "It's pretty rampant," he said.





"I want the director to come forward and tell us what it's going to take" to solve the problem, he said.





John Moriarty, inspector general of the Texas Department of Criminal Justice, said such lapses are highly unusual in the state's penal system. "We have no open gun investigations other than this one," he said. "The last one was several years ago."





Texas Department of Criminal Justice Executive Director Brad Livingston, who has been in the job since 2005, did not immediately respond to a call seeking comment.

***

LAKE LANIER, Georgia (CNN) -- Georgia Gov. Sonny Perdue declared a water supply emergency in north Georgia on Saturday as its water resources dwindled to a dangerously low level after months of drought.

But an Army Corps of Engineers official denied there is a water crisis.

Perdue, who signed an executive order Saturday, asked for President Bush's help in easing regulations that require the state to send water downstream to Alabama and Florida.

He also asked the president to declare 85 counties as federal disaster areas.

Perdue blasted what he called the "silly rules" governing the water supplies, noting that even if the state got replenishing rains, it could not by law conserve those, but must release 3.2 billion gallons a day downstream.

"The actions of the Corps of Engineers and Fish and Wildlife Service are not only irresponsible, I believe they're downright dangerous and Georgia cannot stand for this negligence," Perdue said.

The Army Corps of Engineers, however, presented a different assessment.

If there were nine months without rain, water supplies still would be adequate, said Maj. Daren Payne, the Army Corps' deputy commander for the Mobile, Alabama, District.

The corps sent a letter to Perdue assessing the situation and pointing out that they are "not going to run out [of water] any time soon," Payne said.

The corps -- under an agreement reached in the 1980s with U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the state and downstream users -- releases 5,000 feet of water per second from the dam between Lake Lanier and the Chattahoochee River.

The figure was based on a Florida hydroelectric power plant's needs, as well as concern for endangered species in the river, including mussels and sturgeon.

On Friday, Georgia filed a motion seeking to require the Army Corps of Engineers to restrict water flows from the lake and other north Georgia reservoirs.  Watch Gov. Perdue blast a "disaster of federal bureaucracy" Â»

The corps said it needs 120 days to review its water policies, according to Perdue.

The Bush administration has been in contact with the Georgia congressional delegation on the matter, the White House said Saturday afternoon

"We have already begun drafting interim rules to ... address the endangered species requirements, and the Army Corps has started the process of revising the operations manual for the river basin," said White House spokeswoman Dana Perino.

Months of drought

Rainfall in north Georgia, which includes the Atlanta metropolitan area, is far below normal for this time of year.

That was evident as Perdue addressed reporters on packed red clay on the shore of Lake Lanier -- the main water source for the Atlanta area's 5 million residents.

Normally, he'd be standing in water, but levels have dropped to historically low levels. The drought is hurting businesses and scaring away tourists.

Efforts are under way to try to reduce the flow from Lake Lanier by looking into requirements for endangered species and demands downstream for power plants and industries, Payne said.

A new biological review of endangered species needs will end in November and will be examined by officials from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to see if water requirements can be reduced, he added.

"The corps is not opposed to reducing the flow, if it can do it legally," Payne said.

Georgia, Alabama and Florida have been wrangling over how to allocate water from the Chattahoochee watershed for years as metro Atlanta's population has doubled since 1980.

"No one is sacrificing, no one is sharing the pain like the people in north Georgia are," Perdue said, noting there are no water restrictions in Florida or southern Alabama.

Georgia has imposed a mandatory ban on outdoor water use by homeowners in the region, but Lt. Gov. Casey Cagle warned this is a situation "we cannot conserve our way out of."

Meanwhile, individual counties are monitoring illegal water use.

In Douglas County, violators will have their water supply turned off and may have to pay up to $1,000 to get it turned back on.

Cobb County, just north of

***

(CNN) -- A former prison secretary has been sentenced to six months in federal prison for having sex with an inmate she was supposed to be supervising, a spokesman for the U.S. Attorney's office in the District of Colorado said Friday.



Janine Sligar, 47, of Wray, Colorado, was sentenced Thursday for sexual abuse of a ward. After serving her sentence, she will serve five years of supervised release and must register as a sex offender, spokesman Jeff Dorschner said in a news release.



Sligar, who must surrender to a facility designated by the Bureau of Prisons on March 2, did not respond to a telephone call to her home for comment.



She was indicted in July by a federal grand jury in Denver and pleaded guilty in U.S. District Court in October.



According to the plea agreement, Sligar, a 14-year Bureau of Prisons veteran, said she and inmate Eric McClain met in February 2007, when he was assigned to clean her office.



"They began to have conversations and realized they had similar interests," the plea agreement said.



That summer, they initiated a sexual relationship that included 10 to 20 sessions of oral sex and sexual intercourse, ending in October 2007, it said.



The liaisons primarily occurred in a staff restroom in the housing unit at the Federal Prison Camp in Florence, Colorado, according to the agreement.



Sligar, who acknowledged having detailed her activities in a journal, said she obtained a cell phone with a non-local phone number so McClain could call her without raising suspicion and admitted she gave him contraband that included photographs with explicit sexual poses, the plea agreement added.



"Defendant also admitted using her cell phone camera to take graphic pictures of a sexual nature which depict defendant and this inmate," it said.



Authorities began investigating the incident after receiving a tip about the inappropriate relationship. They then learned that Sligar had changed the primary beneficiary on an insurance policy from her children to McClain. A subsequent search of her home turned up the journal and photographs.

***

(CNN) -- The modern and dysfunctional man, who struggles to find his footing in relationships, career and, in fact, the world, has in many ways been the bread and butter of best-selling British author Nick Hornby's career.



Best-selling British author Nick Hornby releases his latest novel, "Juliet, Naked."



Best known for his novels "High Fidelity" and "About a Boy," both of which were turned into movies (as was his memoir, "Fever Pitch"), Hornby's latest novel, "Juliet, Naked," released in the United Kingdom on September 1, has just been released in the United States.



It focuses on an American singer-songwriter, Tucker Crowe, who still rests on the success he saw with one album in the 1980s, an obsessed English fan, Duncan, and his exasperated girlfriend, Annie.



Hornby's love for music has inspired more than plotlines. It has fueled a partnership with the rock band Marah and other projects, which recently included penning the lyrics for Ben Folds' "Levi Johnston's Blues."



Meanwhile, Hornby is also the force behind the screenplay of the critically acclaimed film-festival darling, "An Education," which will be released in New York and Los Angeles on October 9.



CNN spoke with Hornby about how he develops the characters for his books, the challenges of writing in a woman's voice and his own prowess in relationships.



CNN: Your newest novel, "Juliet, Naked," seems to revisit the kind of character that anchored "High Fidelity," the obsessive, somewhat dysfunctional music fan. What is it about this type that had you coming back, and how have the years changed this character?



Hornby: Well, I conceived them as being different. Rob in "High Fidelity," he wasn't the obsessive. It was the people around him. This one [Duncan] is one of three characters; he's the nerdy obsessive. ... The Internet's changed everything. There are no record stores to hang out in anymore. Ten or 15 years ago, he [Duncan] wouldn't have found anyone to talk to. And nobody's career [character Tucker Crowe's included] is allowed to die. Way back, obsessives had to admit other interests into their lives. These people don't have to really do anything like that.  Watch the author talk about music, comedy and relationships »



CNN: Your books, and now your screenplay, are so rich in complicated and incredibly flawed characters who, in turn, have complicated and flawed relationships. How much of what they struggle with is autobiographical? Are there aspects to these characters that are reflections of you?



Hornby: I think sometimes there are. I have three kids by two moms. Tucker has five kids by four women. But my experience is relatively ordinary. My relationships are fairly stable. A lot of this is trying to write comedy, and complicated relationships are funnier than straightforward ones.



CNN: At times, for instance in your book "How to Be Good," you've narrated as a woman. What are the challenges of taking on a woman's voice?



Hornby: Anytime the narrator is someone who is not you, the challenge is equal. The challenge is to make people laugh. My last book, "Slam," was for young adults, and I had to write as a 16-year-old boy. Of course, it makes me more nervous writing as a woman. I just made sure every woman I knew read the narrative as soon as I finished. But no woman speaks for all women.



CNN: You've been open about having a son, now 16, who is autistic. How much, if at all, has that informed your writing when it comes to getting into the heads of kids and adolescents in, for example, "About a Boy?"



Hornby: It hasn't. Not yet. The experience of fathering a child like that is so different, but I think you have to

***

(CNN) -- A double strike from Welsh winger Gareth Bale helped Tottenham to a 3-1 English Premier League win over QPR on Sunday, a result that lifts them up to fifth place in the table and keeps their unbeaten run going.





Dutchman Rafael Van der Vaart was also on target for Harry Redknapp's side, who have not lost in 11 matches since their 5-1 home defeat by Manchester City back in August.





Bale put the home side ahead in the 19th minute when he fired home an angled drive after a long ball from the back was headed on by Emmanuel Adebayor.





And a rampant Tottenham doubled their advantage 13 minutes later when Van der Vaart picked up a mis-hit shot from Ledley King to place the ball inside the far post.





QPR fought back after the break and halved the arrears on the hour mark when Jay Bothroyd nodded home from close range.





But Tottenham sealed their victory with a superb goal 18 minutes from time, with Aaron Lennon and Bale exchanging a series of passes outside the box before Bale curled home a shot that gave keeper Paddy Kenny no chance.





Manchester City still blaze a trail at the top of the table, with nine wins and a draw from 10 matches. They lie on 28 points, five clear of rivals Manchester United.





Chelsea, Newcastle and Tottenham are all level on 19 points but Chelsea have played a game more and unbeaten Newcastle will move up to third position if they get at least a draw against Stoke on Monday night.





Meanwhile, in Sunday's two German Bundesliga matches, Lukas Podolski netted twice in a 3-0 win over 10-man Augsburg.





Poland midfielder Slawomir Peszko added a third for the home side, while the visitors had Torsten Oehrl sent off for a dangerous tacle with 14 minutes remaining.





The win moves Cologne up to 11th place in the table with five wins and five defeats, but Augsburg are second bottom with just one win and eight points.





Hamburg are just one point and one place above Augsburg after they drew 1-1 with Kaiserslautern on Sunday.





The home side had Slobodan Rajkovic sent off in the 21st minute for elbowing Kaiserslautern captain Christian Tiffert and the visitors went ahead seven minutes before half-time through Pierre De Wit.





But Peru striker Jose Paolo Guerrero levelled for the hosts in the second-half, although the point was enough to lift Kaiserslautern up a place to 13th in the table.

***

(CNN) -- His shooting spree left at least 10 dead and millions terrified of bullets coming from an unseen sniper.



But Mildred Muhammad believes she was the ultimate target of her ex-husband, John Allan Muhammad, the man dubbed the "D.C. Sniper."



And for some time, Muhammad said she felt extreme guilt for the victims that were gunned down in grocery store parking lots and gas stations. The youngest was a 13-year-old boy who was shot while walking to his Maryland school.



Muhammad spoke about the guilt she felt after the killing spree on CNN's "Larry King Live" on Monday night, the day before her ex-husband was scheduled to be executed.



Muhammad said she has gradually gotten over her guilty feelings and focused on her three children.



"I felt that way initially because I had done everything I knew how to do to bring attention to how dangerous he was to me," Muhammad said. "I had no idea his anger would extend beyond me, to include all people in his killings."



John Muhammad, the mastermind behind the Washington-area sniper attacks of 2002, is scheduled to die by lethal injection Tuesday evening at a state prison near Jarratt, Virginia.



During two lengthy trials -- including one featuring testimony from young accomplice Lee Boyd Malvo -- and in several years of legal appeals, John Muhammad has continued to profess his innocence.



Prosecutors say John Muhammad intended the killings to provide a smokescreen to cover up his real goal -- killing his ex-wife Mildred and gaining custody of his three children.



Muhammad said she divorced John Muhammad because of abuse and has not visited him since he was in prison.



"I feel that all of my efforts, all of my energy is to help my children through this emotional turmoil that they are going through," said Muhammad. "I don't have an emotional attachment to John."



John Muhammad's other ex-wife, Carol Williams, also talked to King Monday.



Williams, John Muhammad's first wife, said she plans to visit him in prison with their son Tuesday before the execution.



Williams also brought letters that John Muhammad wrote her from prison.



"Carol, I have missed my family for the past eight years. I don't want to be missed the day that these devils murder my innocent black (expletive)," John Muhammad wrote in one of the letters.



Williams said she was not surprised that John Muhammad still believed he was innocent.



"I'm praying for myself, for my son, and also for the families of the victims," Williams said.

***

Miami, Florida (CNN) -- He lies in a bed on a balloon-type mattress, to reduce pressure on his burned body. He is covered with bandages; a ventilator breathes for Michael Brewer because he can't do it for himself.



He's hooked up to the marvels of modern medicine that are trying to give the 15-year-old burn victim a chance to be a kid once again.



Sixty-five percent of his body is covered with second- and third-degree burns.



"People are writing horror stories ... but people just can't imagine the kind of sickness we're talking about," said Dr. Nicholas Namias, medical director of the University of Miami/Jackson Memorial Hospital Burn Center in Miami.



"I've been to movies like everyone else, and Hollywood hasn't even thought of something like this," Namias said.



Brewer is heavily sedated, and the ventilator does not allow him to speak. His open wounds are covered by bandages, which are changed daily. It's a four-hour process.



He has not been able to speak with police since his desperate fight for life began October 12, when police say five teenage friends, including a 13-year-old, doused Brewer with rubbing alcohol and set him on fire.



The attack occurred after Brewer reported to police that one of the youths had stolen his father's bicycle. Police say the bicycle was stolen because Brewer did not pay one of the boys $40 for a video game.



According to police, witnesses said the teens called Brewer "a snitch" as they used a lighter to set him ablaze.



Namias explained how Brewer's organs are not functioning the way they should be, but that is expected at this early stage of recovery.



"He's still on the ventilator and advanced modes of mechanical ventilation. We are breathing for him. His contribution to the breathing is trivial," Namias said.



Namias also explained that in burn cases, words must be chosen carefully when talking about patients and their condition because so much is at risk and so much can change quickly.



"When you say he's doing OK, in this situation it means he's alive and responding to treatments," Namias said. "We're still dealing with the respiratory failure. We're dealing with infection now and the need to supply the massive amount of nutrition that this person needs to survive."



On Monday, the five teens who are accused of taking part in the attack appeared separately before judges in Broward County, Florida.



State prosecutors were granted additional time to build their case. Formal charges are expected later this month. For now, all five teens are being held in custody.



Four of the boys, all 15 years old, could be charged as adults. The 13-year-old also could be charged as an adult but under Florida law only if Brewer dies.



Michael Brewer's parents, Valerie and Michael Brewer Sr., issued a written statement through the hospital last week. They are not granting interviews.



"The recovery process will be baby steps, but eventually he will be whole again," they wrote.



But their son's injuries enter the realm of medicine and science that has no guarantee.



"There's no evolutionary mechanism to survive a 65 percent burn," Namias said.



"Surviving is a miracle of modern medicine and about the technology and the things we do. This is not like a gunshot and you come out of the [operating room], and say everything's going to be OK," he added.



"We never give up, and we never predict it. ... Our expectation is survival."



Across the hospital floor in the burn unit at Jackson Memorial Hospital, six other people's lives also are at stake: all victims of various accidents, all with burns similar to Michael Brewer's. They, too, are trying to regain at least a part of what they used to have.



"It's understandable that people can be burned in accidents," Namias said.



"

***

(CNN) -- Move aside oom-pah bands.





The new Germany has no space for your lederhosen-clad image. And forget that dark German music scene promulgated by metal industrial bands like Rammstein. Here comes Madsen, a four-piece indie rock band with heart and high-energy live shows. They are one of the most popular new bands in Germany, with several top 10 hits.





Madsen is made up of brothers Sebastian, Johannes and Sascha Madsen and their friend Nico Maurer. They are touring the United States to promote the German language and their audience is mostly high school and college students like 10th grader Maya Dudley of Chamblee, Georgia. She saw the band in Athens on a field trip with her German class.





"Most of their songs sound like anything you would hear on the radio here," she says.





Their sound has been compared to Green Day and the band members claim Nirvana as one of their influences. Their lyrics are smart, fun and distinctly German.





"Our English isn't very good," said Madsen's lead singer, Sebastian Madsen, in his first interview in English. While he only has a slight accent, he's not ready to translate into English any of their more popular tunes like "Du schreibst Geschichte" (You Write History)  or "Mein Herz bleibt hier (My Heart Stays Here)".





"It's more interesting to sing German in America, because it's a challenge for the people here," he says.





That's why the entire tour is sponsored by the German government, the European Recovery Program and others interested in promoting Germany's culture and language, such as the Goethe Institute.





"In the U.S., many German programs have been cut down," says the Goethe Institute's Bjoern Technau. German language education is being pushed out by other languages, like Mandarin Chinese, according to a 2009 survey by the Center of Applied Linguistics.





"We try to keep German on the screen, so to speak." Technau says.





The 12-city Madsen tour is supposed to help.





The band has been playing mostly in school auditoriums in the daytime. The audiences are American students who dance and sing along in perfect German. That's because they have studied the lyrics in class. The Goethe Institute developed lesson plans for German teachers around the band's songs.





"Mad about German -- Mad about Madsen" is the tag line for the U.S. tour. Besides getting kids interested in the language, Madsen wants to push out German music stereotypes one American auditorium at a time.





"German music still has the reputation of being somewhat dark," says Sebastian Madsen. "We want to counter this clichÃ© and surprise our audiences."





One big surprise is that Madsen's live shows are just as energetic in a school auditorium as they are at a huge Berlin music festival.





"It doesn't matter if there are 10 people or 10,000, we always want to give a good show for everybody. That's very important to us," says drummer Sascha Madsen.





The last date on Madsen's U.S. concert tour will be November 18 in Denver.

***

O'Fallon, Missouri (CNN) -- Nathan Halbach is 22, with a diagnosis of terminal brain cancer. He knows that "horrible stuff" lies ahead.





His mother, Pat Bond, has been taking care of him full time. But when she needed help, she reached out to the Roman Catholic Church.





After all, his father is a priest.





Nathan was born in 1986, during a five-year affair between his mother and Father Henry Willenborg, the Franciscan priest who celebrated Nathan's baptism. In a story first reported in the New York Times, it was revealed that The Franciscan Order drew up an agreement acknowledging the boy's paternity and agreeing to pay child support in exchange for a pledge of confidentiality.





Now her son -- the youngest of four children -- may have just weeks to live. And when the Franciscans balked at paying for his care, she decided she was no longer bound by her pledge of confidentiality.





"I never asked for extraordinary amounts. I asked for the basic needs and care of my son," Bond told CNN's "AC 360."  But she said the church told her, "No, we are not Nathan's biological father, we have no legal obligation to your son."





Willenborg, whose priestly vows require celibacy, has been suspended from his most recent assignment, in northern Wisconsin, as Catholic leaders investigate allegations that he was involved with another woman -- then in high school -- around the same time he was seeing Bond. Willenborg has acknowledged his relationship with Bond, but denies any inappropriate relationship with the other woman while she was a minor, according to his current bishop.





And his order acknowledges its agreement to support his son, telling CNN they have paid about $233,000 to support Nathan over his lifetime. Since the affair has become public, the Franciscan Order has agreed to pick up Nathan's medical bills and the costs for the funeral that now appears likely.





Willenborg refused to speak to CNN. But a statement to his parishioners in Ashland, Wisconsin, in September, said, "My failure to be faithful to my vows has caused me and many others pain and disappointment. I have regretted this for a long time."





And in October, he told The New York Times, "We've been very caring, very supportive, very generous over these 20-something years. It's very tragic what's going on with Nathan."





Bond, then Patricia Halbach, said she and Willenborg began their affair in 1983. At the time, Willenborg was a priest in her hometown of Quincy, Illinois, about 130 miles north of St. Louis, Missouri.





Bond, then a 27-year-old, married mother of three, went to a retreat for women with troubled relationships. Willenborg was the retreat's spiritual director, and she said he was a "terrific" priest -- "incredibly charismatic, very sought-after."





He began to counsel her on a regular basis. After about three months, at the end of one of their sessions, she said he kissed her. Bond said she went home and immediately asked her husband for a separation, and she said she began a romantic relationship with Willenborg.





Bond said she knew he was forbidden to have sex with her. But she said when in love, "You don't think clearly."





"I make stupid decisions in my life," she said. "I am not perfect, far from sainthood, and I loved him."





During their relationship, Bond was a lay leader in the church, and "We were a very good team, a very dynamic team," she said.





But in 1985, she learned she was pregnant. The pregnancy ended with a miscarriage that October. She said in its aftermath, she ended her sexual relationship with Willenborg, only to resume it the following spring. It was during that period that Nathan was conceived, she said.





Nathan was born in December 1986. Willenborg had to disclose the affair and Bond's pregnancy to his superiors. A deal was negotiated by Father

***

SAN JOSE, Costa Rica (CNN) -- The official count of confirmed deaths grew to 15 Friday afternoon, one day after a 6.1-magnitude earthquake shook north central Costa Rica, a government emergency official said.

iReporter Leonardo Diaz photographed the damage in Plaza Mayor Shopping Center in San Jose.

Reinaldo Carballo, a spokesman for the federal Commission for National Emergencies, said the updated death toll came from information given to the agency by Costa Rica Vice President Rodrigo Arias.

In addition, Carballo said, rescuers were trying to reach 300 tourists stranded in a hotel in Varablanca. Carballo said he did not know the tourists' nationalities or the name of the hotel.

There were conflicting reports on the number of dead from Thursday's earthquake. The Commission for National Emergencies had issued a news release earlier Friday saying the quake had killed four people.

Also earlier Friday, Red Cross official Milton Chaverri told CNN there were 14 dead and 22 missing. Red Cross spokeswoman Fiorella Vilca said Friday afternoon there were nine dead and 42 missing.

The discrepancy may result from the fact that the Commission for National Emergencies reports only deaths it has confirmed, Carballo said. About 32 people were injured, he said.

On Friday, the U.S. government dispatched a team of 34 U.S. military personnel and four helicopters from Honduras-based Joint Task Force-Bravo to Costa Rica to assist.

Survivors described the suddenness and brutality of the quake. Landslides, tumbling rocks and collapsed buildings caused widespread devastation and death.

"I saw how the earth moved and how it took my family -- my aunt, my cousin and her babies," Miguel Angel Marin told CNN affiliate Teletica TV. "It was very hard because I wanted to save them, but I couldn't."

A sobbing Vilma Cambronero was asked what happened to her family.

"Some are well," she said. "Others are buried."

An unidentified woman told Teletica, "Everything started to move and everything fell on top of us. It was a miracle we got out."

More than 1,200 people were stranded, without a way to get out of towns or homes, Chaverri said. Another 1,000 people were living in shelters, he said. iReport.com: Are you there? Send photos, video

"Many people were injured, many buildings were damaged and landslides blocked roads in the area," the U.S. Geological Survey said.

The dead included three young girls, officials said Friday.

Costa Rican President Oscar Arias Sanchez was scheduled to tour the affected area Friday. On Thursday, he appealed for calm.

The remote area near Alajuela, where the quake hit strongest, is difficult to reach, and officials said they were having to rely on helicopters for medical evacuations and to airlift supplies.

Randall Picado, a government rescue official, said many residents were without water and other necessities.

About 400 volunteers and Red Cross personnel were giving aid in 15 communities, Chaverri said.

The temblor was felt throughout Costa Rica and in southern and central Nicaragua, the U.S. Geological Survey reported on its Web site.

"I felt the earthquake," Costa Rican office worker Erick Solorzano told CNN in an iReport message. "I work in a sixth floor, and it was very strong. We felt the building was going to collapse."

About 2,000 aftershocks have been felt in San Jose, the capital, and other cities throughout the nation, Red Cross spokeswoman Vilca said.

The Geological Survey placed the earthquake's epicenter at 20 miles (32 kilometers) north-northwest of San Jose at a depth of 2.8 miles (4.5 kilometers).

***

BOSTON, Massachusetts (CNN) -- It all started with the flush of an automatic toilet. The terrifying sound marked the beginning of a two-year nightmare for Sarah Teres as she desperately tried to potty train her daughter Molly.



Molly graduated from Potty School four days before her brother, Archer, was born.



"It was awful" Teres said. "We tried everything including bribery and threats." Teres, the mother of three from Andover, Massachusetts, hoped her middle child would be toilet trained by the time she was 2½.



Two years later, the girl was still in diapers, refusing to use the bathroom. "I was going crazy," Teres admitted. "She wouldn't poop. She would hold it for days."



At wits end, Teres enrolled Molly in the Toilet Training School at Children's Hospital Boston.



"By the time the children come in with their families, it has become a power struggle," explained Dr. Alison Schonwald, a pediatrician who supervises the "poop school," as it's affectionately called by staffers. "The kids kind of dig in their heels and put a line in the sand."  Health Minute: Watch more on the perils of potty training »



The American Academy of Pediatrics reports that most children show signs they're ready to potty train between 18 and 24 months. Doctors suggest a child may be ready to start trying if he's staying dry for at least two hours at a time during the day, walking to and from the bathroom, asking for a diaper change and asking to use the potty.



For some kids, the toilet training process can take more than a year, or longer.



The six-week program at Children's Hospital is one of a handful around the country. Kimberly Dunn, a pediatric nurse practitioner, has worked with some of the 450 young graduates over the years.



She said most of the kids admit they are afraid to use a toilet. "Oftentimes, the parents come in and they want to know why they're afraid," Dunn said. "You could ask the kids until they're blue in the face and you hardly ever find out why."



Dunn meets with a half-dozen children once a week. She uses books, music and art to help the students overcome their fear of using the toilet. She helps them set small, realistic goals. For instance, she said, week one involved just sitting on the toilet for five minutes. She encourages positive reinforcement and simple rewards such as extra playtime with Mom or Dad.



While Dunn works on the kids, psychologist Elaine Leclair, an instructor at the Harvard School of Medicine, offers frank advice to the parents in a separate room.



"I just say, 'Step back.' They hate to hear me say this, but I say whatever you're doing now is not working. You really need to try something different," Leclair said.



She said many parents come to the sessions angry and anxious. "They come in feeling extremely discouraged, very isolated thinking they are the only ones in the world who have this problem."



Teres acknowledged that's how she felt. "Imagine my surprise to find out there were thousands of kids who had this problem." After years of hiding her daughter's toilet training troubles from family and friends, the group parenting sessions allowed Teres to open up about her frustrations.



"It was like going to Betty Ford," joked Teres, who felt she had exhausted all her other options.



A majority of the children who attend the Children's Hospital class are dealing with constipation issues often caused by delayed toilet training.



Teres learned that her daughter had a medical condition called encopresis. Experts call it a symptom of chronic constipation and say it occurs when a child resists having a bowel movement.



Youngsters like Molly are sometimes given laxatives or other medications to help encourage them to go.



Schonwald, the author of "The Pocket Idiot's Guide to Potty Training," doesn't want parents to be discouraged during the process

***

(CNN) -- The parents of a Tennessee preacher shot to death by his wife convinced a judge to keep the convicted killer at home, but they couldn't keep her off the air.



Mary Winkler describes her troubled marriage during a taped segrment of "The Oprah Winfrey Show."



Seven months in custody wasn't a long enough sentence for what she did, Mary Winkler said Wednesday in an exclusive, pre-recorded interview with Oprah Winfrey.



"There's no amount of time I think you can put on something like this. I was just ready for them to lock the door and throw away the key," she told Winfrey.



Winkler had sought permission to travel to Chicago, Illinois, to appear live on "The Oprah Winfrey Show," but the judge who presided over her trial would not give her permission to travel.



Her in-laws, who are suing Winkler for wrongful death and are seeking to revoke her parental rights, also fought the television appearance. Watch Winkler's interview with Oprah »



Winkler was convicted earlier this year of the shotgun slaying of her husband, Matthew, at the time the minister of the Fourth Street Church of Christ in Selmer, Tennessee.



She told Winfrey that she killed her husband following years of abuse, including physical violence and being forced to dress "slutty" for undesirable sex acts. All she remembers, she said, is the "boom" as the shotgun went off.



Winkler's account on the show was virtually identical to her testimony during her trial earlier this year. A jury of 10 women and one man found her guilty of voluntary manslaughter. Prosecutors had been pushing for a first-degree murder conviction.



She was released last month from a Tennessee mental heath facility.



Winfrey said on the show that Matthew Winkler's parents did not respond to requests for an interview. Dan and Diane Winkler, who have filed a $2 million wrongful-death suit against Mary Winkler, are pitched in a bitter custody battle over the couple's three daughters.



The grandparents are trying to terminate her parental rights and adopt the three girls.



Mary Winkler's attorney, Steve Farese, said a hearing in the case is scheduled for next week .



During the trial, Diane Winkler chastised Mary for never apologizing to them or his children. Mary Winkler told Winfrey she is sorry she killed her husband and she would like a chance to sit down with her in-laws, whom she loves, misses and prays for every day.



Asked by Winfrey what she would say to them, Winkler said she couldn't hone it down to two or three sentences. "Just when that time comes, my heart will tell me what to say," she said.



In her interview with Winfrey -- for a show titled "The wife who killed her minister husband" -- Winkler said tensions began when her husband tried to put their crying 1-year-old daughter, Brianna, back to sleep by "covering her mouth and nose."



"I don't think he had intentions of killing; he just tried to get her to pass out," Winkler said, recounting the events just prior to her husband's March 2006 death at the church parsonage in Selmer, Tennessee.



Winkler, then 31 and a mother of three, said she was used to his temper, saying, he often "would just get irate with the baby monitor and Brianna crying."



"That's just something that would set him off," she told Winfrey.



After putting Brianna to bed, she returned to the bedroom where Matthew was "and I just wanted to talk to Matthew. And there's just that awful -- awful sound," she said, referring to the shotgun blast.



Asked what she wanted to say to her husband when she went back to the bedroom, Winkler said, "Just to stop. Be happy. He had to be miserable the way he acted and to just stop being so mean and just relax and enjoy life."



She said she doesn't remember retrieving the shotgun from the closet, but

***

CHARLOTTE, North Carolina (CNN) -- When polygamous sect leader Warren Jeffs appeared in a Las Vegas courtroom last August, Kathy Jo Nicholson, a former member of Jeffs' sect, felt fearful even though she was only watching him on television.

Nicholson, roughly 13 years of age, is shown here with five of her sisters and two of her mothers.

"It devastated me. It elated me. It made me afraid. I looked at this man that was so powerful in my life ... and he was just so thin and pale," she said.

Today, as Warren Jeffs sits at Utah's Purgatory Correctional Facility awaiting trial, Nicholson has started talking publicly about her childhood in the church Jeffs led -- the Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints (FLDS). She hopes that by sharing her story she will help others struggling with similar issues.

"My hope is that they, they'll see it, and it'll mean something," the 36-year-old said. Nicholson recently co-authored an article about leaving her polygamous community for Glamour magazine and is planning to write a book as well.

Jeffs, whose approximately 10,000 followers practice polygamy mainly in Hildale, Utah, and Colorado City, Arizona, is charged in Utah with being an accomplice to rape by arranging the marriage of a 14-year-old girl to her 19-year-old cousin. He faces additional charges in Arizona.  Go inside Warren Jeffs' world Â»

As a child, Nicholson had three mothers and 12 siblings. She considers it a typical FLDS home. At the age of 14, Nicholson started sewing her wedding dress in anticipation of getting married. She knew that at any moment she could be whisked away to meet her husband and that her future likely would include at least two "sister wives."

But Nicholson had doubts whether she could live the life before her.

"I've always liked a lot of attention. And when it hit me that I could possibly and most likely absolutely would be sharing my husband, I began doubting that I could live that way," she said.

That perspective got Nicholson in trouble at Alta Academy, the FLDS-run high school whose headmaster was Warren Jeffs.

"He beat the kids there. He humiliated the kids there. And as time went on and I wasn't so devoted to being perfect and sweet, he held me up as an example and humiliated me," she said. Jeffs would force children -- Nicholson included -- to stand on a chair in front of the class and flex their buttocks muscles, according to Nicholson. She doesn't know how he came upon this particular punishment.

"As I got more and more rebellious, he would come up behind me while I was in a group and seize me by the back of the neck and lean down and whisper in my ear, 'Are you keeping sweet or do you need to be punished?' " she said.

Jeffs wrote a letter to Nicholson's parents saying that he was concerned about her and a friend, because "when around boys, and even younger boys, they would outwardly show their cuteness, seemingly to have the younger boys relate their cute behavior to older boys."

After getting caught passing notes to a boy, Nicholson was expelled from Alta Academy. She began working in an FLDS-owned factory full of other youths who openly questioned their religion. It was a common destination for FLDS kids kicked out of high school.

At 18, she eloped with a young man from within the community. Their marriage was not accepted by the FLDS or their families because they had gone outside of the church, to a justice of the peace, for the ceremony. So they packed up a U-Haul and headed toward California.

"That's when I cried the very most," she said tearfully. "Because I was leaving my family, everything that I had ever known, my friends and God behind. And I was choosing it."

That marriage fell apart, but in 2003 Nicholson persuaded her family

***

(CNN)  -- An international peace conference in Johannesburg has been cancelled after South Africa refused the Dalai Lama a visa to attend the event.



Archbishop Desmond Tutu said Monday he would boycott the conference.



Announcing the postponement at a news conference Tuesday, Irvin Khosa, chairman of the South African football league, did not offer an explanation.



A presidential spokesman, Thabo Masebe, said little.



"South Africa has made this decision," he said. "We stand by the decision."



The peace conference had been scheduled to start Friday. Officials said they would like to have a conference in the future, but they did not offer a specific date.



The conference had been organized by South African soccer officials, led by Khosa, and was billed as an opportunity to showcase South Africa's role as a human-rights champion ahead of the 2010 World Cup -- the global soccer championship the nation will host next year.



The presidential spokesman had said earlier that the Dalai Lama -- Tibet's spiritual leader and a Nobel Laureate -- did not receive a visa because it was not in South Africa's interest for him to attend.



Masebe said South Africa thinks that, if the Dalai Lama attended the conference, the focus would shift away from the World Cup.



"We cannot allow focus to shift to China and Tibet," he said. He added that South Africa has gained much from its trading relationship with China.



Khosa made the announcement at a news conference also attended by Chief Mandla Mandela, grandson of former South African President Nelson Mandela. Mandla Mandela said it was a sad day for the country's democracy and the African continent that the South African government had denied the Dalai Lama a visa. South Africa should not succumb to international pressure, Mandela said.



A representative of the Dalai Lama said he was not surprised by the visa refusal. The Tibetan government in exile thinks that China has pressured many countries to refuse a visit by the Dalai Lama, according to Chhime Chhoekyapa, an aide in Dharamsala, India.



The Dalai Lama fled China in 1959 after a failed uprising against Chinese rule.



The peace conference was to bring together Nobel laureates and top soccer officials. Archbishop Desmond Tutu; former President F.W. De Klerk; laureates Nelson Mandela and Martti Ahtisaar; Seff Blatter, president of soccer's international governing body; and actress Charlize Theron were among those invited. The event had the blessing of the Nobel Committee.



A presidential spokesman had said earlier that the Dalai Lama -- Tibet's spiritual leader and a Nobel Laureate -- did not receive a visa because it was not in South Africa's interest for him to attend.

***

NEW DELHI, India (CNN) -- While many now recognize the scientific explanation for a solar eclipse, the phenomenon is still marked with tradition and sometimes suspicion in Hindu-majority India.



People test the "sky watching telescope" at the Gujarat Council of Science City in India.



The "exceptionally long" eclipse that will cross half the planet Wednesday will be able to be seen by virtually all of the population of China and India.



For beggars in India, the occasion means an extra day of receiving alms and food.



The panhandler in Sandeep Jaggi's neighborhood normally visits the block every week on Tuesdays and Saturdays, as well as the days of a new and full moon.



And because his patrons mark an eclipse with alms-giving, prayers and bathing, he rarely misses the chance to meet them on this day as well.



"It's a family tradition and I follow it," says 34-year-old Jaggi. He will fill the beggar's small steel pail with mustard oil and coins and his disheveled sash with lentils.



For others in the country, the eclipse is not a reason to celebrate, but a more ominous phenomenon. Send us your photos of the eclipse



Most pregnant women hope to avoid giving birth during an eclipse.



"None of the expectant mothers under my treatment are willing to have deliveries on Wednesday," Shivani Sachdev Gour, a gynecologist at New Delhi's Fortis La Femme hospital, told CNN.



In fact, there are critically ill patients who do not want to be in the hospital on the day of the eclipse, she said.



Indian astrologers even advise expectant mothers to stay indoors when this celestial event occurs.



"It may not cause any physical harm to the baby, but it may affect the child's overall personality," said R.K. Sharma, who describes himself as a "remedial astrologer."



A solar eclipse, he says, weakens the sun god temporarily because of an encounter with dragon Rahu and leaves some cascading results everywhere.



"Bathing in holy rivers and ponds during this time thus helps protect health and develop positivism and greater will power," he explained.



About 1.5 million people are expected at one such pond -- the Brahmsarovar, or the pool of Hindu god Brahma -- in northern India on Wednesday.



"They offer prayers to the sun god and take holy dips during an eclipse," said Ashok Kumar Bansal, the sub-divisional magistrate of Kurukshetra, an ancient Hindu city.



But the century's longest total solar eclipse is not just about the dragon-sun combat, it also means business for some.



Travel firms in India have plans in place to cash in on the phenomenon.



Cox and Kings India has a planeload of eclipse watchers heading for the eastern state of Bihar, one of the most preferred locations for sighting the event.



The plane will hover over Gaya in Bihar and return to New Delhi the same day, company spokesman Thomas C. Thottathil told CNN.



Passengers were given two options: to book a "sunside" seat facing the eclipse for about $1,640, or reserve an "earthside" seat for about $610, Thottathil added.



"And it's a sold out flight now!" he said.

***

UNITED NATIONS (CNN) -- Russia and China vetoed a U.N. Security Council resolution Friday that would have imposed sanctions on Zimbabwe's longtime president, Robert Mugabe, and 11 senior members of his government.



Zimbabwe President Robert Mugabe meets this week with Arthur Mutambara, an opposition leader.



According to a draft of the resolution, the measure would have instituted a travel ban on Mugabe and others in his government, frozen many of their assets and imposed an international arms embargo on the regime.



The measure received nine votes -- the minimum for it to pass. However, two of the five negative votes were from Russia and China, who as permanent members of the Security Council have veto power.



One Security Council member abstained.



The resolution was pushed by the United States after Mugabe ignored the Security Council's appeal to postpone the June 27 presidential runoff election.



The vote initially was intended to be a runoff between Mugabe and opposition candidate Morgan Tsvangirai. But Tsvangirai withdrew days before, saying Mugabe's supporters had orchestrated a campaign of beatings, intimidation and murders against his supporters.



With their votes, ambassadors for China and Russia said they wanted to give the rival political parties a chance to resolve the election matter on their own terms without undue interference from the Security Council.



Representatives from Mugabe's party, the Zimbabwe African National Union-Patriotic Front (ZANU-PF), have been meeting in Pretoria, South Africa, with the opposition Movement for Democratic Change this week.



Tsvangirai said Wednesday the talks, which are being mediated by South African President Thabo Mbeki, are focusing on "how to move forward."



Chinese Ambassador Wang Guangya said his nation believes the international community should allow the talks in South Africa on the Zimbabwe situation a chance to progress before imposing sanctions.



Wang said the adoption of the resolution would "unavoidably interfere with the negotiation process and lead to the further deterioration of the situation."



"Many countries, including China, repeatedly called upon the Security Council to respect the position of the African countries on this question and give more time," Wang said.



"China has always maintained the best approach to solve a problem is negotiation and dialogue," Wang said. "To use or threaten to use sanctions lightly is not conducive to solving the problem."



Wang's comments echoed those of Russian Ambassador Vitaly Churkin, who said the Security Council would have overstepped its responsibilities had it approved the resolution.



"Recently, in the positions of a number of council member states, we have seen an ever-more-obvious attempt to take the council beyond its chartered prerogatives and beyond maintaining international peace and security," Churkin said. "We believe such practices to be illegitimate and dangerous, leading to a realignment of the entire U.N. system."



Churkin also noted that, had the resolution been approved, council members would have ignored appeals from the African Union to let the South African talks take place. He also accused the council of missing an opportunity to coordinate a response that would have "promoted the success of the political dialogue" in Zimbabwe.



Speaking before the vote, Zimbabwean Ambassador Boniface Chidyausiku said his nation has been a victim of "incessant meddling" from the international community.



Chidyausiku blamed sanctions already imposed on Zimbabwe for its underperforming economy and the suffering of its people.



South African Ambassador Dumisani Kumalo also urged the Security Council to give the South African talks a chance to bring about a resolution.



U.S. Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad said the United States was disappointed at the veto.



"China and Russia have stood with Mugabe against the people of Zimbabwe ... for reasons that we think are not borne out by the facts on the ground," he said.



"The U-turn on the Russian position is particularly surprising and disturbing," he said, noting that a few days ago, the Russian Federation was supportive of a statement adopted at the Group of Eight meeting in Japan expressing "grave concern" about the situation in Zimbabwe.



"The Russian performance here today raises questions about its reliability as a G-8 partner," Khalilzad said.



The

***

(InStyle) -- While the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences has been celebrating film's best and brightest for more than 80 years, the glamour we associate with the Oscars truly started in the 1950s, when stars such as Audrey Hepburn, Grace Kelly and Janet Leigh brought high style to the ceremony.



Anne Hathaway accessorized her Armani Prive gown with more than $1 million worth of Cartier jewelry.



Since then, the red carpet has been a can't-miss staple of the evening, and Hollywood's hottest stars work with fashion designers, wardrobe stylists, jewelers, hairstylists and makeup artists to create looks they hope will go down in fashion history.



This year's show was no exception, and high-wattage stars such as Anne Hathaway, Kate Winslet and Natalie Portman walked the red carpet in stunning couture gowns. Here are just a few of our favorites:



• Best actress nominee Anne Hathaway made the most of her big night, arriving in a champagne-colored strapless Armani Prive gown that glittered with paillettes and Swarovski crystals. When the "Rachel Getting Married" star turned to give an over-the-shoulder pose, she revealed an unexpected onyx and black crystal dragon brooch, which was affixed to the back of her gown. Diamonds are always in fashion on the red carpet, and the actress accessorized with more than $1 million worth from jeweler Cartier.



• Best actress nominee Kate Winslet looked as stunning as ever in an asymmetrical Atelier Yves Saint Laurent gown and Chopard jewels. Despite her picture-perfect appearance, the Oscar winner for "The Reader" admitted, "I'm extremely nervous!"  See photos of InStyle's favorite red carpet looks »



• "Slumdog Millionaire" beauty Freida Pinto continued her winning awards season style streak in a John Galliano royal-blue gown made of silk tulle with delicate embroidery and metallic beading. The 24-year-old, who said an enthusiastic hello to her parents in India from the red carpet, wore Martin Katz jewelry, including a ring set with a 150-year-old diamond from her native country.



• In a sea of red and white dresses Natalie Portman stood out in an orchid gown by Rodarte, vegan heels by Stella McCartney and a vintage Rialto clutch. The actress' minimal Kwiat jewelry and elegant updo highlighted her flawless skin. Portman was truly an Oscars triple threat, making our best dressed, best hair and best makeup lists.



Other colorful bests included Sarah Jessica Parker's Dior Haute Couture gown, which we loved not only for the shade (which she described as "barely mint, maybe seafoam") but also for its impressive size. Best supporting actress nominee Amy Adams was stunning in a crimson silk and satin gown by Carolina Herrera and a jaw-dropping, jeweled collar necklace by Fred Leighton (as seen on Beyoncé in the November 2008 issue of InStyle!).



And Heidi Klum's bright red dress was not only glamorous, but also charitable: For the second year running, the "Project Runway" host partnered with The Heart Truth campaign to raise awareness of women's heart health by wearing red.



Last year, Klum wore a custom red dress by John Galliano for Dior that was auctioned off for charity, and this year she hit the carpet in a red silk taffeta gown from RM by Roland Mouret. The stylish supermodel accessorized with a diamond and ruby bracelet charm of her own design that will be part of a giveaway on dietcoke.com.



In total, the best-dressed women of the night span 28 years, from 16-year-old Miley Cyrus to 44-year-old Marisa Tomei. See all of our favorites, including Amanda Seyfried and Vanessa Hudgens, on InStyle.com.



Get a FREE TRIAL issue of InStyle - CLICK HERE!

***

ORLANDO, Florida (CNN) -- An ex-astronaut accused of assaulting a romantic rival in a Florida parking lot will stand trial December 7, a judge ruled.



Prosecutors accuse Nowak of driving nearly 900 miles wearing NASA diapers to track down her rival.



Lisa Marie Nowak, 46, is accused of stalking Air Force Capt. Colleen Shipman and pepper-spraying her in a parking lot at Orlando International Airport in February 2007.



She has pleaded not guilty to charges of attempted kidnapping with intent to inflict bodily harm, battery and burglary of a vehicle using a weapon. If convicted, she could face a sentence of up to life in prison.



Prosecutors accuse Nowak of driving nearly 900 miles from Houston to Orlando -- wearing NASA diapers to cut down on the number of stops she needed to make -- and donning a disguise before following Shipman from baggage claim to a parking lot. Her attorney, Don Lykkebak, has denied that she wore the diapers.



Shipman told police that after she got into her car, Nowak feigned distress and knocked on the window. When Shipman cracked it to talk to her, Nowak sprayed her in the face with pepper spray, Shipman said. Police said Nowak was apprehended as she was disposing of her disguise in an airport trash bin.



Nowak has said she went to the airport to talk to Shipman, who had begun dating Nowak's former love interest, Navy Cmdr. Bill Oefelein, who was also an astronaut but has since left the astronaut corps.



Judge Marc Lubet handed Nowak a legal victory in November 2007 when he ruled evidence found in her car and statements she made to police after her arrest were inadmissible at trial because both were unlawfully obtained.



Prosecutors appealed, however, and in July 2008, the Fifth District Court of Appeals ruled that evidence found in Nowak's car was admissible, although it agreed her statements to police were not.



At a hearing in August 2007, Orlando police detective William Becton testified that when he searched Nowak's car, he found maps showing how to reach the airport, maps of the airport's layout, a buck knife and papers including a letter Nowak appeared to have written to Oefelein's mother. He also testified he found used and clean diapers in the car. Police previously said they also found a BB gun, a steel mallet, a 4-inch knife and rubber tubing in the vehicle.



Nowak's attorneys have said they intend to utilize an insanity defense, saying in court documents her diagnoses include more than a dozen psychiatric disorders.



A pretrial conference in the case is set for November 10, Lubet ruled Tuesday.



A hearing set for Friday was canceled.



CNN's Rich Phillips contributed to this report.

***

(CNN)  -- Pro wrestling legend Hulk Hogan, embroiled in a bitter divorce with his wife, Linda, told Rolling Stone magazine he can "totally understand" O.J. Simpson, the former football great found liable for the deaths of his wife and another man.

Linda and Hulk Hogan enjoy happier times at the 2006 MTV Video Music Awards in New York in 2006.

"I could have turned everything into a crime scene like O.J., cutting everybody's throat," Hogan said in the interview for a feature that will run in Friday's edition of the magazine.

"You live half a mile from the 20,000-square-foot home you can't go to anymore, you're driving through downtown Clearwater [Florida] and see a 19-year-old boy driving your Escalade, and you know that a 19-year-old boy is sleeping in your bed, with your wife ...

"I totally understand O.J. I get it," Hogan said.

A spokeswoman for Rolling Stone magazine confirmed the quote to CNN.  Watch report on Hogan's statements »

It has been widely reported that Linda Hogan, 49, is dating a younger man. She filed for divorce in 2007 after nearly 25 years of marriage.

Simpson was found not guilty of murder in the 1994 stabbing deaths of his wife, Nicole Brown Simpson, and her friend, Ron Goldman, but was found liable for their deaths by a civil court jury.

Simpson later was found guilty in a Las Vegas, Nevada, armed robbery case and sentenced in December to up to 33 years in prison.

A spokesman for Linda Hogan said Wednesday that the statement amounts to a death threat and that her attorney is "weighing all options necessary to protect his client."

"Sadly, his recent comments remind us that his definition of fair is much different than what the law dictates," Linda Hogan said in a written statement.

Her spokesman, Gary Smith, linked the comments to the 55-year-old Hogan's three-decade career, during which he held multiple championship titles and, during his heyday in the 1980s, was easily the most popular wrestler in the world.

"We have always maintained that the fear that Linda has had to live with comes from the rage and instability much too often associated with pro wrestlers," Smith said in the statement.

CNN was unable to reach Hulk Hogan's publicist for comment on Wednesday. In comments to Access Hollywood, a spokesman said the comments were not intended as a threat and that Hogan "in no way condones" Simpson's actions.

"As part of a larger conversation, he referred to it to exemplify his frustration with his own situation," the spokesman said.

Hulk Hogan's real name is Terry Bollea. His wife alternately goes by Linda Hogan and Linda Bollea.

CNN's Marc Balinsky and Doug Gross contributed to this report.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- The election of 736 members from 27 member countries to the European Parliament in June will be the biggest transnational electoral contest there has ever been.  Between them they will represent more than 500,000,000 people.



About 375 million EU citizens aged 18 or over are entitled to vote.



But few understand how the low-profile Parliament affects the lives of EU citizens. Here are answers to the most frequently asked questions about the contest.



Who will be voting, when and where?



About 375 million EU citizens aged 18 or over are entitled to vote in the election of the parliament members for a five-year term. The elections will be held on Thursday, June 4 in the UK and the Netherlands. There will be voting on Friday, June 5 in Ireland and the Czech Republic. And it will begin on Saturday, June 6 in Cyprus, France, Italy, Latvia, Malta and Slovakia. The other countries will conduct their voting on Sunday, June 7. Elections will take place in all 27 member countries of the EU, with the citizens of Bulgaria and Romania included for the first time.



How many MEPs are there and how many does each country elect?



There will be 736 Members of the European Parliament (MEPs) in the new assembly. The number each country has varies according to its population. Germany, with a population of 82 million, the biggest among EU states, will have 99 members. Malta, with a total population of just 410,000, will have only 5.



Will that number stay the same if the Lisbon Treaty comes into effect?



No. The Lisbon Treaty, designed to give the EU a new streamlined constitution for the EU (and to increase the powers of the European Parliament,) has been put on ice following its rejection in a referendum in Ireland, the only country to give electors a direct voice. But the Irish are due to vote again in the autumn. If they then vote Yes and all remaining EU states ratify the treaty, then the Parliament will be increased from 736 to 751 members on a different distribution formula. That means that 15 'ghost MEPs', will be elected on June 7, entitled to attend the Parliament but not to vote in it until the Lisbon Treaty goes through.



What election system is used?



That varies according to the individual states represented, but all will be using some variant of proportional representation. In some countries candidates will all be on a single national list, making the entire country a constituency. Others elect MEPs from regional constituencies. Many countries set a threshold, insisting that parties have to gain an overall proportion of the vote -- 5 per cent in France and Germany, 4 per cent in Sweden or Austria -- to qualify for any allocation of seats.



Whom do the MEPs represent?



Most would-be MEPs contest the elections with the endorsement of national political parties. National parties such as the Christian Democrats in Germany or the Labour Party in Britain put up approved lists of candidates. But when they are in the European Parliament the MEPs mostly operate in wider groups of left or right such as the Socialist Group (PES), the Liberal Group (ELDR) or the European Greens. The main conservative grouping is the European Peoples Party (EPP). However, David Cameron, the national leader of Britain's Conservatives, has withdrawn his members from the EPP, regarding it as too federalist in its approach. The groups work as a bloc when they can and have "whips" designed to make them as cohesive as possible.



What powers do the MEPs have?



Much legislation in member states actually originates at a European level. National legislatures pass laws which have begun life as directives from the European Commission, the EU executive arm, which the MEPs have helped to shape. They are the only elected part of the European apparatus which is otherwise dominated by European Councils (meetings of the prime ministers or finance or trade or interior ministers from the 27 nations) or the European Commission.



Do MEPs really make much difference to ordinary people's lives?



It

***

PARKLAND, Florida (CNN) -- Yorelle Haroush fled a million-dollar South Florida home this week, chased out, she said, by drywall made in China that's emitting vapors that smell like rotten eggs.





Amy Massachi hugs her pregnant niece, Yorelle Haroush, as she prepares to move this week.





"It's making me sick. Physically, mentally and emotionally, making me sick," said the 18-year-old, who is pregnant with her first child.





Haroush lives with her aunt Amy Massachi and her four siblings and cousins in the house. They believe a year's worth of upper respiratory infections, antibiotics, bloody noses and sickness have been caused by the walls.





Their doctor said they need to get out of the $1.2 million estate in Parkland, Florida, northwest of Fort Lauderdale.





"I said, 'you can't stay there anymore, because you're sick every minute,'" the family's longtime physician, Dr. Ross Nochimson, told CNN. "They're sick on a weekly basis. Earaches, sore throat. I give them something, and they're sick again."





Massachi and her family are among homeowners in more than a dozen states who allege Chinese drywall has emitted corrosive gases they believe have given them health problems.





Homeowners also allege the gases corrode metal components including copper wiring, causing air conditioners and other household systems to fail.  Read about homeowners' allegations »





The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission says most of the complaints have come from Florida, where the concerns emerged last year. But consumers also have filed complaints in Louisiana, Virginia, Wisconsin, Ohio, Alabama, Mississippi, California, Washington, Wyoming, Arizona, Tennessee and Washington, D.C.





The Florida Department of Health says complaints it received -- more than 330 as of Tuesday -- generally involve homes built between 2004 and 2007.





A study done for the Florida health department by private laboratory Unified Engineering Inc. found that samples of certain Chinese drywall gave off a sulfurous odor from "volatile sulfur compounds" when exposed to extreme heat and moisture. It also found that vapors "in the residential atmosphere created a corrosive environment in the presence of moisture."





The health effects of those vapors are still the subject of several scientific studies.





Odors and corrosion are clearly evident in the Massachi house.





The pungent, rotten-egg-like smell permeates the two-story home. Throughout the house, electrical outlets are open to reveal black corrosion on the copper wiring. The air conditioning unit's air handler, inside the house, is blackened.





"This is disgusting. It's so corroded. I can't even believe it," Amy Massachi said in a raspy voice. "I can't breathe. Every morning, I wake up with sinus allergies, my voice is hoarse.  Watch Massachi explain what's happening in her house »





"My mother, when I call her up on the phone, she says, 'Amy, what's wrong with your voice?' and I say, 'allergies.'  "'What are you allergic to?' I don't know. Well, now I know. I'm allergic to my house. My house is making us sick."





The doctor recommends they vacate their 18-month-old home.





"Before they bought this house, they weren't calling every week with allergies and sore throats and ear aches and coughing," Nochimson said. "I don't know what more I can do for them."





Haroush, who after giving birth faces heart surgery for an unrelated condition, is moving in with her grandmother.





"I'm graduating this year, and I'm having a baby, and I don't need to be thinking about anything else going wrong, and any more stress that is on me," she told CNN.





Chinese drywall was imported into the U.S. during a different economic era, at the height of a housing boom. Prices were sky high, and the country was hit by two active hurricane seasons in 2004 and 2005, increasing the demand for

***

(CNN) -- Arsenal climbed to the top of the English Premier League with a 2-0 victory over London rivals West Ham despite playing half of Saturday's clash with only 10 men.





Arsene Wenger's team moved a point above champions Manchester United, who host Liverpool on Sunday, while Chelsea dropped to third ahead of their trip to Blackburn. Carlo Ancelotti's side can join Arsenal on 67 points with victory in that game.





Gianfranco Zola's West Ham team were left to rue a missed penalty as the defeat left them just three points above the relegation zone.





Arsenal, who on Friday were handed a chance to avenge 2006's Champions League final defeat by Barcelona in the upcoming quarterfinals, took the lead after just five minutes in the rain at the Emirates Stadium.





Brazil midfielder Denilson fired in a low shot for his sixth goal this season, having dispossessed Valon Behrami and then played a neat one-two on the edge of the area with striker Nicklas Bendtner.





But Arsenal could not turn their dominance into further goals, and West Ham should have leveled just before halftime when Belgium defender Thomas Vermaelen was sent off as his nudge in the back of Guillermo Franco saw the Mexico striker tumble in the box.





But Alessandro Diamanti saw his penalty saved by Arsenal goalkeeper Manuel Almunia, and the hosts also escaped in the second half when substitute striker Carlton Cole saw his fierce low shot hit the outside of the post.





Arsenal captain Cesc Fabregas made the points safe on his return from injury five minutes after that with a penalty on 82, as England defender Matthew Upson paid the price for deliberately blocking the Spain midfielder's clever little flick with his arm.





Tottenham consolidated fourth place with a hard-fought 2-1 victory at 10-man Stoke, as substitute Eidur Gudjohnsen came off the bench to put the London club ahead before Dean Whitehead was sent off and then helped set up Niko Kranjcar's 77th-minute winner.





The on-loan Iceland forward netted just 18 seconds after halftime having come on for Roman Pavlyuchenko, who joined England striker Jermain Defoe on the injured list after suffering a hamstring problem in the first half.





Whitehead went three minutes later for his second booking, but Stoke leveled on 64 as winger Matthew Etherington scored from the penalty spot against his former club after fullback Benoit Assou-Ekotto fouled striker Paul Kitson.





Gudjohnsen's dummy allowed Croatia midfielder Kranjcar to put the Londoners four points clear of fifth-placed Liverpool, who will have played one more match after Sunday's trip to bitter North-West rivals United.





The victory was doubly important for Tottenham after fellow Champions League hopefuls Aston Villa had to come from behind to snatch a 2-2 draw with lowly Wolverhampton in the Midlands derby earlier on Saturday.





John Carew put Villa ahead in the 16th minute despite appearing to be offside, and the Norway striker salvaged a point for the hosts with eight minutes remaining as he steered Steve Sidwell's low shot into the visitors' net for his 13th league goal this season.





Wolves moved four points clear of the bottom three, but were denied a first win at Villa Park in 30 years despite Jody Craddock's bundled 23rd-minute equalizer and an own-goal from England international James Milner seven minutes before halftime.





The result left Villa in seventh, having played one less game than Tottenham, equal on 50 points with Manchester City, who travel to Fulham on Sunday.





Everton moved above Birmingham into eighth place with a 2-0 win at home to Bolton, who had Gretar Steinsson sent off in the 71st minute for bringing down Nigeria striker Yakubu.





Spanish midfielder Mikel Arteta fired in the resulting freekick and South Africa international Steven Pienaar wrapped up victory with a minute to go after Leon Osman hit the crossbar.





Birmingham crashed 3-1 at Sunderland, who eased their relegation worries as England World Cup hopeful Darren Bent scored twice in the first 11 minutes to take his Premier League tally to 20 goals this season and 21 overall.





Wigan moved seven points clear of the bottom three with a 1-0 win over Burnley, as Colombia striker Hugo Rodallega's 90th-minute header

***

(CNN) -- Basketball legend Michael Jordan has caused a furor at the President's Cup golf tournament after the former Chicago Bulls player was snapped smoking a cigar at the Harding Park course in San Francisco.



Michael Jordan smoking a cigar at the Hardin Park golf course.



Jordan -- who is acting as the honorary assistant captain for the U.S. team at the event -- puffed while playing a practice round despite the city's ban on smoking at public golf courses.



Pictures were published in the San Francisco Chronicle of the 46-year-old flouting the rules, a move which prompted city officials to request the PGA Tour to remind Jordan of the law.



"It was sort of a gentle nudge reminding them that smoking is illegal and that we would appreciate their support," Recreation and Park General Manager Phil Ginsburg told the Chronicle.



The breaking of the smoking ban carries a $100 fine, however, Matt Dorsey, the spokesman for City Attorney Dennis Herrera, told the newspaper: "Just don't expect me to ask him for it."



Fred Couples invited Jordan to be an honorary assistant captain at the Presidents Cup, and the Hall of Famer spoke to reporters on Monday about his smoking.



"I heard this is a public place, so they limit what you can smoke, but this was a practice round and no one said anything," he told the gathered media.



British Open champion Stewart Cink backed Jordan despite the outcry suggesting the cigar was unlit: "The tobacco usage did become a little bit of a story out there, because I saw Michael with a cigar in his mouth that was unlit.



"He's trying to set a good example for the rest of the people who see on TV what we are doing out there, just try to set a good example and try to chew his tobacco instead of smoke it."

***

Beijing, China (CNN)  -- President Obama intends to meet the Dalai Lama even though China has warned that such a meeting would harm bilateral ties, a White House spokesman said Tuesday.



"The president told China's leaders during his trip last year that he would meet with the Dalai Lama, and he intends to do so," Bill Burton told reporters covering Obama's planned town hall meeting in New Hampshire later Tuesday.



No date for Obama's meeting with the Tibetan spiritual leader has been announced. The Dalai Lama has speaking engagements scheduled in the United States in late February and in May.



Earlier Tuesday, China warned that ties between two of the world's superpowers would be strained if Obama met with the Dalai Lama.



"It will seriously undermine the foundation of Sino-U.S. political relations," said Zhu Weiqun, a Communist Party official who is in charge of talks with representatives of the Dalai Lama. "We will take corresponding action to make relevant countries see their mistakes."



Zhu issued his warning during a news conference to discuss the lack of progress made during five days of talks between China and the Dalai Lama's representatives.



Beijing accuses the Dalai Lama of advocating for Tibetan independence from China.



"The two sides had sharply divided views," Zhu said. "We have been accustomed to such clash of viewpoints. It's been the norm rather than the exception."



In explaining Obama's intention to hold the meeting, Burton said the Dalai Lama "is an internationally respected religious and cultural leader, and the president will meet with him in that capacity.



"As the president has expressed, we expect that our relationship with China is mature enough where we can work out issues of mutual concerns -- such as climate, the global economy and nonproliferation -- and discuss frankly and candidly those issues where we disagree," Burton said. "The president is committed to building a positive, comprehensive and cooperative relationship with China."



Tibet is technically autonomous from the central Chinese government, but the Dalai Lama and others have said they favor genuine autonomy and resent the slow erosion of their culture amid an influx of Han Chinese, the most numerous ethnic group in China.



Zhu said there would be no compromise on China's control of Tibet.



Representatives from the two sides have met eight other times, but have reached no consensus on the issue of autonomy.



The Dalai Lama fled China in 1959 after a failed uprising against Chinese rule. He lives in exile in the north Indian hill town of Dharamsala.



Burton said the United States "considers Tibet to be a part of China, and we have human rights concerns about the treatment of Tibetans."



"We urge the government of China to protect the unique cultural and religious traditions of Tibet," he said.



CNN's Jaime Florcruz and Helena Hong contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Police in San Bernardino, California, released pictures of two suspects in the abduction of a 3-year-old boy who was taken at gunpoint from his home last weekend.



Authorities say these men purchased tape from a store and used it 3-year-old Briant Rodriguez's abduction.



Briant Rodriguez has been missing since May 3, when two Hispanic males armed with handguns burst into the home, tied him up, along with his mother and four siblings. They ransacked the home before leaving with Briant, a small amount of cash and some personal property, San Bernardino County Sheriff's Public Information Officer Cindy Beavers said.



A motive for the abduction is still unclear, and the authorities have not received a demand for ransom, Beavers said.



Investigators traced samples of the tape used to tie up the family to a home improvement store where they believe the suspects purchased the tape the Friday before the abduction.



The unidentified store's surveillance camera captured two men who matched the description of the kidnappers given by Briant's mother, purchasing tape believed to have been used in the abduction, Beavers said.



The home improvement store's exterior surveillance cameras also caught a green Ford Bronco believed to have been used in the abduction, Beavers said. The same car was later seen driving past a convenience store near Briant's home about three minutes after his mother called police on Sunday to report the abduction, Beavers said.



Authorities distributed screen grabs of the footage on Friday showing the suspects and the vehicle in an effort to draw more tips, which have been coming in steadily since an Amber Alert was issued earlier this week.



"You've got two men that resemble the description given by Briant's mother, they're buying tape that matches the tape used to tie them up, then they leave the store in this green Bronco and then on Sunday, just a few minutes before the emergency call for help, the same vehicle is seen leaving the victims' neighborhood," she said.



"Detectives put these two incidents together, and they're confident that these are the suspects and that was the vehicle used," she said.



Both suspected kidnappers are Hispanic males -- one 5-feet, 5 inches tall, between the ages of 18 and 20 with a thin build, unknown hair and eye color, last seen wearing a black baseball hat, blue jeans and green T-shirt. The other is 5-foot-10, around age 24 with a thin build, black boots, a black shirt and a bandanna.



Neighboring law enforcement agencies are on alert, and the FBI, Immigration and Customs Enforcement and the U.S. Border Patrol are assisting in the investigation.



The FBI and the San Bernardino County Sheriff's Department have both put up $25,000 rewards for Briant's return. The FBI has also established a Facebook page with the latest information in the case.



"We became involved in the beginning and that's customary in kidnapping cases because of the potential for cases to go out of state or out of the country," FBI Spokeswoman Laura Eimiller said.



Despite early speculation that the abduction was related to Mexican cartel violence, both spokeswomen said they were unaware of specific evidence suggesting the family had ties to the drug trade.



"We've seen an escalation nationwide in south-of-the-border-related kidnappings, whether it be drug cartels exacting revenge or carrying out violence in exchange for drug debts, or in another type of scenario, Americans who do business in Mexico being targeted for ransom," Eimiller said.



"Of course that's being looked at as a scenario here, but we have no conclusive evidence suggesting that's the case just yet."



Briant is described in the Amber Alert as a Hispanic male who was last seen wearing a yellow shirt with blue sleeves and blue-striped shorts with two different colors of blue. The boy's hair is longer than shoulder length.

***

Harare, Zimbabwe (CNN) -- The trial of controversial Zimbabwean politician Roy Bennett took a new twist Tuesday when prosecutors told the judge they wanted to impeach their star witness.



The prosecution called arms dealer Michael Peter Hitschmann to the stand to implicate Bennett in the procurement of the arms.



Bennett is a senior official of the Movement for Democratic Change (MDC) and Zimbabwe's deputy agriculture minister-designate. He has pleaded not guilty to charges of terrorism and inciting people to carry out terrorism. He could face the death penalty if convicted.



The MDC -- led by Prime Minister Morgan Tsvangirai -- says the case against Bennett is politically motivated and was aimed at keeping him out of the unity government it formed with President Robert Mugabe's Zanu-PF party last February.



Under questioning from Attorney General Johannes Tomana, Hitschmann testified he had seen Bennett on television and then had met him at a public gathering.



But Hitschmann told the fully packed courtroom that he was not aware of some of the weapons the prosecution claims that he bought with the financial support of Bennett.



In addition, Hitschmann -- who appeared relaxed throughout the proceedings -- cast doubt on the authenticity of e-mails that were produced in court which the prosecution said had been retrieved from his laptop and which allegedly reveal that he and Bennett were planning to commit terrorism.



"None of the contents was retrieved from my laptop in my absence or in the presence of my legal counsel (in 2006 when he was arrested)," he said, adding, "I don't know here they came from."



After that, Tomana started questioning Hitschmann as if he were a hostile witness and not the star witness for the prosecution.



Bennett's lawyers objected, saying the prosecution was trying to "confuse" people.



At that point, Tomana indicated that he was in the "preparatory stage" to "to lay evidence that Hitschmann was being inconsistent."



"The witness -- who is an accomplice witness by the way -- is getting to be a witness in favor of the accused; we are entitled to start impeachment procedures when the state witness starts showing that he is being unfavorably indisposed in favor of the accused," he added.



Bennett's lawyer, Beatrice Mtetwa, said the prosecution had never indicated that it had e-mails which were purportedly written by her client and Hitschmann.



She said Hitschmann had submitted an affidavit saying he does not want to testify against Bennett, adding that the statements about conspiracy that were purportedly made by him were done under "traumatic and unfriendly circumstances" in 2006, when he was arrested and later charged with terrorism himself.



Mtetwa said the prosecution was attempting to take a statement Hitschmann made to the army and turn it into a statement against her client.



"That is an army-procured statement. What legal basis is there to change it to a witness statement? The statement was made when he was an accused facing conspiracy charges," said Mtetwa. "During that time the prosecution did not indicate that he had acted in common purpose with the accused (Bennett)."



Hitschmann was acquitted of terrorism charges in 2006 but served a jail sentence for the lesser charge of possessing weapons without a license. The weapons allegedly included six sub-machine guns and two machine guns, which the prosecution produced in Bennett's trial as part of the state's exhibits.



The judge in the case, Justice Chinembiri Bhunu, who resumed the trial after adjourning it last November, is expected to rule Wednesday whether the state can proceed to impeach its own witness.



Throughout the court proceedings, Bennett -- clad in a blue suit, matching blue tie and a light blue shirt -- sat motionless, gazing into the sky once in a while. He laughed out loud when Hitschmann said he first saw Bennett on television punching the justice minister in parliament.

***

(CNN) -- A woman put on trial for wearing clothing deemed indecent by Sudanese authorities was jailed Monday for refusing to pay a court-ordered fine, her lawyer said.



Sudanese journalist Lubna Ahmed al-Hussein was facing 40 lashes for wearing trousers.



Lubna al-Hussein had faced 40 lashes for wearing pants deemed too tight and a blouse considered too sheer. The threat of lashes was dropped when a court found her guilty but ordered instead that she pay a fine.



"She is now in jail," her attorney Nabil Adib told CNN. "She refused to pay the fine as a matter of principal."



Al-Hussein will appeal her verdict in an effort to have the conservative Muslim government's decency law declared unconstitutional, Adib said by phone from Khartoum.  Watch what outfit brought the charges »



"We intend to file an appeal within the next three days, but we do not know how long it will take the court of appeals to decide on the case," Adib said. "We expect it will happen in the next two to three weeks."



He said al-Hussein could be in jail for a month unless her verdict is overturned.



Al-Hussein, who was arrested in July, pleaded not guilty during her one-day trial Monday, he said. She was not allowed to call defense witnesses or present a defense case, he added.



She was sentenced to pay 500 Sudanese pounds ($209) or face a month in prison, starting immediately, the lawyer said.



"She thinks that she did not have fair trial and a conviction was wrong so she did not want to pay the fine nor let anyone else pay on her behalf," Nadib said.



Al-Hussein, a journalist who worked in the media department of the United Nations mission in Sudan, resigned from her U.N. position in order to waive her immunity as an international worker and face trial.



Police lobbed tear gas at people outside the courthouse Monday, and closed roads leading to the courthouse before the trial began, al-Hussein told CNN before the hearing.



Sudanese security forces roughly handled scores of al-Hussein supporters, injuring some and detaining 47 women, according to an eyewitness who spoke to CNN by phone.



A Sudanese official accused "the West" of interfering in the case.



Mohammed Khair, the information attaché at the Sudan Consulate in Dubai, said the international campaign surrounding the case "proves the West contributes only toward deepening (the) crisis."



The human rights organization Amnesty International had previously called for the charges to be dropped.



"The manner in which this law has been used against women is unacceptable, and the penalty called for by the law -- up to 40 lashes -- abhorrent," Tawanda Hondora, deputy director of Amnesty International's Africa program, said in a statement.



Al-Hussein was arrested along with 18 other women on July 3 at a Khartoum restaurant when police burst in and checked women for their clothing.



"I don't think she was targeted specifically," Adib said. "They attack public and private parties and groups. They are called 'morality police' and she was just a victim of a round-up." Put your questions to Dutch activist Ayaan Hirsi Ali here



At the time of her arrest, she said, she was wearing pants, a blouse and a hijab, or a headscarf worn by Muslim women.



Scores of protesters gathered outside the courtroom in Khartoum to support al-Hussein in early August, when she was last scheduled to be tried.



The demonstrators carried banners and wore headbands with the messages, "No return to the dark ages" and "No to suppressing women." Others demanded an amendment to the country's public order law that human rights activists say is vague on what constitutes indecent dress.



U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has said he is concerned about al-Hussein's case.



"The United Nations will make every effort to ensure that the rights of its staff members are protected," Ban said

***

Sandy Springs, Georgia (CNN) -- During the week before Halloween each year, Lt. Steve Rose of the Sandy Springs Police Department in Georgia knocks on the doors of every registered sex offender in his jurisdiction.





Rose set out in his unmarked Dodge Charger Wednesday with a printout of 20 names to verify that the people on the list live where they say they live.





His mission brings him and members of his force to subdivisions, houses, hotels and and apartment buildings in this Atlanta bedroom community of about 85,000 people.





"We do this to give people a level of comfort so they know we're keeping tabs on them," said Rose, a former sex crimes detective with 34 years of police experience.





Sandy Springs is one of many local law enforcement agencies across the country taking extra steps this Halloween to assure the community that the agencies are keeping track of the sex offenders living among them.





There are 686,515 registered sex offenders in the United States, according to the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children.





The Houston, Texas, Police Department says members of its Juvenile Sex Offender Registration Unit performed checks on the residences of registered sex offenders to ensure they are in compliance with the provisions of their parole or probation. They were also told not to decorate their homes, distribute candy, turn on their porch lights or answer the door.





Similar restrictions are in place in Nashville, Tennessee.





"This is a proactive effort on our part to ensure community safety," said Melissa McDonald, spokeswoman for the Board of Parole and Probation.





Some registered sex offenders in parts of Arkansas, Texas and Illinois must report to mandatory meetings, which critics have mockingly nicknamed "sex offender Halloween parties," for a few hours on Saturday evening.





In Rose's experience, however, most sex offenders keep to themselves on Halloween. In some areas, they cannot attend Halloween parties or events such as haunted houses or corn mazes.





"They just want to stay out of trouble," he said. "But it's still incumbent on us to provide the community with the most up-to-date information about these people who are living in here."





Technically, Sandy Springs police are not responsible for verifying the addresses for the state's sex offender registry.





As soon as all the addresses are verified, Rose says he includes the information in his weekly newsletter to the local homeowners' associations. He'll also notify the Fulton County Sheriff's Office, whose jurisdiction includes Sandy Springs, of any incorrect listings.





After maneuvering through traffic for nearly three hours in the sprawling suburb, Rose had visited five residences. He spoke with one man, who calls a room at the Intown Suites home. Weekly rates start at $199.





"They don't have to worry about background checks in places like these," Rose said as he made his way down the fluorescent-lit hallway, the faint scent of fast food wafting through the vents.





He knocked twice, announcing himself as Sandy Springs police, and a tall, thin man opened the door, revealing a sliver of the pitch black room as he rubbed sleep from his eyes.





"Just checking in to verify your address. Has anyone else been by lately? Sheriff or probation?" Rose asked.





"Yes. Sheriff. I'm off probation," answered the man, who was convicted of receiving child pornography in 2001.





"Everything OK here?"





"Yes sir."





"OK then. Have a good day."





"Thank you sir," the man said, closing the door.





In two other stops, Rose confirmed with the leasing offices that the offenders were no longer living at the listed addresses. He failed to gain entry to another, and spoke with the roommate of another.





"We'll go back until we find them," he said.





Such measures, which have been part of the season for years now, are widely perceived to provide the community with a sense of comfort, said Ernie Allen, president of the National

***

(CNN)  -- Israeli soldiers routinely and intentionally put children in harm's way during their 22-day offensive against the Palestinians in Gaza, according to a United Nations report made public Monday.



On March 6, a Palestinian boy sits on the rubble of a building destroyed during Israel's 22-day Gaza offensive.



The report said a working group had documented and verified reports of violations "too numerous to list."



For example, on January 15, in a town southwest of Gaza City, Israel Defense Forces soldiers ordered an 11-year-old boy to open Palestinians' packages, presumably so that the soldiers would not be hurt if they turned out to contain explosives, the 43-page report said.



They then forced the boy to walk in front of them in the town, it said. When the soldiers came under fire, "the boy remained in front of the group," the report said.



It said the boy was later released.



Also cited were "credible reports" that accused Hamas, the militant Palestinian group that runs Gaza, of using human shields and placing civilians at risk.



But it singled out the Israelis for more sweeping criticism.



A spokesman for the Israeli prime minister called the report another example of the "one-sided and unfair" attitude of the U.N. Human Rights Council, which requested it.



The report cited two alleged incidents from January 3. In one, it said, after a tank round struck near a house, a father and his two sons -- both younger than 11 -- emerged to look at the damage.



"As they exited their home, IDF soldiers shot and killed them (at the entrance to their house), with the daughter witnessing," the report said.



In the second, it said, "Israeli soldiers entered a family house in the Zeitoun neighborhood of Gaza City. Standing at the doorstep, they asked the male head of the household to come out and shot him dead, without warning, while he was holding his ID, hands raised up in the air, and then started to fire indiscriminately and without warning into the room where the rest of the family was huddled together.



"The eldest son was shouting in vain the word 'Children' in Hebrew to warn the soldiers. The shooting did not stop until everyone was lying on the floor. The mother and four of the brothers, aged 2-12 years, had been wounded, one of them, aged 4, fatally."



The alleged instances occurred during Operation Cast Lead, which was launched December 27 to halt rocket attacks into southern Israel from Gaza and ended January 17 with a cease-fire.



The U.N. report called the response by Israel disproportionate.



Of the 1,453 people estimated killed in the conflict, 1,440 were Palestinian, including 431 children and 114 women, the report said.



The 13 Israelis killed included three civilians and six soldiers killed by Hamas, and four soldiers killed by friendly fire, it said.



The report said the Israeli operation resulted in "a dramatic deterioration of the living conditions of the civilian population."



It cited "targeted and indiscriminate" attacks on hospitals and clinics, water and sewage treatment facilities, government buildings, utilities and farming and said the offensive "intensified the already catastrophic humanitarian situation of the Palestinian people."



It said Israeli strikes damaged more than 200 schools and left more than 70,000 people homeless.



"There are strong and credible reports of war crimes and other violations of international norms," it said, adding that many observers have said war crimes investigations should be undertaken.



"The alternative is de facto impunity," it said.



It called for the end of Israel's blockade of Gaza and the free passage into the territory of food, medicine, fuel and construction supplies.



Mark Regev, a spokesman for Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert, called the report "another example of the one-sided and unfair attitude of the rapporteur of the Human Rights Council, a council that has been criticized by current and previous secretaries-general for its unbalanced attitudes toward Israel."



He

***

Editor's note: Ruben Navarrette Jr. is a member of the San Diego Union-Tribune editorial board and a nationally syndicated columnist. Read his column here.



Ruben Navarrette says hate crimes should be punished severely because they're aimed at society as a whole.



SAN DIEGO, California (CNN) -- To think there are some people who still argue that the law shouldn't categorize some offenses as hate crimes and allow for enhanced criminal penalties.



They claim that all sorts of crimes are motivated by hate, and to separate some from others elevates some victims over others and amounts to the state policing thoughts and feelings.



They also fear that politicians and institutions are simply yielding to political correctness, liberal pressure groups and identity politics.



My view is that hate crimes deserve special punishment because they don't just victimize whoever they're aimed at; they're intended to send a message, and they terrorize the whole society.



That debate might have been settled Wednesday at the U.S. Holocaust Memorial Museum, where hate was on display. A shooting left one man dead: Stephen Tyrone Johns, a six-year veteran of the museum's security staff who, according to museum director Sara Bloomfield, "died heroically in the line of duty." The alleged assailant is James von Brunn, a Holocaust denier who created an anti-Semitic Web site.



The 88-year-old often challenged the authenticity of "The Diary of Anne Frank," the book about a teenage girl living in Amsterdam during the Nazi occupation of the Netherlands. So it was probably no coincidence that the shooting occurred on the same day the museum had scheduled a play based on a fictional meeting between Anne Frank and Emmett Till, a martyr of the civil rights movement.



Von Brunn also had longstanding ties to white supremacist groups, according to authorities. These outfits flourish in bad times because they give underperformers something really valuable: convenient scapegoats for their troubles, failures and shortcomings.



Without that, these misfits might actually have to look in the mirror and take responsibility for their own lives. Although these groups are properly categorized as "hate groups" by organizations such as the Southern Poverty Law Center, what also fuels them are things like fear and insecurity.



Nowadays, their targets are often Latinos, especially immigrants. But, before that and for much of the history of this country, the targets have been African-Americans. And, for much of the history of the world, they have been Jews.



And that prejudice hasn't gone away. Consider what the Rev. Jeremiah Wright, the former Chicago, Illinois, pastor whose relationship with Barack Obama became an issue in the presidential election, recently told the Virginia newspaper, the Daily Press, when asked if he speaks to Obama. "Them Jews aren't going to let him talk to me," Wright said in an apparent reference to some of Obama's aides. Wright later said he misspoke and meant to refer to "Zionists."



A researcher for the Southern Poverty Law Center has said her group had a thick file on von Brunn going back 20 years and that he had become a "hardcore neo-Nazi." Von Brunn blamed a six-year prison term he once served -- for the attempted kidnapping of Federal Reserve board members in 1981 -- on "a Negro jury," "Jew/Negro attorneys" and "a Jew judge," according to his Web site.



In documents read at trial, von Brunn wrote that his goal was to "deport all Jews and blacks from the white nations." Also, on his Web site, there's a message lamenting how "bit by bit government institutions and Congressmen fell into JEW hands -- then U.S. diplomacy, businesses, resources and manpower came under Jew control."



You get the picture. It's no mystery what this guy is, to anyone but himself. His court-appointed lawyer from the Federal Reserve case said von Brunn, a veteran, considers himself a patriot. He's no such thing. That concept is best defined as love for one's country, not hatred for everyone else.



It's

***

(CNN) -- For Capt. Kamaljit Singh Kalsi, a doctor, and 2nd Lt. Tejdeep Singh Rattan, a dentist, this is a hill worth fighting for.





Tejdeep Singh Rattan, left, and Kamaljit Singh Kalsi are set to report for duty in the U.S. Army in July.





These two U.S. military recruits of the Sikh faith are challenging an Army order that they remove their turbans and cut their unshorn hair and beards when they report for active duty in July.





In Sikhism, which originated in northwestern India, the turban and unshorn hair are articles of faith and can't be removed.





But the U.S. military says there are times when the military cannot accommodate certain religious practices, "such as when those religious observations would interfere with the wear of proper military headgear or protective clothing or equipment."





"It doesn't make sense to me, especially in these hard times," Kalsi told CNN. "The military is hurting for professionals. They need doctors, they need nurses."





Aided by the Sikh Coalition, a national civil rights group, and a law firm, the men have filed requests that their religious needs be accommodated. They have filed appeals with their immediate superiors and complaints with the inspectors general of the Army and the Pentagon.





The Sikh Coalition said Kalsi and Rattan had been assured that when they were recruited to join the Army's Health Professions Scholarship that their unshorn hair and turbans "would not be a problem."





"Both men were both recruited and commissioned -- with their Sikh articles of faith -- during their respective first years of medical and dental school (2001 and 2006) through the Army's Health Professions Scholarship Program.





"Both are concluding their training and are slated to begin active duty in July 2009. However, the U.S. Army is now disputing their ability to serve with their Sikh identity intact," the Sikh Coalition said in an April 14 letter addressed to Defense Secretary Robert Gates.





Amardeep Singh, the head of the Sikh Coalition, told CNN that the issue at hand involves observant Sikhs, not those Sikh-Americans who entered the military after removing their turbans and shaving their beards and hair.





The issue is all-important for the roughly 500,000-strong American Sikh community, which faced hostility after the September 11, 2001, attacks, when people associated them with al Qaeda terrorists because their turbans and beards resembled the militants' appearance.





"The perception is still there," said Singh. "We're sort of still feeling it."





He said surveys -- including one done recently in Queens, New York, where children reported being on the receiving end of verbal and physical abuse -- chronicle the problems Sikhs face.





"These kids are being harassed in New York. It's Queens, the most diverse county in the United States. If this is happening in Queens, it's happening in other parts of the country."





So, he said, the opportunity to serve in the U.S. Army sends the opposite message -- "that we are part and parcel of the fabric of this country."





Kalsi, Singh and the Sikh community stress the Sikhs' military heritage. Kalsi, for example, is the fourth generation in his family to serve in the military, and his ancestors served in India's military. The Sikh served in allied forces in the two world wars and they serve in the militaries of Great Britain, Canada, Sweden, Pakistan, as well as India.





The coalition notes in its letter to Gates that a Sikh doctor and dentist were serving in the Army, "grandfathered in under the old policy" that ended in the 1980s when observant Sikhs were barred from admission to the armed forces.





Lt. Col. Christopher C. Garver, an Army spokesman, told CNN in an e-mail that "the Army places high value on the rights of Soldiers to freely observe the tenets of their respective religions."





"Accommodation of a Soldier's religious practices must be examined against military necessity and cannot be guaranteed at all times," he wrote. "There are times when the Army

***

PENSACOLA, Florida (CNN)  -- A fourth suspect has been arrested in the shooting deaths of a Gulf Coast couple known for adopting special-needs children, authorities said late Monday.



Police say they have evidence that places Gary Lamont Sumner at the crime scene.



Gary Lamont Sumner faces a murder charge for his alleged role in the deaths of Byrd and Melanie Billings on Thursday, Escambia County, Florida, Sheriff David Morgan said.



Sumner was pulled over in a traffic stop in Okaloosa County Sunday and arrested after authorities found he matched a description put out by Escambia authorities.



Police believe six to eight people were involved in the homicides, which occurred in the couple's home in Beulah, west of Pensacola, near the Alabama state line.  Watch surveillance video of the home invasion »



The crime was "a very well-planned and methodical operation," Morgan said.



Wayne Coldiron, 41; Leonard Patrick Gonzalez Jr., 35, and Leonard Patrick Gonzalez Sr., 56, were arrested over the weekend. Coldiron and the younger Gonzalez face charges of murder, robbery and residential home invasion; the elder Gonzalez faces charges of evidence tampering for allegedly trying to disguise a vehicle spotted at the home.



Morgan said at least three others are persons of interests in the investigation.



"We expect more arrests to be imminent," Morgan told reporters.



Both of the Billingses were shot multiple times, Morgan said, but he would not release further details on their deaths.



Authorities released two surveillance tapes taken from the front and rear of the Billingses' home. Each shows a vehicle pulling up to the property, and five people dressed in black and wearing masks entering the home through two entrances -- including through a utility door left unlocked, something Morgan said is not uncommon in the community. Authorities believe drivers remained in both of the cars.



Investigators believe one motive in the deaths was robbery, but "we believe there are other motives," Morgan said. He would not say what, if anything, was taken from the home.



Melanie Billings' biological daughter, Ashley Markham, told reporters the couple initially had 17 children -- two biological children each for Byrd and Melanie Billings, with the rest adopted. Three have died over the years, she said. The couple had no biological children together.  Watch Ashley Markham say, "Love was never scarce" in Billings home »



Morgan, however, said the couple had a total of 16 children, with two that have died and others that have grown older and no longer live in the Billingses' home.



Nine of the couple's children were home at the time of the incident, Morgan said, and police believe three of them saw the intruders. One managed to flee the home and seek help at a neighbor's house, the sheriff said.



Coldiron and the younger Gonzalez were being held on $1 million bond, according to records posted on the sheriff's Web site. The senior Gonzalez was being held on $250,000 bond.



One of the first three arrested is believed to be the mastermind behind the crime, Morgan said, but would not say which one.  Watch a report on the arrests in the complex case »



Police also released a surveillance photo taken at a Wal-Mart in nearby Gulf Breeze, Florida, recently. Two of the people in the photo are Sumner and the younger Gonzalez, but authorities want to know who the other man is, Morgan said.



The sheriff called the surveillance tapes "chilling." He noted the vehicles were at the home less than 10 minutes, and the five people were in the house less than four minutes.



"It leads me to believe that this was a very well-planned and methodical operation," Morgan said.  Watch experts describe the "military-style" attack »



Although the Billingses were well known in the community, the sheriff said authorities are still trying to unravel why they were targeted. He compared their deaths to the slaying of the Clutter family of Kansas, inspiration for Truman Capote's novel "In Cold

***

(CNN) -- It's been five days since Hurricane Ike smashed into the Texas coast, but people are still struggling mightily with its effects.



Flags of the United States and Texas fly where homes stood in Gilchrist, Texas, before Ike's wrath came ashore.



From the destroyed coastline, to far inland where evacuees are seeking shelter, to communities in the Midwest where the storm dumped flooding rains, CNN's affiliates are reporting on the rebuilding of lives.



Galveston, Texas Wrecked homes and possessions strewn around the ubiquitous sludge were the sights awaiting residents of Galveston, some of whom were allowed to check their property on Wednesday, KHOU reported.



Paula Munoz said although the damage to the family's El Rey restaurant was worse than she could have imagined, they still planned to rebuild. "We spent 10 years paying off this place," she told KHOU. "We'll rebuild, and we'll do it here. Where else would we go? This is our life."



But there was some relief for Maria Patina, who was worried she had lost everything. When she saw her house was standing, she rushed inside, grabbed a statue of Jesus and said: "Thank you, God." Read KHOU's report on going back to Galveston



Crystal Beach, Texas Frank and Dee Ann Sherman huddled in the attic of their beachfront home in Crystal Beach as Hurricane Ike ripped the house apart -- washing walls out to sea and lifting up what remained only to smash it down, KHOU said.   Watch the Shermans tell their amazing survival story »



Somehow the roof stayed on and they survived, but they are not being allowed back into the ruins, not even to retrieve the ashes of their dead daughter.



The couple said they were frustrated with complaints by people better off than them. "We see all of these people that are crying and moaning because they got some mud on their floor or their lights are out in Houston," Frank Sherman told KHOU.



"We don't see anything about our friends that died in Crystal Beach and about the fact that our world is totally devastated. I'm 60 years old and I have to start my life all over again." Read how the Shermans contacted KHOU when they found they couldn't escape



Brazoria County, Texas  Patty Smith fled Brazoria County and evacuated to Austin before the storm. She still does not know whether she has a home to return to, KVUE said.



"It's like a nightmare. You look at your house when you pack up to leave and you're like 'Am I going to see this again'?" she said.



Right now she's now relying on donations and just making it through each day. "We don't even know if we're going to have the money to pay our bills. It's that bad. My husband hasn't been able to work since we left," she said. Read KVUE's report on how Austin residents and workers are trying to help



Austin, Texas Parents still staying at the Austin Convention Center are trying to stay strong for their kids, News 8 reported, but they say it is getting harder.  Watch Homeland Security boss discuss plans to help evacuees »



William Jones said the hardest part was trying to talk to his two daughters about their home.



"I just tell them the truth and keep it simple," he said. "I don't try to sugarcoat it, so they know this is a real serious situation, but it's just hard on everybody right now," he told the station. Read what young victims are telling News 8



San Antonio, Texas Kevin Green's mind was on laundry as he spent another day in a shelter in San Antonio, Texas, after getting out of Houston to avoid Ike.



"I've been washing these clothes out and putting them on every day," he told KSAT.



The Salvation Army said there would be enough clothes to hand out to evacuees, but there were concerns about making sure distribution was fair, KSAT said. Read KSAT report on

***

(CNN) -- Two U.S. spacecraft are set to crash on the moon Friday. On purpose. And we're all invited to watch.



An artist's rendering shows the LCROSS spacecraft, left, separating from its Centaur rocket.



NASA's Lunar Crater Observation and Sensing Satellite is scheduled to drop its Centaur upper-stage rocket on the lunar surface at 7:31 a.m. ET.



NASA hopes the impact will kick up enough dust to help the LCROSS probe find the presence of water in the moon's soil. Four minutes later, the LCROSS will follow through the debris plume, collecting and relaying data back to Earth before crashing into the Cabeus crater near the moon's south pole.



The LCROSS is carrying spectrometers, near-infrared cameras, a visible camera and a visible radiometer. These instruments will help NASA scientists analyze the plume of dust -- more than 250 metric tons' worth -- for water vapor.



The orbiting Hubble Space Telescope and NASA's Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter will watch, and photograph, the collisions. And hundreds of telescopes on Earth also will be focused on the two plumes.  Watch animation of how the moon will be "bombed" »



NASA is encouraging amateur astronomers to join the watch party.



"We expect the debris plumes to be visible through midsized backyard telescopes -- 10 inches and larger," said Brian Day at NASA's Ames Research Center at Moffett Field, California. Day is an amateur astronomer who is leading education and public outreach for the LCROSS mission.



Ames will host "Impact Night," an event with music and food starting Thursday evening before a live transmission of the lunar impact will be shown around 4:30 a.m. PT Friday. Other science observatories and amateur astronomy clubs across the country will be hosting similar events. iReport: Are you planning to watch?



"The initial explosions will probably be hidden behind crater walls, but the plumes will rise high enough above the crater's rim to be seen from Earth," Day said. The Cabeus crater lies in permanent shadow, making observations inside the crater difficult.  Watch CNN's Jeanne Moos ask if lunacy is behind the moon "bombing" »



The impacts will not be visible to the naked eye or through binoculars. If you don't have a telescope, or you live in areas where daylight will obscure the viewing, NASA TV will broadcast the crashes live. Coverage begins at 6:15 a.m. ET Friday.



The two main components of the LCROSS mission are the shepherding spacecraft and the Centaur upper stage rocket. The spacecraft will guide the rocket to its crash site.



Data from previous space missions have revealed trace amounts of water in lunar soil. The LCROSS mission seeks a definitive answer to the question of how much water is present. NASA has said it believes water on the moon could be a valuable resource in the agency's quest to explore the solar system.



LCROSS launched with the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter aboard an Atlas V rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, on June 18.



Friday's lunar impact will be visible best in areas that are still dark, particularly in the Western United States.



The Fremont Peak Observatory near Monterey, California, will open up its doors early Friday to allow people to watch the event through its 30-inch telescope. It's "the most accessible public telescope in the [San Francisco] Bay Area," said Dave Samuels, the observatory's vice president.



So far, at least 50 people have signed up, Samuels said, noting that number is "really phenomenal, especially on a school night [and] work night. It's really incredible."



Students, retirees and board members are among those scheduled to attend.



Samuels said a special low-light, infrared video camera will be hooked up to the telescope so that the audience can watch the rocket strike the moon. The observatory is in Fremont Peak State Park, which is on a list of California parks that could close because of recent budget cuts.



Samuels said he hopes Friday's event triggers more interest in astronomy, particularly among young children, and possibly help the park to stay open.



"

***

ATLANTA, Georgia (CNN)  -- A judge has ordered the children of the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. to meet in their capacity as the sole shareholders of the corporation that manages their iconic father's estate.



Dexter King has denied taking "substantial funds" from his parents' estates.



King's children were in Fulton County, Georgia, Superior Court Monday in a dispute over their parents' estates.



Two children of the civil rights icon are suing their brother, accusing him of wrongfully taking money from their parents' estates.



The Rev. Bernice King and Martin Luther King III allege Dexter King took "substantial funds" out of Coretta Scott King's estate and "wrongfully appropriated" money from their father's estate.



Dexter King has publicly denied the accusations.



It was unclear what outcome having a shareholder meeting for the Estate of Martin Luther King Jr., Inc. would have on the dispute. The three siblings have not held such a meeting since 2004, corporation attorney Luke Lantta said. The removal of Dexter King as the estate's administrator is unlikely because that would require a meeting of the board of directors.



Judge Ural Glanville on Monday also ruled in favor of dismissing some of the allegations against Dexter King, but left the question of whether he failed to act in the best interest of his father's incorporated estate to a jury. A trial on the allegation of breach of fiduciary duty could happen as early as next month.



The lawsuit reveals a very public fissure in an iconic family that has always professed unity, particularly as questions have swirled around some of their financial dealings.



Martin Luther King III and Bernice King were in the courtroom Monday, but Dexter King was not. He had been injured in an accident in California and did not make the trip to Georgia.



Dexter King had filed a counter claim against his sister, asking the court to force her to hand over to the corporation some items that belonged to Martin Luther King Jr.



In a special hearing Monday, the court ruled that the items, including Martin Luther King Jr.'s Nobel Peace Prize and his love letters to Coretta Scott King will be turned over to the court to hold until a resolution is reached.



The courtroom was packed with supporters of the King family.



Among those in attendance were the Rev. Joseph Lowery and former Ambassador Andrew Young, friends of Martin Luther King Jr. who worked with him during the civil rights movement.



CNN's Aaron Cooper contributed to this report.

***

Hong Kong (CNN) -- If you can tolerate the junkies on the stairwells or the rats that sometimes scale the 12 floors of her building on the external electrical wiring, Lui's penthouse shack ticks all the boxes for a multi-million dollar property in Hong Kong.





It's light, it's well ventilated and it has sweeping views of Kowloon's Lion Rock Hill. Constructed from recycled materials, the design is customized to her lifestyle down to the last detail.





"This is my washing machine," says Lui, pointing proudly to a small stainless steel basin on the terrace side of her rooftop house in Sham Shui Po. "I do my tai chi exercises here in the morning, and on moonlit nights I like to sit out here and look out on the mountain."





Anywhere else in Hong Kong, luxury apartments can often fetch HK$100 million (US$12.85 million), and a house with these features could easily cost the average transaction price of HK$13.25 million (US$1.7 million), according to data released by agency Midland Realty earlier this year.





The only difference is that as an unprepossessing corrugated iron shack that forms part of Hong Kong's extensive network of sky slums -- technically illegal rooftop structures barnacled onto the roofs of tenements built in the 1950s and 60s -- the market is sluggish.





Nevertheless, a gray market in these slum dwellings does exist.





"Of course the agent never explicitly says it's a rooftop dwelling. The listing will say something like small apartment with a unique view or interesting features," says Dr. Ernest Chiu of Hong Kong University who has studied informal housing.





"I've heard anecdotal evidence of them changing hands for HK$40,000 (US$5,000) but that was three years ago when I was doing my research."





In the volatile world of Hong Kong property prices, says realtor Janice Chan of Y&L Properties, they could now be worth a lot more.





"Even if a dwelling has an illegal structure status, I would say that it was absolutely impossible to get anything in Hong Kong for under $HK1 million (US$129,000)," Chan says.





World's most expensive luxury city is...





She contends prices could even exceed this, making Lui's hand-built shanty one of the most expensive slum dwellings in the world.





According to the latest Hong Kong census from 2006, there are 3,962 rooftop dwellers in 1,556 households in Hong Kong. Mostly found in old urban areas in Kowloon -- Sham Shui Po, Kwun Tung and Tai Kok Tsui -- the houses are crammed together so tightly that they form their own above-ground streetscapes, complete with gardens, playgrounds and places of worship.





The slums are a hangover from the housing crises of the 1950s and 1960s when successive waves of refugees from mainland China set up squatter cities in Hong Kong. Many of the residents have lived in the slums for more than 30 years, and new arrivals tend to be underprivileged migrants from either mainland China, Pakistan, Nepal or other parts of Asia.





Since 2001, when 16,359 people lived on Hong Kong's rooftops, the number of illegal dwellings has reduced dramatically. While government policy has played a part, more often the tenements -- under constant pressure due to the shortage of land in Hong Kong -- are torn down to make way for new shopping and residential developments.





For the government, which supplies these rooftop communities with a postal service, water and electricity; collects rates; and even levies stamp duty on their sale and purchase, the sky slums operate under an established practice of "tolerance versus demolition," says Chiu. Their existence, while not ideal, keeps almost 4,000 people off a crowded public housing queue, he adds.





Fire restrictions are strict (those with a single rather than double fire exits are earmarked for demolition as a top priority), and building codes rigidly enforced (adding an extra floor to a non-structural building is forbidden), but the Building Department's normal practice is simply to issue a notice that slates the illegal structure for eventual demolition.





Under this system, illegal rooftop dwellings often survive for decades

***

ATLANTA, Georgia (CNN) -- Children with high-risk medical conditions or disabilities should be among the first to be vaccinated against H1N1 influenza, also known as swine flu, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention advised Thursday.



CDC: The H1N1 virus is spreading in the United States, particularly in the Southeast.



And high-risk children under 18 years of age should be rushed to a doctor at the first sign of the virus, said Dr. Thomas Frieden, CDC director.



In addition, doctors should be aware that some otherwise healthy children with bacterial infections may be more susceptible to the flu, he told reporters during a conference call.



Frieden said the vaccine should be available by mid-October, and will be free at public hospitals and other sites. All schoolchildren should be vaccinated, he said.



"We also are recommending that all people with underlying conditions get vaccinated -- people who have asthma, diabetes, lung disease, heart disease, neuromuscular conditions, neurological conditions that increase their risk factors and women who are pregnant," Frieden added.



As of August 22, there had been 556 deaths in the United States associated with the H1N1 virus, and 42 of those deaths were children under the age of 18. The figures were published August 28 on the CDC Web site.



Thursday, the CDC's Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report focused on the pediatric cases -- 36 that were counted among the 477 flu-related deaths up to August 8.  Watch more on what the CDC had to say about H1N1 influenza »



Seven of the children who died were younger than 5 years old, the report said, and 24 had underlying disabilities, such as muscular dystrophy or cerebral palsy, or one or more high-risk medical conditions.



Frieden said the H1N1 virus -- which he said never really went away, judging by the cases reported this summer -- is spreading in the United States, particularly in the Southeast.



"The good news is that so far, everything that we've seen, both in this country and abroad, shows that the virus has not changed to become more deadly. That means that although it may affect lots of people, most people will not be severely ill," he said.



He noted, however, that both H1N1 and the seasonal flu are unpredictable. Because of this, health professionals have to be ready to change their protocols based on any new information.



On Wednesday, the CDC said there were six suspected cases among its approximately 7,000 employees at the Atlanta, Georgia, headquarters.



Frieden referenced findings by federal agencies who were asked to study the impact of H1N1 in the Southern Hemisphere. They examined data from Argentina, Australia, Chile, New Zealand and Uruguay, since they more closely resemble U.S. demographics and economic development.



"All countries report that after mid-July, disease activity in most parts of the country decreased. This indicates that the duration of the current influenza season in the Southern Hemisphere, in which the 2009 H1N1 virus is the predominate strain, may be similar in length to an average seasonal influenza season," according to the Flu.gov Web site.



Earlier Thursday, the Institute of Medicine released a report recommending a major step up in protection for health workers dealing with patients suspected or confirmed to have H1N1 influenza.



The institute, in recommendations requested by the CDC, said loose paper masks are inadequate because workers can still breathe in the virus. Instead, health workers should switch to a specific type of mask -- N95 respirators -- that form an airtight seal around the nose and mouth.



CNN's Mariam Falco contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Three crew members died in a fiery Navy helicopter crash near Corpus Christi, Texas, a military spokesman said, and a fourth is hospitalized in critical condition.



The Navy MH-53 Sea Dragon helicopter crashed in a field about four miles south of Corpus Christi on Wednesday just after 8 p.m. It caught fire after impact, said Ed Mackley with the Naval Mine and Anti-Submarine Warfare Command.



Copter wreckage came to rest near guide wires of a 1,000-foot TV tower for Public Broadcasting System affiliate KEDT, according to the Corpus Christi Caller-Times. Authorities refused to tell The Associate Press whether the Sea Dragon collided with the tower.



A witness reported a huge fireball and booming noise shortly after the crash. Rescuers found bodies of three crew members about 2:30 a.m. on Thursday, Mackley said.  Watch smoke and flames after the crash »



Witness J.D. Batten told the Caller-Times he was walking on his property about two miles from the crash site when he heard a helicopter overhead.



"I saw a red-glowing fireball shoot hundreds of feet up into the air," he told the paper. "I heard a giant boom a second later. It was then dead silent, and I couldn't hear the helicopter anymore."



A fourth crew member was in critical condition at Christus Spohn Memorial Hospital in Corpus Christi, Texas, Mackley said.



"Our hearts and prayers go out to the families," Mackley said. Authorities did not immediately identify the victims.



The aircraft was part of Helicopter Mine Countermeasures Squadron 15 out of Naval Air Station Corpus Christi, a military spokesman told the Caller-Times.



The Caller-Times quoted a Navy spokesman who said the aircraft was on a training mission and the crash occurred during heavy fog. A military investigation will try to determine what caused the crash, Mackley said.



First responders to the crash site were hindered by downed power lines, according to the Caller-Times report. The paper said firefighters and a busload of military personnel searched the muddy area surrounding the crash site for hours. E-mail to a friend

***

In our Behind the Scenes series, CNN correspondents share their experiences in covering news and analyze the stories behind the events. CNN's Gary Tuchman accompanied a Border Patrol unit in Nogales, Arizona, and experienced the variety and the danger of law enforcement life firsthand.



CNN's Gary Tuchman pulls his weight on ride-along with 64 lbs. of marijuana seized by law enforcement.



NOGALES, Arizona (CNN) -- Nogales, Arizona, is a small city. Just more than 20,000 people live here, according to the 2005 census. But spend a couple of days here with law enforcement, and your head will spin.



Almost half of all illegal drugs seized from Mexico last year were seized in the eastern Arizona region, and Nogales is the largest border city in this U.S. border patrol sector.



In the past six months, the Border Patrol has seized about 500,000 pounds of illegal drugs here, which is 15 percent higher than the previous six months. Each day, hundreds of people are arrested, mostly for immigration violations but many for drug and weapons crimes. The temporary jail cells in the Border Patrol station in Nogales are often overflowing. The Border Patrol boss in this sector says his agents were assaulted 260 times within the past year.



One night this week, we saw the danger and variety of lawbreaking activity experienced here quite vividly.



At the immigration checkpoint set up a half-hour north of Nogales on Interstate 19, a semi truck is pulled over when the drug-sniffing dog detects something. The back of the truck is opened, and inside are thousands of tomatoes, but the dog is still not happy.



The truck is taken back to the Border Patrol station, and agents climb over the tomatoes. And that's where they find the stash. Bales and bales of dope. Forty bales of marijuana. Nine hundred eight pounds, to be exact. At a street value of $800 a pound, the authorities estimate they kept $720,000 worth of marijuana off the streets.



I interview the man arrested for driving the shipment. The operating theory: that he is doing dirty work for one of the Mexican cartels. But the Mexican man tells me he is not scared, because "I was just carrying tomatoes." He claims that he knew nothing about the nearly half-ton of pot. The man will be telling that to the judge and could face significant time in an American prison.



Illegal drugs consume the day of all law enforcement people here.



We drive with the Border Patrol in the late hours of the night and hear a call over the radio that two men have been spotted jumping the border wall with backpacks.



The chase is on, and another dog is brought to the area. The men disappear, but the dog picks up a scent in the heavy, hilly brush. Sarah the drug-sniffing dog is taught to sit when she finds something.



She suddenly sits and then jumps on what looks like bushes. It turns out the bushes are actually attached to sacks of marijuana. Two 25-pound sacks full of pot.



They were abandoned by the men when they ran away after being spotted. Street value, at least $40,000.



Ray Rivera, the agent who works with Sarah, told me that over the past two years, Sarah has found nearly 7,000 pounds of pot. But Rivera also is pretty heroic. Just a couple of weeks ago, he was shot in the leg when a man he was chasing committed suicide. The bullet passed through the man's face and into Rivera's knee. Law enforcement life here is not for the squeamish.



Before we leave this area, we go to a rural area west of Nogales where we hear illegal immigrants and drug couriers often try to get into the United States. When we get there, we see why. The tall border fence abruptly ends as it gets close to a small mountain, but there is plenty of space for people to squeeze into the United States.



We wander about 10 feet into Mexico to look at some of the clothes, water bottles and cigarette boxes that people have