(CNN) -- A diamond unearthed in the southern African nation of Lesotho could yield one of the largest and highest quality round polished diamonds, according to a statement Monday from company that found it.



A mining company unearthed this 478-carat diamond in the southern African nation of Lesotho.



Experts in Antwerp, Belgium who analyzed the 478-carat stone determined it to be of the highest color grading available for a white diamond, said a statement from Gem Diamonds Ltd., the company that found the stone.



"What makes it more remarkable is the color and quality of this stone," said diamond consultant Neil Buxton.



"It's a D color, which is the highest possible graded color you can get, and we believe there is a chance -- a very good chance -- of getting a 100-carat plus" round stone with the highest color and clarity rankings.



The company said such a stone would "to the best of our knowledge" be "the first one in history."  Watch more on the diamond »



The diamond, which was found in September, ranks as the 20th largest rough diamond ever found, but is not the biggest ever taken from the Letseng Mine, which is co-owned by Gem Diamonds Ltd. and the Kingdom of Lesotho, a country of 2.1 million that is surrounded by South Africa.



Two bigger stones -- 603 and 493 carats -- were found in the mine in 2006 and 2007, respectively, the company said. A 601-carat diamond was mined there in 1960, it said.

***

MILAN, Italy -- European Super Cup winners Milan were brought back down to earth at the San Siro on Monday, as Fiorentina held them to a 1-1 draw in Serie A.



Kaka (right) wheels away in celebration after scoring his penalty against Fiorentina.



Fiorentina striker Adrian Mutu earned the visitors a point with a 56th-minute header after Milan playmaker Kaka had scored from the penalty spot in the 27th minute.



Milan, who beat Genoa 3-0 in their opening league game, join Fiorentina as one of seven teams with four points in the league table.



Mutu scored against the run of play from Mario Alberto Santana's cross.



Earlier, Fiorentina defender Dario Dainelli had conceded a penalty when he tripped Massimo Ambrosini in the area.



Filippo Inzaghi wasted a golden chance to win the match in the 71st minute when Kaka slid the ball across the front of Fiorentina's goal. However, the Italy forward somehow managed to miss the ball and an open net.



Fiorentina could have won it late on but midfielder Zdravko Kuzmanovic hit the post.



"I am always angry when we don't get the maximum points, but in this case we did everything we possibly could," said Milan coach Carlo Ancelotti.



"We tried to win and ran quite a few risks, but so soon after our last game it was understandable we had some difficulties."  E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- The Chinese government has lifted a 20-year-old rule that banned foreigners with HIV and AIDS, sexually transmitted diseases and leprosy from entering the country, according to the country's state news agency.





State-run news agency Xinhua reported Tuesday that China's State Council decided to repeal the ban after realizing it did little to prevent the spread of disease and caused problems when the country was hosting international events.





The revision came days before the opening of the six-month Shanghai World Expo, which organizers expect will draw 70 million people. The government had previously lifted the ban temporarily for other large-scale events, including the 2008 Olympics in Beijing.





Xinhua said the health ministry estimates the number of people living with HIV in China had reached 740,000 by October 2009, with deaths caused by AIDS totaling 49,845 since the first case was reported in 1985.





China's decision comes several months after the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention removed HIV infection from the list of diseases that prevent non-U.S. citizens from entering the country.





Until January, the U.S. was one of seven countries with laws barring entry of people with HIV, according to amfAR, an AIDS research organization.

***

(CNN) -- Iranian opposition leader Mir Hossein Moussavi plans to form a new political party aimed at reining in the power of the Islamic Republic's leadership, a leading reformist newspaper reported Sunday.



Mir Hossein Moussavi is reportedly seeking to form a new political party in Iran.



Moussavi told supporters the party will be focused on upholding "the remaining principles of the constitution," according to Etemad-e Melli, a newspaper aligned with fellow opposition candidate Mehdi Karrubi.



He is expected to file papers with Iran's Interior Ministry to establish the party before hard-line incumbent Mahmoud Ahmadinejad is sworn in for a new term, the newspaper reported.



The announcement comes after weeks of protests over Iran's disputed presidential election and an attempted clampdown by Iran's clerical leadership.



The clerical leadership has declared Ahmadinejad the winner of that vote. Moussavi, a former prime minister, was the leading challenger to Ahmadinejad in the June 12 balloting.



The official results showed Ahmadinejad winning with more than 62 percent of the vote. Moussavi and Karrubi have consistently rejected those results as fraudulent and demanded a new vote.



Their supporters turned out in crowds estimated in the hundreds of thousands to demand the results be overturned.



Iran's Guardian Council, which oversees the elections, has declared the official count will stand.

***

Mexico City, Mexico (CNN) -- Heavy flooding in central Mexico in the past week has killed at least 33 people and left thousands homeless, the government said Monday.





Schools remained closed in five cities in Mexico's Michoacan state, where the flooding has killed at least 22 people and left more than 3,500 residents homeless, the state government said on its Web site.





Another 83 people still were missing Monday in Michoacan, a state in western coastal Mexico that has been beset by drug violence in the past few years.





A mudslide Saturday killed at least 11 people near the small town of Temascaltepec, in neighboring Mexico state.





Uncharacteristic heavy rain throughout Mexico also has led to flooding in the nation's capital, Mexico City.





Up to 35,000 people nationwide could have been affected, published reports said.





On Sunday, Mexican President Felipe Calderon toured Valle de Chalco, a city in Mexico state.





In Valle de Chalco, on the eastern outskirts of the Mexico City area, officials announced that contaminated water from a sewage network that overflowed Friday will continue to flood the town for at least another 48 hours. The number of affected houses in the city grew from 2,000 on Friday to about 3,000 on Monday, the government said.





Mexico state is bordered on the west by Michoacan and adjoins Mexico City on three sides -- north, east and west.





In Mexico City, officials announced the reopening Monday of 165 of the 174 schools that were closed Friday because of the heavy rain and flooding.





Calderon and other Mexican officials have vowed to help displaced families, including offering them food, medicine, shelter and cash allowances to buy new furniture.

***

(CNN) -- In anticipation of more flooding next week, residents of Fargo, North Dakota, began stacking sandbags Wednesday for the second time in just over two weeks along the banks of the Red River.

A trucker relaxes April 1 on sandbag pallets in Fargo, North Dakota,  which is preparing for more flooding.

They hoped to fill 1 million, said Fargo spokeswoman Karena Lunday.

"If we get a million, that will be a total of 4 million we've made since the flood started," she said.

The first sandbag effort began about March 23. The Red River crested at nearly 41 feet at Fargo on March 28, breaking a record that had held since 1897, when the Red River reached 40.1 feet.

The National Weather Service issued a flood warning Tuesday, predicting that melting snow -- and possibly rain -- will start to raise river levels on the Red River south of Oslo, Minnesota, this week.

Lunday said forecasters expected the river to crest there between April 16-18, possibly reaching 35 feet on April 14.

"I don't think people are as worried as they were the last time, but the possibility of getting up to 40 feet is a concern," Lunday told CNN.

The Red River meanders along the border between North Dakota and Minnesota, so many other cities also were bracing for flooding.

***

Los Angeles, California (CNN) -- Casey Johnson, heiress to the Johnson & Johnson fortune, died of natural causes related to diabetes, the Los Angeles County coroner said Thursday.





The 30-year-old socialite was found dead at a friend's home January 4, authorities said.





Johnson was one of the great-great-granddaughters of Robert Wood Johnson, a co-founder of the pharmaceutical giant, and was the daughter of Woody Johnson, owner of the New York Jets professional football team.





She died of diabetic ketoacidosis, the coroner found. The Mayo Clinic describes the condition as a serious complication of untreated diabetes.





Johnson was in the news recently because of her relationship with Internet and reality television star Tila Tequila.





Several messages on Tequila's official Twitter page mentioned Johnson in the wake of her death.





"I can't stop these haunting visions of her and I. We made such a lovely couple, only beginning to spend the rest of our lives together," a posting said the day after Johnson died.





"Everyone please pray 4 my Wifey Casey Johnson," Tequila wrote the day of Johnson's death. "She has passed away. Thank u for all ur love and support but I will be offline to be w family."





Johnson's family also expressed sadness.





"The Johnson family is mourning their tragic loss and asks for privacy during this very difficult time," a family representative said in a statement on the Jets' Web site.





"The entire New York Jets organization is saddened at the news that Casey Johnson ... has passed away."





CNN's Tim Langmaid and Brittany Kaplan contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Most conservationists would agree that you should not interfere with mother nature. But there are exceptions to every rule.





Staff and tourists at Kapani Safari Lodge in Zambia were caught by surprise when a mother and baby elephant became trapped in mud.





Saying they couldn't just "stand by and watch them slowly die," what ensued was a dramatic rescue.





Together with the South Luangwa Conservation Society (SLCS) and the local wildlife authority, the team devised a plan to get the elephants out. The rest of the herd initially tried to help the screaming mother and baby escape, but they were stuck too deep.





Team managers from the conservation society slipped a rope around the baby and after a few attempts managed to pull her out of the muddy pit. The team says it took a lot of coaxing to get her out and on her feet though, adding that she "was terribly frightened and wouldn't leave her mum's side".





Getting the adult elephant out of the mud was a far more challenging task -- by the time the baby had been rescued, its mother was dehydrated and exhausted. But the SLCS team eventually pulled her out too, using a tractor and rope.





Staff at Kapani Lodge say it was "heart-warming to see how many local people joined in the efforts to free the two elephants... it was the happiest possible ending."

***

JERUSALEM (CNN)  -- A fugitive American white supremacist was arrested Monday in Israel, ending an international manhunt that began in 2007, Israeli and U.S. officials said.



Micky Louis Mayon, pictured in a 2007 mug shot, entered Israel in 2008, authorities say.



Micky Louis Mayon, one of the 100 most wanted people in the United States, was taken into custody in southern Tel Aviv after Israel received information from Interpol indicating he was there.



The Ku Klux Klan member was located during a secret operation by Israeli immigration authorities, said Sabin Hadad, a spokeswoman for the country's Interior Ministry.



He arrived in Israel in January 2008 on a one-month tourist visa, frequently changed apartments, and earned money by working part time at several restaurants, the ministry said.



Mayon, 32, is being held at Israel's Maasiyahu prison and is in the process of being deported, Hadad said.



"The search for Mayon came to a successful conclusion ... with the actions in Israel," Michael Regan, a U.S. marshal in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, said Monday. "Locating and identifying Mayon in a foreign country sends a strong message that you can run, but you cannot hide."



Two U.S. marshals are being sent to Israel to escort him back to the United States.



Mayon was featured on the television program "America's Most Wanted." He is a convicted felon and is accused of setting a judge's car on fire in Pennsylvania, the show's Web site said.

***

MEXICO CITY, Mexico (CNN)  -- In response to a spate of attacks allegedly by a drug cartel, Mexico more than tripled the number of federal police officers patrolling the state of Michoacan, a government spokeswoman said.



Drug violence is up in Michoacan state, shown by recent attacks on police in at least a half-dozen cities.



The government on Thursday dispatched 1,000 federal police officers to Michoacan state in southwest Mexico, increasing its presence to 1,300 total, Public Safety spokeswoman Veronica Penunuri told CNN.



At least 18 federal agents and two soldiers have been killed since the weekend in Michoacan, the home state of President Felipe Calderon.



The sudden spike in violence followed the arrest Saturday of Arnoldo Rueda Medina, whom authorities described as a high-ranking member of the drug cartel known as La Familia Michoacana.



Cartel members first attacked the federal police station in Morelia to try to gain freedom for Rueda, authorities said.



When that failed, drug gangs attacked federal police installations in at least a half-dozen Michoacan cities, according to authorities.



The Michoacan cartel also is accused in the slaying of 12 federal police officers whose bodies were found Tuesday on a remote highway.



Video from the scene showed three signs, known as narcomensajes, left by the killers. They all stated the same thing: "So that you come for another. We will be waiting for you here."



Since Calderon went after the drug cartels shortly after coming into office in 2006, more than 10,000 people have died across Mexico, about 1,000 of them police.



The state of Michoacan, on Mexico's southwest Pacific coast, is not alone in the wave of violence sweeping the country.



The border city of Ciudad Juarez set a record this weekend when its toll of drug-related deaths for the year topped 1,000, a distinction the Mexican city did not reach last year until September.

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- Late-night talker David Letterman married his longtime girlfriend, Regina Lasko, last week, according to a transcript of the taping of his Monday night show.



Late-night host David Letterman says he "avoided getting married for ... 23 years."



The wedding was at the courthouse in Choteau, Montana, on Thursday, he said, according to quotes from CBS' "Late Show with David Letterman" provided to CNN by Letterman's publicist, Tom Keaney.



"Regina and I began dating in February of 1986, and I said, 'Well, things are going pretty good, let's just see what happens in about 10 years ... ," he joked during the taping.  Watch Letterman spill the beans »



"I had avoided getting married pretty good [sic] for, like, 23 years, and ... honestly, whether this happened or not, I secretly felt that men who were married admired me -- like I was the last of the real gunslingers."



Lasko is a former "Late Show" staffer. The couple have a son, Harry.



Letterman told his audience that the wedding almost didn't happen after the couple, son in tow, got their pickup truck stuck in the mud on the way to the ceremony.



"So I get out of the truck and I walk two miles back to the house into a 50 mph wind. It's not Beverly Hills, it's Montana, for God's sakes,' " he said. "And the whole way, I'm thinking, 'See, smartass? See? See? You try to get married, this is what happens.' "



When he returned with a car, he said -- presumably joking -- that his son was disappointed, "because mom had told him if I wasn't back in an hour, the deal was off."

***

(CNN)  -- A single-engine plane crashed Saturday outside a bank in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, seriously injuring the five people on board, authorities said.



A damaged airplane lies on the ground Saturday next to a busy road in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.



The pilot reported engine problems shortly after leaving the city's Wiley Post Airport, about a mile away from the crash site, at midmorning, said Lynn Lunsford, spokesman for the Federal Aviation Administration.



The plane hit two trees as it came down, and video showed the damaged Beechcraft Bonanza resting on the grass near a busy thoroughfare in the northwest section of the city.



Fire Department Deputy Chief Cecil Clay said the two men and three women on the plane were taken to hospitals. Lunsford said they suffered multiple injuries.  Watch footage of the plane at the crash site »



The plane was headed to Enid, Oklahoma, about 100 miles north of Oklahoma City. The pilot tried to return to Wiley Post Airport after he recognized the engine trouble, Lunsford said.



"I heard what I thought was a Dumpster being unloaded in the complex," said Shaddy Ahmad, who manages the U-Haul business across the street from the bank.



He said emergency responders used special equipment to extricate the people from the plane, the top of which was peeled back.



"They were very lucky because this is a high-traffic area," Ahmad said. "You have the expressway, the bank and stores in the area. They were blessed to land how they did."

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- This month the U.S. government has introduced major changes that will affect millions of travelers to the U.S. who do not need a visa.



Instead of filling in the green visa waiver form en route, short-term visitors must register their details online at least three days before they depart.



The measure is designed tighten security and make it harder for terrorists who are citizens of the participating countries to easily obtain entry to the U.S.



The new system, known as the Electronic System for Travel Authorization (ESTA), does not become compulsory until January 12, 2009. But travelers are urged to prepare for the new rules in advance.



ESTA applies to citizens from the 27 Visa Waiver Program (VWP) countries that includes most of western Europe in addition to New Zealand, Japan, Brunei and Australia.



Visitors are recommended to submit applications no later than 72 hours before departure in case further inquiry is necessary. But the U.S. Department of Homeland Security has assured travelers that the system can handle last-minute and emergency requests.



Applications can be made at any time, even if travelers have no specific travel plans. And if itineraries change, information can be easily updated on the ESTA Web site.



Once travelers are authorized, they can travel for up to two years or until their passport expires, whichever comes first.



From mid-January, travelers who have not received approval may be denied boarding, delayed processing, or denied admission at a U.S. port of entry.



Passengers must submit the same information that is currently required in the I-94 immigration form. This includes biographical data, travel information as well as questions regarding communicable diseases, arrests and convictions.



Registration is possible through the U.S. government ESTA Web site. In most cases, eligibility for travel will be approved immediately. Applicants who receive an "Authorization Pending" response will need to check the Web site for updates. Applicants whose ESTA applications are denied will be referred to Travel.State.Gov for information on how to apply for a visa.



ESTA does not change the rules for citizens from countries that require visas. But the U.S. is due to extend the visa waiver program and has signed agreements with eight countries including the Czech Republic, Hungary and South Korea.



Travelers are advised that ESTA does not guarantee entry into the United States. The final decision rests with the immigration official at the port of entry.

***

New York (CNN) -- Police arrested hundreds of protesters who occupied an iconic New York bridge during demonstrations against the nation's financial system, before releasing the demonstrators with tickets.





The "Occupy Wall Street" protesters extended their rally to Brooklyn Bridge, where they were cited for blocking the roadway, authorities said late Saturday.





Protesters banged drums and chanted, "the whole world is watching" as police moved in.





"Over 700 summonses and desk appearance tickets have been issued in connection with the demonstration on the Brooklyn Bridge ... after multiple warnings by police were given to protesters to stay on the pedestrian walkway," said Paul J. Browne, deputy commissioner for the New York City Police Department.





Browne said authorities had warned protesters they would be arrested if they occupied the roadway.





"Some complied and took the walkway without being arrested," he said.





Bridge traffic heading to Brooklyn from Manhattan was shut down for several hours, police said. Manhattan-bound lanes were open during the incident.





The protesters are rallying against what they say are social inequities resulting from the financial system.





Organizers have said they take their inspiration from the Arab Spring protests that swept through Africa and the Middle East this year. Crowds have taken up residence in the park in New York's financial district, calling for 20,000 people to flood the area for a "few months."





The protest campaign -- which uses the hashtag #occupywallstreet on the microblogging site Twitter -- began in July with the launch of a simple campaign website calling for a march and a sit-in at the New York Stock Exchange.





Over the past two weeks, demonstrations have addressed various issues, including police brutality, union busting and the economy, the group said.





CNN's Susan Candiotti and Jordana Ossad contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Khloe Kardashian and her new husband, basketball player Lamar Odom, have found themselves a newlywed love nest.



Kardashian, star of the E! network's reality show "Kourtney & Khloe Take Miami" and Odom, a forward for the Los Angeles Lakers, have purchased a seven-bedroom, nine-bathroom mansion in Tarzana, California, for nearly $4 million.



The pair, who married after a two-month-long courtship, have been looking for a place to call their own since their September 27 wedding.



Finding a home was one of the stipulations Kardashian, 25, wanted met before the couple started thinking about growing a family.



"I would be over the moon if I was having a baby, but right now, our focus is on finding a house. They say it's a buyers' market, but no one is selling, and I think it would be very stressful to have a baby in a condo downtown," Kardashian told CNN earlier this month.



When asked by talk show host Chelsea Handler earlier this month if Khloe is pregnant yet, Odom, 30, responded, "Soon." And when Handler pushed and asked, "You planning on having a baby soon? You want to do that right away?" Odom responded, "I do."



Kardashian was even more candid with CNN, saying, "We are not planning to have a baby, but we're not doing anything to not have a baby right now."

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- Billionaire oil man T. Boone Pickens is shelving plans to build the world's largest wind farm.



T. Boone Pickens says the capital markets will not support his plans to build the world's largest wind farm.



The chairman of BP Capital Management announced Tuesday that his plans for the Pampa Wind Project, designed to generate 4,000 megawatts of electricity using thousands of wind turbines, is on hold.



"I had hoped that Pampa would be the starting point, but transmission issues and the problem with the capital markets make that unfeasible at this point," Pickens told CNN's Ali Velshi. "I expect to continue development of the Pampa project, but not at the pace that I originally expected."



The Pickens Plan was an attempt to wean the United States off foreign oil and switch to wind and natural gas. The project was to be set in four Texas Panhandle counties.



Pickens said he faced hurdles in routing the power from Texas to a distribution system. His plans were also stymied by a plunge in natural gas prices and a tightening credit market.



"The capital markets have dealt us all a setback, and I'm less aggressive with the Panhandle project than I have been," Pickens said.  Watch Pickens respond to criticism that the U.S. can't shake it's oil addiction »



He said he was still committed to 667 wind turbines that he has already ordered and would find homes for them.



The Texas billionaire pushed The Pickens Plan in television commercials and lobbying efforts that started last summer. Pickens had hoped to complete his $12 billion plan in 2014 and provide enough electricity to power 1.3 million homes.



Renewable energy is the source of only a small portion of electricity used today, but in 2008, the United States became the world's leading provider of wind power.



Pickens, 81, made his fortune in oil production and trading and is listed in Forbes magazine as the 117th richest person in the United States with a net worth of about $3 billion in 2007.

***

(CNN) -- Russian energy monopoly Gazprom on Wednesday said it would stop natural gas deliveries to Ukraine over a dispute about payments.



Gazprom chief executive Alexei Miller accused Ukraine of using the issue as "a political bargaining chip."



Gazprom chief Alexey Miller said talks with Ukraine have been "unproductive" and accused Ukraine of using the issue as "a political bargaining chip."



"The talks with Ukraine haven't brought any concrete result ... Gazprom hasn't received any money from Ukraine as payment for the supplies of Russian gas," Miller said in a statement on the Gazprom Web site.



The state-controlled Gazprom said supplies to its other European customers would not be affected by Ukraine's cut-off, which the company said would take place at 10 a.m. Thursday (2 a.m. ET).



Ukrainian Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko also assured the European Union that there would be no disruptions in deliveries, the Kiev Post reported.



Ukrainian President Viktor Yuschenko called "for every effort to be made for the earliest possible signature of an agreement with Russia," Yuschenko energy security commissioner, Bohdan Sokolovsky, told the Russian news agency Interfax on Wednesday evening.  Watch a report on Gazprom's threats to cut off gas supplies to Ukraine »



It is the second time in three years Gazprom has threatened to cut off gas supplies to Ukraine. The company made good on its threat on January 1, 2006, but turned the spigots back on a day later.



Russia, the world's biggest producer of natural gas, supplies Europe with more than 40 percent of its imports -- mainly via pipelines that cross the former Soviet republic of Ukraine.



Ukraine owes Gazprom about $2 billion for past natural gas deliveries. Ukraine's state-controlled energy company, Naftogaz Ukrainy, initially denied it owed the payment to Gazprom, but later retreated from that claim.



The Kiev Post reported Tuesday that Naftogaz said it had paid $1.5 billion toward the debt, but Gazprom said it had not received the payment.



Also at issue is Gazprom's contract for 2009 deliveries. Gazprom had wanted to more than double Ukraine's payments, but on Wednesday offered a much lesser payment of $250 per 1,000 cubic meters of gas. Ukraine, which currently pays about $100 per 1,000 cubic meters, balked at that figure.



"We have heard a negative reply to the offers from the Russian side on the favorable terms of gas supply to Ukraine in 2009, and we are getting the impression that there are political forces in Ukraine which have a strong interest in the gas standoff between our two countries," Miller said.

***

(CNN) -- Thousands of mourners filled a Tracy, California, high school gym Thursday to remember slain 8-year-old Sandra Renee Cantu.

Sandra Cantu, 8, had been missing almost two weeks before her body was found.

The little girl made national headlines after she went missing March 27 from a mobile home park in Tracy where she lived with her family.

She was on her way to a friend's home and her playful skipping down an alley was caught by a surveillance camera. Police later found her body stuffed into a suitcase and submerged in a pond at a nearby dairy farm.

Photos of Sandra, flowers and stuffed animals covered the front of the stage. Family members, friends and state dignitaries memorialized the child during a ceremony that lasted just over an hour.

The printed program called the memorial service "A Celebration of Life," and organizers said they hoped the service would help ease the pain the community has suffered since Sandra's disappearance.

"We are left with the haunting image of her skipping on the streets of Tracy. But today she is skipping on the streets of gold, into the arms of a loving God", said Brent Ives, mayor of Tracy.

Cindy Sasser, principal at Jacobsen Elementary School told mourners, "We should all strive to be like Sandra -- always smiling, wanting to help, to look out for others and to be caring."

The service included a video that showcased some of the family's favorite photos.

People from across California attended, filling the gymnasium, cafeteria and the football stadium at West High School.

Melissa Huckaby, 28, a Sunday school teacher who lived in the same mobile home park as Sandra's family, has been charged with murder, kidnapping, the performance of a lewd and lascivious act on a child under 14, and rape by instrument.

If convicted, she would face the death penalty or life in prison without parole, San Joaquin County District Attorney James Willett said this week.

A private memorial service for Sandra was held Wednesday. Her casket, signed by classmates, was taken to a nearby burial site by a horse-drawn carriage.

***

(CNN) -- Forty-three soldiers suffered heat-related illnesses Friday during a 12-mile road march at Fort Bragg, North Carolina, an Army spokesman said.





The march was the culmination of a week of "expert field medical badge training," during which soldiers are tested on their medic and general soldier skills in order to receive an "expert" badge, Fort Bragg spokesman Benjamin Abel said.





Sixty soldiers were on the march, which started at 6 a.m., and they were carrying backpacks, helmets, weapons and other combat gear, Abel said.





About an hour and a half into the march, the people running the event noticed some personnel "were having difficulties," and medical transports were begun, he said.





Eighteen of the soldiers were transported to Womack Army Medical Center, and one was admitted to the intensive care unit, he said.





Humidity levels Friday morning were higher than expected, but "this is odd, out of the norm, to have this many people treated," Abel added.





The expert field medical badge is deemed by the Army as "the utmost challenge to the professional competence and physical endurance of the soldier medic," Fort Bragg officials said in a statement earlier this week.





"It is the most sought-after peacetime award in the Army Medical Department, and while the combat medical badge is the 'portrait of courage' in wartime, the expert field medical badge is undoubtedly the 'portrait of excellence' in the Army all of the time," officials said.





"To wear the EFMB means you passed a grueling series of hands-on-tests on communications, common skill tasks, emergency medical treatment, evacuation of the sick and wounded, litter obstacle course, day/night land navigation courses, comprehensive written test, 12-mile foot march, CPR, physical fitness test, and weapons qualification," the base said.





In June 1965, the Department of the Army established the badge as a special skill award for the recognition of exceptional competence and outstanding performance by field medical personnel.

***

(CNN) -- All federal waters in the Gulf of Mexico closed to fishing because of last year's oil spill have reopened, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration said Tuesday, one day before the one-year anniversary of the disaster.





The announcement came as the administration reopened the final 1,041 square miles of waters immediately surrounding the Deepwater Horizon wellhead, just east of Louisiana. No oil or sheen has been found in the area since August 4, NOAA said in a statement.





NOAA sampled the area in November, March and April for potentially affected fin fish, including tuna, swordfish and escolar.





The analysis of samples found "no detectable oil or dispersant odors or flavors, and results of chemical analysis for oil-related compounds and dispersants well below the levels of concern," the statement said.





The decision to reopen the waters was made after consultation with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.





"Throughout this process, public health and safety has been our primary goal," said FDA Commissioner Margaret A. Hamburg. "This has been an extraordinary team effort and the reopening of these federal waters serves as a dramatic example of what cooperation between federal agencies can accomplish."





The April 20 explosion on the Deepwater Horizon led to the worst oil spill in U.S. history, with more than 200 million gallons of oil released into the Gulf. At its peak in June, 37 percent of Gulf waters, or 88,522 square miles, were closed to fishing.





Also Tuesday, Omega Protein Corp. announced the final settlement of its claims for costs and damages incurred as a result of the spill. In total, the company received payments of nearly $45 million from the Gulf Coast Claims Facility, it said.

***

(CNN) -- At least 200 people were evacuated from their homes, including 84 residents of an apartment building for the elderly, after a tanker truck carrying 9,000 gallons of gasoline erupted early Wednesday in a northern Boston suburb.



Firefighters battle a blaze Wednesday north of Boston after a tanker overturned carrying 9,000 gallons of gas.



No serious injuries were reported in the Everett, Massachusetts, blast, but witnesses recounted close calls to a local television station. One man said he narrowly escaped from his car before it exploded.



"In consideration of everything that firefighters had to deal with, I think it's a miracle that we haven't seen some serious injuries," Everett Fire Chief David Butler said.



The tanker overturned and caught fire at a traffic circle in the town of about 37,000 outside Boston. Officials are investigating whether the driver was speeding, Butler said.



"Our major concerns right now are we still have an ongoing fire operation in the family dwellings, and we are still heavily engaged in those operations, and we have some concerns environmentally," Butler said.  Watch residents of an elderly housing complex describe their shock »



Flames from the truck engulfed at least 40 cars and three buildings, two of them houses, fire officials said. The truck was destroyed, but the driver was not seriously injured, the officials said.



WCVB-TV in Boston identified the driver as Chad LaFrance of Dover, New Hampshire.



Seven hours after the truck caught fire, firefighters were still battling a blaze in one of the homes, according to the television station.



Evacuees were taken to an armory converted into a shelter, Red Cross official Amelia Aubourg told CNN. Local streets were closed temporarily, and a nearby school was shut down for the day, WCVB reported.



One evacuee who fled a high-rise building told the television station he saw at least 15 cars burning.



"And popping, they were popping. I don't know if it was tires that were blowing, but they were completely gone, the cars," Dan Savage told WCVB.



Nearby resident Chris Barrow awoke to the sound of a "big bang," he told WCVB. At first, he thought it was a car accident, but when he went outside to investigate the noise, he saw fire "just coming down the hill toward the houses as fast as you could think."



Barrow tried to escape in his car, but fire quickly surrounded the vehicle, he told the TV station.



"I rode over the fire and my car caught fire," he told WCVB. "I got out just in time, and I ran a couple feet just before it blew up." E-mail to a friend



CNN's Michelle Cumbo and Saundra Booker contributed to this report.

***

MIAMI, Florida (CNN) -- Tropical Storm Arthur, the first named storm of the 2008 Atlantic season, formed Saturday near the coast of Belize, the U.S. National Hurricane Center said.



Tropical Storm Arthur could make its way across the Yucatan and re-emerge in the Gulf of Mexico.



The storm made its way over land and was expected to weaken, but the center said the storm could re-emerge in the Gulf of Mexico and regain intensity Sunday.



At 11 p.m., the center of Arthur was over the southern Yucatan Peninsula, about 80 miles (125 km) west of Chetumal, Mexico, and about 120 miles (195 km) south-southeast of Campeche, Mexico.



It was moving west at about 7 miles (11 km) per hour.



The storm's maximum sustained winds were near 40 mph (65 km/hr), with higher gusts, mainly over water east of its center. Tropical storm-force winds extend outward up to 260 miles (415 km) from the center of the storm, forecasters said.



The government of Belize issued a tropical storm warning for the nation's coast, and the government of Mexico issued a tropical storm warning from Cabo Catoche south to the border with Belize.



A tropical storm warning means tropical storm conditions are expected within the warning area -- in this case, within the next six to 12 hours.



The storm was forecast to dump up to 10 inches of rain over Belize, up to 15 inches in isolated areas, the hurricane center said.



The 2008 Atlantic hurricane season begins Sunday.



On Thursday, Tropical Storm Alma, the first one of the year in the eastern Pacific, formed near the west coast of Central America, according to the National Weather Service. The storm was downgraded to a tropical depression and dissipated over the high terrain of Central America.



The federal government's National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration predicted this month that the Atlantic season would be more active than normal, with up to 16 named storms and up to five major hurricanes of Category 3 or above.



The noted Colorado State University hurricane forecasting team predicted this year that there would be 15 named storms, eight hurricanes and four major hurricanes.



The team calculated a 69 percent chance that at least one major hurricane will make landfall on the U.S. coast.



A survey released this week found that 50 percent of 1,100 adults surveyed in Atlantic and U.S. Gulf Coast states did not have disaster plans or survival kits.



"Nearly one in three said they would not prepare their home until a storm is within 24 hours of landfall," Bill Read, director of the National Hurricane Center, said Thursday.



"Now is the time to buy all that stuff," he said upon the release of the survey by polling firm Mason-Dixon.

***

(Mashable) -- Facebook is rolling out an update to News Feed that lets people sort information by Recent Stories or Highlighted Stories.





The update adds a "Sort" link at the top of the News Feed. Clicking it brings up two options for organizing News Feed content: "Highlighted Stories First" or "Recent Stories First."





Highlighted Stories will push the most important content to the top of the page -- the current way it operates. The Recent Stories option will order News Feed items in reverse chronological order, though it is not as comprehensive as Facebook's real-time "Ticker".





The social network revamped News Feed in September in an attempt to make sure users don't miss the important events in their friends' lives. This was accomplished through the launch of Ticker and an update that highlighted key events that occurred within users' social graphs.





As part of this change, Facebook removed the "Top Stores" and "Most Recent" links at the top of the page. It looks like that some users still wanted a simple way to see News Feed items at any time, though. The new News Feed has the ability to see recent stories in News Feed if you had logged in recently, but it wasn't a comprehensive option.





Facebook says that the Sort feature will be rolling out over the next few days. Do you think bringing Recent Stories back is a good idea? Let us know in the comments.





See the original story on Mashable.com





© 2011 MASHABLE.com. All rights reserved.

***

(CNN) -- A man who is accused of trying to board an Air Jamaica flight at Orlando International Airport with apparent bomb-making materials was taken into custody Tuesday.



Witnesses say the man arrested Tuesday was "rocking left and right and up and down."



Officials said Kevin Brown, a Jamaican national, was acting strangely and caught the attention of an air safety officer at the Florida airport.



Brown was arrested on charges of carrying a weapon or explosives onto a plane, according to the FBI.



The bureau said Brown, who is in his early 30s, had baggage that concealed two galvanized pipes, end caps, two containers of BBs, batteries, two containers with an unknown liquid, a laptop and bomb-making literature.



"He looked rather crazy," a passenger told CNN affiliate WKMG. "He was rocking left and right and up and down."



Transportation Safety Administration officials said Brown caught the eye of a "behavior identification officer" about noon Tuesday as Brown approached a ticket counter for his planned flight to Jamaica.



Lee Kair, the TSA's federal security director in Orlando, said the materials in his bags posed no danger to other travelers.



Initial record checks indicate that Brown was in the United States legally, the FBI said.



The FBI and the Orlando Police Department are investigating, Kair said.



Airport officials say several ticket counters were shut down during the incident and 11 flights were delayed. Airport spokeswoman Carolyn Fennell said Air Jamaica, Air Canada, West Jet and Frontier flights were among those delayed.



"Things are slowly returning to normal," Fennell said, adding that the terminal where Brown was apprehended was operating normally by 3 p.m.



Kair said that behavior identification officers like the one who spotted Brown are plain-clothes officers trained to watch for suspicious behavior at airports.



"When people are doing things that are deceptive, they exhibit behaviors that are involuntary," he said. "Our officers are very well trained to identify these behaviors."



Brown is scheduled for an initial appearance in federal court in Orlando on Wednesday. E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN)  -- A Utah man trapped for more than 26 hours in a crevice of a popular cave tourist attraction died as rescuers struggled to save him, authorities said Thursday.



John Edward Jones, 26, of Stansbury Park was stuck in the Nutty Putty Cave, which sits west of Utah Lake near Cedar Valley, according to the sheriff's office of Utah County.



The cave is 55 to 60 miles south of Salt Lake City.



Sheriff's officials said Jones entered the cave at around 6 p.m. Tuesday with a group of about 11 people and became stuck about 8:45 p.m. in a "tightly confined" feature inside Nutty Putty Cave called "Bob's Push."



Utah County sheriff's spokesman Sgt. Spencer Cannon told CNN affiliate KSL that Jones was trapped upside down in a crevice that was about 18 inches wide and about 10 inches high. The crevice is about 150 feet below the surface and about 700 feet from the cave entrance, according to the sheriff's department.



"They had him to a level spot where he wasn't heading downhill with his head below his feet," Cannon said. "During the course of that, they have a raising system to hold him in position, and one of the devices of that system failed, and Mr. Jones actually fell back to the area where he had been stuck for so long."



Shortly before midnight on Wednesday, rescuers got close enough to Jones to conclude that he was not breathing and he had no pulse. Rescue officials were meeting Thursday to determine how to recover Jones' body.



Rescuers had tried to reach Jones for more than 24 hours, but had problems navigating the treacherous terrain, Cannon said.



"Getting people to him is very difficult," Cannon told KSL before Jones died. "It is a tightly confined space. When there is movement, it is literally millimeters at a time."



There are narrow areas of the cave where visitors have to crawl on their bellies to get through, according to the attraction's Web site. Up to 5,000 people visit each year, the site said.

***

(CNN) -- Tens of thousands of Congolese refugees fled camps Tuesday in the Democratic Republic of Congo as rebel troops attacked government forces in the area, the U.N. refugee agency said.

Refugees move along a road Tuesday in Mugunga, near Goma, in the Democratic Republic of Congo.

A press release from the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees said it didn't appear rebels had targeted the camps, but it reported some were looted after camp residents, classified as internally displaced persons, fled.

Roads to Goma, about 10 miles from the camps, were crowded with refugees and local residents fleeing the fighting, the UNHCR reported. Torrential rain made the movement even more difficult.

"The main road toward Sake was crowded with people; we had difficulties getting through," UNHCR field safety adviser Pierre Nazroo was quoted as saying in the agency's release. "Internally displaced people are moving from site to site, direction Goma."

UNHCR spokesman Ron Redmond said, "They have been living in extremely difficult conditions anyway. Now they have nothing but what they can carry."

Redmond added, "These are people in poor health; they are soaking wet because of the torrential downpours. They need shelter, they need water, they need a lot of assistance so we're going to have to move quickly to get that help to them because a lot of them are already in a weakened state."

While the Congolese government accused troops under rebel general Laurent Nkunda of staging the attack, a Nkunda spokesman denied the allegation, according to a report from the Integrated Regional Information Networks, a U.N.-affiliated news service.

The spokesman, Bwambale Kakolele, said Rwandan Hutu rebels who also operate in the area were behind the attack, that report said.

A spokesman for the U.N. military mission in the Congo said it was uncertain which group attacked the Congo army outpost near the village of Kishangazi, according to the U.N.-affiliated news service.

"We think it could have been insurgents close to Nkunda who attacked, but we cannot rule out the [Rwandan rebels]," spokesman Col. Pierre Cherayron was quoted as saying.

The UNHCR identified the affected camps as Mugunga I, Mugunga II, Lac Vert and Bulengo, saying about 28,000 had abandoned the first three camps and about 2,000 had left Bulengo.

The UNHCR said 375,000 Congolese in North Kivu province have been forced from their homes in the past year. In the past two months alone, 160,000 have fled their homes amid the fighting between renegade troops and government forces, the agency said.

North Kivu is in eastern Congo near the borders of Rwanda and Uganda.

Congolese President Joseph Kabila has tried to gain a cease-fire with the rebels in the area under Nkunda, but fighting continues as hard-liners among the rebels and in the government have blocked reconciliation efforts, according to the International Crisis Group, an nongovernmental organization looking for solutions to conflicts. E-mail to a friend

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- The Supreme Court has blocked further consideration of a federal law designed to keep sexual material from underage users of the Web.

The justices without comment Wednesday rejected an appeal from the federal government to reinstate the Child Online Protection Act (COPA), passed by Congress in 1998. The high court and subsequent federal courts said the law -- which has never taken effect -- had serious free speech problems.

The Bush administration was a strong supporter of the law and the Justice Department led the fight in court to revive it.

The justices issued their ruling a day after all nine were on hand for the inauguration of President Barack Obama. Retired Justice Sandra Day O'Connor also attended the ceremony.

The case tested the free speech rights of adults against the power of Congress to control Internet commerce. The Supreme Court twice ruled against COPA, arguing that it represented government censorship rather than lawful regulation of adult-themed pornography businesses. The law would have prevented private businesses from creating and distributing "harmful" content that minors could access on the Internet.

Free speech advocates said adults would be barred access to otherwise legal material and that parental-control devices and various filtering technology are less intrusive ways to protect children.

The high court in 2004 upheld a preliminary injunction against the law and sent the case back to lower courts for consideration of the arguments. In their opinion at the time, the 5-4 majority concluded COPA "likely violates the First Amendment."

"The government has not shown that the less restrictive alternatives proposed ... should be disregarded," Justice Anthony Kennedy wrote in the 2004 decision. "Those alternatives, indeed, may be more effective" than the law passed by Congress. "Filters are less restrictive" he said, and thus pose less risk of muzzling free speech. "They impose selective restrictions on speech at the receiving end, not universal restrictions at the source."

He added, "There is a potential for extraordinary harm and a serious chill upon protected speech" if the law takes effect."

In reconsidering the law, a federal appeals court in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, again ruled the law unconstitutional.

***

(CNN) -- At least three tornadoes caused massive damage in Virginia and injured more than 200 people on Monday, officials said.



This Suffolk, Virginia, house was destroyed by an apparent tornado Monday.



At least 200 were injured in Suffolk where a twister destroyed several homes and businesses, said Bob Spieldenner of the Virginia Department of Emergency Management.



The storm hit the 138-bed Sentara Obici Hospital, though Spieldenner said the facility was still operational and accepting patients.



A second tornado struck Colonial Heights -- about 60 miles northwest, near Richmond -- injuring at least 18 people, he said.



A third twister damaged several homes near Lawrenceville, about 70 miles south of Richmond, said Bryan Jackson, a meteorologist with the National Weather Service, which confirmed all three tornadoes.



Gov. Tim Kaine declared a Virginia-wide state of emergency as hazardous weather continued through the central part of the state.



The Suffolk twister touched down just before 4 p.m. ET and plowed its way east into Norfolk, damaging scores of homes, stores and cars and downing dozens of trees and power lines, Jackson said.  Watch as a witness describes the tornado form »



Video footage from the scene showed roofs torn off homes, cars flipped over, trees snapped in two and a caved-in section of a newly constructed shopping center.



Furniture, fences and mounds of other debris were tossed in streets, parking lots and lawns.  Watch the storm's massive destruction from the air »



A tornado warning over the area remained in effect Monday evening.



Jeff Judkins, the city's emergency management coordinator, said there also were reports of people trapped inside cars. It's the worst damage he's seen in the area, he said.



An emergency shelter will be established by Monday night, Suffolk spokeswoman Dana Woodson said.



Officials initially reported a fatality, but later determined that it was unrelated to the storm, she said. E-mail to a friend

***

BEIJING, China (CNN)  -- The Chinese women's gymnastics team did not use underage competitors during this year's Summer Olympic Games in Beijing, the International Gymnastics Federation said Wednesday.



Widespread reports claimed that gold medal winner  He Kexin was only 14 years old.



The federation said it has concluded its inquiry into the matter after it confirmed the gymnasts' ages through official documents that the Chinese Gymnasts Association provided. The documents included passports, identity cards and household registers.



However, the organization intends to further investigate the ages of two gymnasts, Dong Fangxiao and Yang Yun, who participated in the 2000 summer games in Sydney, Australia. The federation said it did not consider  the explanations and evidence that Chinese authorities provided in regard to those athletes as satisfactory.



The International Olympic Committee had asked gymnastics officials to clarify the situation after numerous commentators, bloggers and others questioned whether about half the members of China's team were old enough to compete.  Watch tiny gymnasts work out »



Athletes must be at least 16 in the year the games take place. In women's gymnastics, younger girls can have an advantage over older competitors on account of their often smaller, lighter and more agile bodies.



The Chinese women's gymnastics team won a gold medal in a team competition at the Beijing games, and five members won individual medals.



One of the challenges came from a blogger known as "Stryde Hax." The blogger claimed to have uncovered proof that Chinese gymnast He Kexin is only 14.



In Internet searches, "Stryde Hax" allegedly uncovered Web pages showing lists complied by China's General Administration of Sport that show a 1994 date of birth for He.



CNN was not been able to independently verify the information, but snapshots of the Web pages appeared to back up the claim. Other bloggers joined the search and reported similar results.



The New York Times conducted its own investigation, producing similar results that seem to implicate He and two other members of the team. The Times uncovered a 2006 biography on He that lists her birthday as January 1, 1994.



The International Gymnastics Federation, however, has said that those gymnasts were eligible and that the ages on their passports were correct.



Chinese gymnastics coaches also defended their team.



"Asians have different figures than people from the West, so that's what caused their suspicion," said Huang Yubin, head coach of the men's and women's teams, referring to media inquiries. "They shouldn't be suspicious."

***

LONDON, England (CNN)  -- A wicked opportunity is brewing at Wookey Hole Caves in western England.



Aspiring witches audition for the job Tuesday at Wookey Hole Caves in England.



Applicants are flocking to the town of Wells in Somerset Tuesday in the hopes of being selected as the caves' new resident witch.



With the promise of £50,000 ($82,000) per year, and a spacious cave to boot, more than 2,000 candidates are stashing their wart remover and grabbing their broomsticks to persuade a panel of judges to choose them.



The winner will portray the notorious witch that is said to have haunted the caves in the Dark Ages. The witch lived in the cave with goats until an abbot threw holy water on her, turning her to stone, legend says.



Locals say her frozen figure can still be seen in the caves today.



Legend has it that the witch cursed crops, caused disease and soured milk in the area, audition organizers say.



Today, the caves at Wookey Hole are part of a tourist attraction with rides, a circus, theme parks and restaurants. The company that runs it, Wookey Hole Ltd., pays the witch's salary on a year-long contract.



The would-be witches have one minute to perform for the panel Tuesday, employing their best cackle and whatever props they can carry, organizers say.



The position won't necessarily go to a woman; male and transgender witches are also invited to apply. Applicants are told they must, however, be knowledgeable in the history of witchcraft, be willing to travel, sleep overnight in caves, and cannot be allergic to cats.



Organizers say they've had applications from men, women and 230 mothers-in-law.

***

(CNN) -- Turkey's military said it killed at least 15 rebels in operations in northern Iraq earlier this week, but a spokesman for the Iraqi Kurdish Regional Security Forces denied the report, saying Turkey has not conducted any military operation or air assault there in the past two weeks.



Turkish troops patrol near the border with Iraq during an offensive in February.



A statement posted on the Turkish armed forces' official Web site said a group of PKK, or members of the Kurdistan Workers' Party, was identified in northern Iraq, and said the group was believed to be planning an attack and trying to leak through the border into Turkey.



The PKK, labeled a terrorist group by Turkey, the United States and the European Union, is comprised of militants who have been launching attacks against Turkey from bases in northern Iraq.



The Turkish military said the PKK group "came under fire by long-range weapons" on Thursday, and 15 terrorists were killed.



The same region was targeted by a Turkish air assault on Friday, the military said, adding that the number of casualties was not yet available.



"In the missions, only the places that were confirmed to belong to the terrorist group were targeted," the military statement said. "Turkish armed forces acted with utmost sensitivity in order to avoid any negative impact of the strikes on the civilians in the region."



However, Jabbar Yawer, a spokesman for the Iraqi Kurdish Regional Forces, said no air assault was conducted Thursday or Friday, and added that no operations have been conducted in northern Iraq for the past two weeks.



The PKK has spent two decades fighting for autonomy for Kurds in southeastern Turkey, with some of its attacks launched from inside  Iraq ». The Iraqi government opposes the PKK's presence, but views a Turkish military incursion as a violation of its sovereignty. E-mail to a friend



CNN Turk's Begum Donmez and CNN's Mohammed Tawfeeq contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Charges of bribery against former U.S. Vice President Dick Cheney and Halliburton by Nigeria's anti-corruption police may be dropped after an agreement to pay a $250 million fine.





"Discussions focus on the possibility of a plea bargain arrangement," said Femi Babafemi, a spokesman for Nigeria's Economic and Financial Crimes Commission.





"Allowing the company and former officials to pay heavy fines in lieu of prosecution ... they would pay $120 million as fines and $130 million from bad money stored in Switzerland from the original deal -- so $250 million in total."





This month, the commission charged Cheney -- who ran Halliburton in the 1990s -- and nine others with "conspiracy and distribution of gratification to public officials."





The investigation is part of a long-running case involving Halliburton and a subsidiary firm, Kellogg, Brown and Root, over alleged bribes paid to Nigerian officials to secure $6 billion worth of contracts for a liquefied natural gas project in the Niger Delta.





The bribes are said to have amounted to $180 million between 1994 and 2004.





The firm pleaded guilty to foreign bribery charges in the United States last year and paid a $402 million criminal fine, the U.S. Justice Department said. KBR and Halliburton also paid $177 million to settle civil complaints related to the bribery, the Justice Department said.





Investigations in Nigeria, however, have been ongoing, and there are allegations that the bribes went all the way to the top, to aides, officials and possibly then-President Olusegun Obasanjo.





Many observers in Nigeria regard the move as a publicity stunt by the commission ahead of national elections in April and as a symbolic effort to display resolve against government corruption.





The agency has had limited success in getting successful prosecutions and hasn't charged any high-profile people since its top commissioner was removed from the body in 2007.





Cheney's atttorney has said that there is no reason to suspect that his client is guilty.





"This matter involves the activities of an international four-company joint venture (which included KBR, then a subsidiary of Halliburton) well over a decade ago," Terrence O'Connell said.





"The Department of Justice and the Securities and Exchange Commission investigated that joint venture extensively and found no suggestion of any impropriety by Dick Cheney in his role of CEO of Halliburton."





The latest discussions on reaching a settlement ended this weekend in London, Babafemi said.





The arrangement is now waiting for Nigeria's Minister of of Justice to officially agree to the deal, a decision that is expected by the end of the week.

***

AMMAN, Jordan (CNN) -- In the sunbathed schoolyard of the Shmisani Institute for Girls in Amman, Jordan, principal Sanaa Abu Harb makes an announcement over the speaker system.

Iraqi students at the Shmisani school in Amman gather around a teacher. One in 5 students there is Iraqi.

"All Iraqi girls come outside now. All Iraqi girls. Iraqi girls only!" she repeats several times, making sure the message is clear and waving away Jordanian pupils attracted by the commotion.

Dozens of girls in green apron-like uniforms pour out into the courtyard and cluster on the top level of a stone staircase overlooking a concrete playground.

Harb wants the CNN crew to see how many Iraqi refugee girls her school is accommodating. This school year, she says, 145 students are Iraqi -- roughly 20 percent of the students at this state-funded institution -- with another 40 Iraqi children on a waiting list.  Watch Iraqi girls describe a long way from home »

The reason behind the jump in the number of Iraqis at the school is a new government policy: For the first time since the start of the Iraq war, Jordan is allowing all Iraqi children -- regardless of refugee status -- to enroll in state-funded schools.

Simply, this means that even illegal refugees with no paperwork can send their kids to school with no questions asked.

The move is cementing a massive population shift in the Middle East. More than 2.2 million Iraqis have fled the violence in their homeland, most of them seeking refuge in neighboring Jordan and Syria, according to humanitarian officials.

Jordanian Minister of Education Khalid Touqan says he expects Jordan to accommodate 40,000 to 50,000 Iraqi students this year. That's more than double the number of Iraqi children enrolled in public school two years ago.

Harb, on the front line of the phenomenon, says the influx is putting a strain on her school. Even with some U.N. and U.S. aid to Jordan, there's still not enough money.

"We need more teachers here, more resources, more buildings, more chairs for all Iraqi students and our students," she says.

In a nearby neighborhood, in the study room of the Ahmed Toukan School for Boys, a handful of Iraqi kids talk of their experience living far from home. Seated at a rectangular table covered with a red and white tablecloth, the boys tell stories of horror and displacement.

Eighteen-year-old Qutaiba lost five immediate family members before moving to Jordan to try to live a normal life. Matter-of-factly and with a straight-ahead stare, he repeats the number: "Five members."

Most of the boys and young men from Iraq have missed several years of school -- up to a four-year educational gap that will delay not only their high school graduation, but also their entry into the workforce.

All say, though, that they feel lucky to have gotten out, even if the violence in their country means always having to be on the move, ready to live far from home and away from loved ones.

"It's not strange for me to be in the middle of people I don't know," says eleventh grader Ziad Tarek Al Shamsi. "I had friends in Iraq when I was small, I left them. In America, I left them. I came here, I left them."

He pauses: "But you have to miss your country."

The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees estimates up to 250,000 school-age Iraqi children are in Jordan.

Many of them are enrolled in private institutions. But as families run out of money they had when they left Iraq, they turn to public schools.

Even so, more than a month into the new academic year, fewer Iraqi families than first anticipated enrolled their kids in schools this year. According to the charity Save the Children, 21,000 Iraqi children have so far enrolled in Jordanian classrooms.

As a result, the government extended the deadline for student applications and cut down on the required paperwork for Iraqi families.

The lower registration

***

(CNN) -- Olympic swimming champion Michael Phelps will not face criminal charges in connection with a November party at which he was photographed using a bong, a South Carolina sheriff said Monday.

Michael Phelps admitted "regrettable behavior" after a  photo of him using a bong was published.

"We do not believe we have enough evidence to prosecute anyone" who was at the party in Columbia, South Carolina, Richland County Sheriff Leon Lott told reporters, adding that authorities are ending their investigation into Phelps.

"We had a photo, and we had him saying he was sorry for his inappropriate behavior," Lott said. "That behavior could have been going to a party. ... He never said, 'I smoked marijuana.' He never confessed to that. We didn't have physical evidence. We didn't have enough where we could go arrest him."

Phelps, 23, who won a record eight gold medals at the 2008 Olympic Games in Beijing, China, admitted "regrettable behavior" after a British newspaper published the photograph about two weeks ago. The tabloid News of the World showed Phelps using the bong during what it said was a November party at the University of South Carolina in Columbia.  Watch the sheriff say he won't prosecute Phelps Â»

A bong is a device commonly used to smoke marijuana. University police and Columbia police both said they would not pursue charges against Phelps.

Lott said he has not spoken to Phelps, but hopes the swimming champion has learned from his mistakes and is willing to share an anti-drug message with children.

Phelps said Monday he had learned some "important lessons" from the incident.

"I'm glad this matter is put to rest," he said in a written statement. "But there are also some important lessons that I've learned. For me, it's all about recognizing that I used bad judgment and it's a mistake I won't make again. For young people especially -- be careful about the decisions you make. One bad decision can really hurt you and the people you care about.

"I really appreciate the support my family and fans have shown me, and now I will move forward and dive back into the pool, having put this whole thing behind me."  Watch Phelps acknowledge making 'a mistake' Â»

Phelps told CNN affiliate WBAL in Baltimore, Maryland, "This is something that I need to learn from, will learn from and have learned from."

"I know that a lot of people make mistakes, and the best way to learn from them is changing things," Phelps told WBAL.

Lott said the photo that surfaced of Phelps put him and his department in a "no-win situation." If he had ignored it, he said, he would have faced criticism, but he also was criticized for investigating.

However, he said, the photo did initiate an investigation into goings-on at the home where the party took place, and some people were arrested on suspicion of drug possession. The home has been the focus of previous drug-related investigations, he said.

He defended his investigation, saying, "As a cop, my responsibility is to enforce the law, not to create it or ignore it. Marijuana in the state of South Carolina is illegal."

***

(CNN)  -- The Wisconsin man accused of poisoning his wife with antifreeze and convicted of murdering her was sentenced Wednesday to life in prison with no chance of parole.



Mark Jensen's chin quivers as a letter from his sons is read in court Wednesday before his sentencing.



Mark Jensen, 48, was found guilty Thursday in Elkhorn, Wisconsin, of killing his wife, Julie Jensen, in 1998.



The prosecution said the murder culminated years of torment.



"Your crime is so enormous, so monstrous, so unspeakably cruel that it overcomes all other considerations," Kenosha County Judge Bruce Schroeder said before pronouncing the sentence.  Watch the judge lower the boom »



Prosecutors contended that Jensen poisoned his 40-year-old wife with antifreeze and then suffocated her in 1998, but the defense argued that Julie Jensen was a depressed woman who killed herself and framed her husband.



Julie Jensen had given a neighbor a letter pointing an accusing finger at her husband should anything happen to her.



She also made foreboding comments to police and to her son's teacher, saying she suspected her husband was trying to kill her.



Her letter, read aloud in court, said in part: "I pray I'm wrong + nothing happens ... but I am suspicious of Mark's suspicious behaviors + fear for my early demise."   Read the letter »



The case turned on the admissibility of the letter, which would have been considered unusable "hearsay" evidence if Schroeder had not ruled that it was a "dying declaration." In such cases, the defendant has no opportunity to face his accuser.



After the verdict, jurors told reporters that the letter gave them "a clear road map" to conviction, as one female juror phrased it.



Another female juror said he believed Mark Jensen was trying to push his wife over the edge. "He tortured Julie hoping she could be classically diagnosed as a nutcase," she said.



Several of the jurors were in the court gallery for the sentencing hearing Wednesday.



Jensen, dressed in blue jail fatigues, sat stoically while Julie Jensen's four brothers asked for the harshest possible sentence.



"I hope the court shows the same mercy and compassion that the defendant showed our sister," Patrick Griffin, the victim's youngest brother, said.  Watch brothers demand justice »



But Jensen's chin quivered and his eyes watered when his attorney read a letter from Jensen's two sons, David and Douglas.



"He never failed to support us throughout this ordeal," the sons wrote in requesting mercy for their father. "... If anyone in this world is the epitome of loyalty, it is our dad." E-mail to a friend



CNN's Jim Kavanagh contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Incumbent leader Abdelaziz Bouteflika has won a third term in office after a landslide victory in Algeria's presidential election, media reports said Friday.

Algerian President Abdelaziz Bouteflika arrives to cast his vote at a school in Algiers.

Bouteflika's victory came despite calls from his political opponents for voters to boycott the polls. They claim the election was a charade, with the other presidential candidates -- from left-wing parties to Islamists -- standing no real chance.

The 72-year-old was elected with over 90 percent of the vote, Reuters.com quoted the official in charge of organizing Thursday's presidential election as saying.

"Bouteflika has won ... 90.24 percent of the votes cast," Interior Minister Minister Noureddine Yazid Zerhouni told a news conference.

Algerian lawmakers, most of them loyal to the president, cleared the way for him to stand for re-election last year by abolishing constitutional term limits. Critics said that would allow him to serve as president-for-life.

Supporters of Bouteflika say he deserves credit for steering the North African country, an oil and gas producer, back to stability after a bloody civil conflict in the 1990s that killed an estimated 150,000 people.

But critics say he is using the threat of renewed violence from Islamic militants to mask the country's deepening economic problems.

"I continue to regard the restoration of civil peace as a national priority, as long as hotbeds of tension and pockets of subversion survive," Bouteflika, running for a third term, said in his final campaign speech on Monday, Reuters.com reported.

He has also promised to spend $150 billion on development projects and create 3 million jobs, his remedy for an economy in which energy accounts for about 96 percent of exports but where other sectors have been choked by red tape and under-investment.

***

(CNN) -- Fernando Verdasco denied fellow Spaniard David Ferrer a third successive final appearance at the Barcelona Open after coming from behind to win a tense last-four clash on Saturday.





Fifth seed Verdasco, the losing finalist last weekend in Monte Carlo, triumphed 6-7 (3-7) 7-5 6-1 to set up a title showdown with second seed Robin Soderling on Sunday.





Verdasco was a break down as he trailed 4-3 in the second set, but battled back to win in more than two and half hours in the claycourt event.





Ferrer had been hoping to make up for his past two final defeats against Rafael Nadal, who opted to rest this week after crushing Verdasco to win a record-equaling sixth title in Monte Carlo, but the eighth seed was soon 5-0 down in the decider.





Verdasco is through to his third final this year, having won the SAP Open tournament in San Jose in February.





The 26-year-old has won only once in five meetings with Soderling, who crushed young Dutchman Thiemo de Bakker 6-1 6-4 in Saturday's second semifinal.





The Swede needed just one hour and 16 minutes to end the challenge of the 21-year-old, who fought back to make the scoreline respectable after trailing 4-0 in the second set.





De Bakker, who has risen to a career-high 67th in the world rankings this month, upset third seed Jo-Wilfried Tsonga in the quarterfinals to follow up his earlier win over clay specialist and former world No. 1 Juan Carlos Ferrero.

***

(CNN) -- Federal officials are urging consumers to put off eating foods that contain peanut butter until assurances are made that the foods do not contain products manufactured by the Peanut Corp. of America, some of which were found to contain salmonella.



A salmonella outbreak has sickened almost 500 people and killed at least six.



Food and Drug Administration officials said Saturday that peanut butter and peanut paste made from ground roasted peanuts, manufactured in Peanut Corp.'s Blakely, Georgia, plant were found to contain the bacteria, although a direct link to the strain that has now sickened 474 people in 43 states has not been found.



Six deaths may have been connected to this salmonella outbreak.



Peanut Corp. announced an expanded recall of peanut butter and peanut paste produced from its Georgia plant Friday night. Peanut Corp. doesn't directly supply to supermarkets, so brand-name peanut butters are not expected to be affected, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.



Instead, Peanut Corp. sells produce in bulk. The peanut butter is sold in containers from 5 to 1,700 pounds. Peanut paste is sold in sizes from 35-pound containers to tankers.



The peanut paste is used in the manufacturing of cakes, candies, crackers, cookies and ice cream, FDA officials say.



Minnesota and Connecticut health officials have confirmed salmonella Typhimurium linked to this outbreak in bulk containers found in institutions such as prisons, schools and nursing homes.



The FDA is urging companies that make these foods to check whether they use peanut butter or paste produced by the company. The recalled peanut butter was manufactured on or after August 8, 2008; the peanut paste was produced on or after September 26, 2008.



The administration is urging companies to notify consumers if the products they manufacture may contain peanut products from Peanut Corp. It is also urging companies whose products do not contain Peanut Corp. peanut butter or paste to make that information available to the public.



The Kellogg Co. announced a voluntary recall of 16 products, including Keebler and Famous Amos peanut butter cookies, because they contain peanut butter that could be connected to Peanut Corp.



The FDA does not have the authority to order a recall of products. It has to rely on companies doing so voluntarily. Congress would have to pass a law to give the FDA such power



Peanut Corp. products are also distributed by King Nut Co., which voluntarily recalled its products a week ago.



"The majority of products [like cookies, crackers, ice cream] are manufactured with products that don't come from PCA," said Dr. Stephen Sundlof, the FDA's director of the Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition.



However, until people can be sure that the peanut cookies or crackers they have do not contain product from Peanut Corp., the FDA is asking consumers to hold off on eating them.



Sundlof said a previous outbreak linked to salmonella-contaminated peanut butter showed that the bacteria are not necessarily killed if the product is heat-treated or baked.



"It took temperatures up to 250 degrees [Fahrenheit] to kill salmonella," Sundlof said.



Even if a cookie is cooked at 350 degrees, it doesn't guarantee that the center of the food gets that hot, making it possible for some some salmonella bacteria to survive.



CNN's Miriam Falco contributed to this report.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- The pirate suspect arrested in the hijacking of the Maersk Alabama was all smiles on arriving in New York City late Monday, escorted by a phalanx of law enforcement officers.



The unidentified pirate suspect arrested in the hijacking of the Maersk Alabama arrived in the U.S. late Monday.



None of the officers would confirm his identity, but his arrival for trial in the United States had been widely expected.



The suspect arrived at the Jacob K. Javits Federal Office Building in Manhattan, which is linked to a federal detention facility where he was expected to be held pending an appearance in federal court. The timing of that appearance was not immediately available. He was walked through the rain, surrounded by media, as well as officers from federal and New York City law enforcement agencies.



The suspect wore a dark jumpsuit and handcuffs, and what appeared to be a bandage on his left hand.



Members of the media urged him to comment, but it was not clear whether he understood. He smiled broadly and laughed.



He had been handed over to federal authorities by the U.S. military in Djibouti, defense officials said.



The suspect, known in official documents as "Pirate Defendant," was brought to Djibouti aboard the USNS Walter S. Diehl, a refueling ship that was with the warship USS Bainbridge at the scene of the failed hijacking on April 8 that turned into a hostage ordeal 350 miles off Somalia.



Three pirates who were holding the Maersk Alabama's captain in the ship's lifeboat were killed by Navy SEALs four days later.



The survivor had surrendered and was aboard the Bainbridge when the captain, Richard Phillips, was rescued, officials have said. From the Bainbridge, he was transferred to the USS Boxer for medical treatment.  See an interactive map of 2009 pirate attacks off the Horn of Africa »



The surviving pirate was wounded when crew members of the Maersk Alabama took him hostage in the early hours of the pirate attack on the cargo ship, according to the military.



The crew members had hoped to exchange him for their captain, but the pirates did not release Phillips when the crew returned their captive.



"I'm mad because, you know, I could have been dead right now," Ken Quinn, the Maersk Alabama's navigation officer, told CNN Radio on Monday. "But at the same time he's just a little skinny guy, you know, from Somalia where they're all starving and stuff."



Quinn said he wasn't angry at the single alleged pirate, noting that piracy in the region is fueled by the urge to survive hardship and poverty. He said the suspect told him that he wanted to go the United States, and asked whether Quinn could help him get there.



"I said, 'Yeah, you'll probably going to go anyway. I don't think you're going to need my help,'" Quinn said. "If he goes to jail here, it will be a whole lot better than living in Somalia."



CNN's Mike Mount, Emily Anderson, Jennifer Rizzo and Steve Kastenbaum contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- A former Mexican senator was reported missing on Saturday, Mexico's attorney general's office said.





The case has rocked Mexico, with President Felipe Calderon saying he is closely monitoring the investigation into the disappearance of the former official, Diego Fernandez de Cevallos Ramos.





The attorney general of the state where Fernandez de Cevallos was reported missing said that authorities have no clues as to his whereabouts.





Fernandez de Cevallos was last seen on the ranch of his home in Pedro Escobedo, in central Mexico's state of Queretaro, the country's official Notimex news agency reported.





The attorney general's office said that Fernandez de Cevallos' vehicle was located on his ranch and that "in the place where the car was located, some of his belongings were found and there were traces of violence."





Queretaro attorney Arsenio Duran said the former legislator had arrived alone at his La Cabana ranch, as he usually did, at approximately 11 p.m. Friday (midnight ET Saturday) and that it was presumed that he was kidnapped in the driveway of his property, Notimex reported.





Duran said that around 7 a.m. Saturday (8 a.m. ET) relatives of the former legislator noticed that the door to his truck was open, Notimex reported. Outside the vehicle were discarded glasses, pens and scissors; inside were traces of blood.





The federal attorney general's office has declined to call the case a kidnapping.





Queretaro authorities are investigating the case, the attorney general's office said.





A statement on the Mexican president's website said that Calderon "from the first hours of the morning, has been in constant communication with the attorney general and with the secretaries of Interior and Public Security," about the investigation.





The statement said that Calderon has "communicated with one of the two children of Fernandez de Cevallos, who is facing this difficult situation with integrity, to offer his solidarity and the necessary backing to successfully locate Fernandez de Cevallos."





The missing legislator was a senator from PAN, Mexico's National Action Party, and is a former presidential candidate. The statement on Calderon's website called Fernandez de Cevallos "a key politician in the Mexican democratic transition."





CNN's Esprit Smith contributed to this report.

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN) -- Florence Henderson, "The Brady Bunch" mom, may be one of America's best-loved mothers.



Florence Henderson is often asked for hugs by complete strangers.



As Henderson travels the United States with her one-woman road show, "All the Lives of Me," fans respond as if they grew up in her 1970s TV family.



"Every day, I'm asked 'Can I have a hug?' " Henderson said. "And I do. I hug a lot of people."



And on Mother's Day every year, her mailbox fills with cards from people she doesn't know but who think of her as Mom.



"I get mail from all over the world, 122 countries," she said.



Henderson is using her fame as the iconic TV mother to help other moms who suffer from "lackus appreciatus," which she says is "a condition caused by years of under-appreciation and neglect" of mothers by their kids.



Her role as spokeswoman for the "Center for Lackus Appreciatus Prevention" is part of a tongue-in-cheek campaign sponsored by Kodak to promote an online service where Mother's Day cards can be sent for free.



A video posted on YouTube points to the Mom-a-thon.com Web site, which aims to close the "appreciation deficit" between what your mom does for you and what you do for your mom.



Although just five seasons of "The Brady Bunch" were produced, starting in the fall of 1969, children still grow up with the Bradys in syndication.



"It's never been off the air in the United States," she said.



Henderson said she sometimes encounters mothers who tell her "You know, I really didn't like you when my kids were small, because they preferred you to me."



She knows the power of her motherly voice, using it to make a reporter feel special with a scolding: "Don't play ball in the house!"



For a moment, the interviewer feels like a Brady.

***

GUATEMALA CITY, Guatemala (CNN) -- Guatemalan President Alvaro Colom said Friday that government prosecutors are trying to determine who put microphones and video cameras in the presidential palace.

Guatemalan President Alvaro Colom: "Organized crime" may be behind cameras found in the presidential palace.

"It's a serious allegation, it has never happened before in Guatemala," he told CNN en Español.

He said he did not know who was responsible for the breach of security, but added, "One of the possibilities is organized crime."

He said "a lot of people" had access to the palace and his office.

Colom noted that Mexican President Felipe Calderon's anti-narcotrafficking efforts may have pressured drug cartels to move their smuggling to other countries, including Guatemala.

Calderon said in June that his campaign against drug traffickers was working. Mexico has seized more cocaine and money from drug cartels than anywhere else in the world and this summer Mexican authorities seized at least 16,000 arms, including more than 1,000 grenades.

Colom said Friday that he has already taken measures to ensure his security and that of his family.

The president said that the discovery of the microphones and cameras explain, to him, some strange experiences he's had recently.

He said he was in his office when the Guatemalan military called him and asked permission to seize a plane suspected of carrying illegal drugs.

Within moments of approving the action, the plane disappeared. He is convinced the call was being monitored.

Colom took office in January and is Guatemala's first leftist president in 53 years.

CNN's Claudia Palacios contributed to this report.

***

New York (CNN) -- A New York man is suing two airlines for $10 million, saying he was injured when he tackled the "underwear bomber" during a Detroit-bound flight on Christmas Day in 2009.





Theophilus Maranga filed the lawsuit Wednesday in U.S. District Court in New York, alleging that he sustained physical and psychological injuries during the incident.





He is suing Delta Airlines and Air France-KLM for neglecting to prevent Umar Farouk AbdulMutallab from boarding Flight 253 on Northwest Airlines, which merged with Delta Airlines.





Both airlines declined to comment on the lawsuit.





It is unclear how federal agencies partner with authorities abroad to screen for potentially dangerous passengers aboard U.S.-bound flights and what responsibilities airlines bear in that process.





The 2009 incident -- referenced in the lawsuit -- started when passengers heard a loud noise aboard the plane, sounding much like a firecracker, according to Jonathan Tukel, chief of the National Security Unit for the U.S. Attorney's Office in the Eastern District of Michigan.





AbdulMutallab became enveloped in a fireball that then spread to the wall and carpeting of the plane, yet he remained in his seat "expressionless, completely blank," Tukel said.





Four passengers restrained him and helped put out the fire, he added, and AbdulMutallab was escorted up to the first-class section of the plane.





Georgia resident Dimitrios Bessis said he was among the passengers who put out the fire. Michael Zantow, a 20-year Army veteran, was another of those who tried to restrain the suspected bomber.





Within a minute of the loud sound on the plane, a passenger said to AbdulMutallab, "Hey man, your pants are on fire!" Zantow later testified.





The Nigerian native, who in October pleaded guilty to trying to blow up the airplane, is facing the prospect of life behind bars.





U.S. officials say the terror group al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula was behind the bombing attempt.





Earlier this week, AbdulMutallab -- who has been acting as his own court representative -- asked U.S. District Judge Nancy Edmunds to replace attorney Anthony Chambers, who had been advising him.





In a handwritten letter to Edmunds, he said wants a different adviser, preferably a Muslim male attorney, citing that his relationship with Chambers had been strained.

***

KABUL, Afghanistan (CNN) -- Thirty-two Taliban insurgents and three Afghan soldiers were killed in fighting between security forces and militants in southern Afghanistan, a local government official told CNN Thursday.





The violence took place on Wednesday in the Khushal Khan village of Nad Ali district in Helmand province, said the provincial governor's spokesman, Dawood Ahmadi.





The district is where the U.S. Marines are cranking up plans for a major operation against the insurgency, a push targeting a swath of territory considered the last major stronghold of the Taliban in Helmand province.





The Wednesday flareup in Khushal Khan occurred during an Afghan-NATO-led joint operation. Along with the deaths, three Afghan soldiers and a soldier from NATO's International Security Assistance Force were injured.





The Marines plan to launch a big push on Marjah, a town with 80,000 to 100,000 people in the Nad Ali district, considered to be under Taliban control. The insurgency there has influence stretching to Pakistan and the bordering provinces of Nimruz and Farah.





The Marine-led operation will "alter the ecosystem of this area significantly," Col. George Amland, the deputy commander of Task Force Leatherneck, said at a briefing Wednesday.





Amland didn't say when the operation will start, but indicated it will be soon.





He noted that the backbone of the force will be made up of some of the 30,000 additional U.S. troops being sent to Afghanistan by President Obama and will include a large contingent of Afghan security forces.





The push will follow other big operations in Helmand -- Cobra's Anger in December and Khanjar last summer.





CNN's Matiullah Mati contributed to this report

***

Motozintla, MEXICO (CNN)  -- "My life was sad before because I had to crawl on the ground," recalls Caesar Morales, a 24-year-old father in Mexico who, until recently, had only one limb and couldn't walk.



David Puckett's nonprofit has provided free artificial limbs, orthopedic braces and care to more than 420 people.



But today, thanks to David Puckett and his U.S.-based nonprofit, Morales has new prosthetic legs. Now, he's not only able to walk, but his newfound independence has made it possible for him to move to another town where he could find work.



"He lifted me up to where I am today," Morales says.



Morales isn't the only person in southeastern Mexico who credits Puckett with changing his life. Since November 2000, the certified, licensed prosthetist/orthotist from Savannah, Georgia, has been providing artificial limbs, orthopedic braces and ongoing care to hundreds in need in the communities of Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula and Chiapas -- free of charge.



"When someone loses a limb they immediately know what they've lost," says Puckett. "The goal is to restore the healthy self image again so that that person can see themselves whole."



Puckett first connected with the Yucatan people while volunteering on a mission there as a teenager. Struck by the overwhelming poverty and the physical challenges he saw people facing in the rural communities, Puckett vowed to return and make a difference there.



"When I finally got into the field of orthotics and prosthetics, I said, 'Ah-ha. Now, I know what I can do.' "



His nonprofit, PIPO Missions: Limbs and Braces to Mexico, collects donated, used orthopedic braces and artificial limbs in the United States and crafts new ones from their recycled components. On average, Puckett makes a six-day trip every two months to distribute the custom prosthetics and braces, while also providing ongoing care.



"To deliver an artificial limb or brace without follow-up doesn't help that person in the long run," says Puckett. "We need to make sure that they have what they need to continue living successfully for years to come."



Over the course of his 41 trips to the region, Puckett has helped more than 420 individuals. He's found that word of his work spreads fast through the villages and people will drive hours to attend his clinics. Puckett's trips are routinely extended to accommodate house calls to immobile residents of distant towns.  Watch how Puckett brings prosthetic and orthotic care to people in Mexico »



"Someone might say, 'I wanna bring 10 people with me next time you come.' The mixed blessing is they'll bring 50 or 100 people that have physical needs," says Puckett. "The difficulty for me is, how do I say no?"



For Puckett, each trip demonstrates the immeasurable impact he is making on people's lives. Stories of previously unimagined independence, confidence and employment greet him from clinical waiting areas, often along with offerings of food, livestock and friendship. When his group helps one person, Puckett explains, it has an effect on an entire community.  Watch Puckett describe how one patient in Mexico crafted himself a homemade foot »



"It opens a whole other door for many of these folks to experience the world in a way in which they've never even dreamt of," says Puckett. "And the world has an opportunity to greet them, accept them and welcome them back into society. So, it's a double blessing."  Watch Puckett describe how he helped a woman now known as "the miracle girl" »



In between trips, Puckett also spends time soliciting the aid of surgeons, as he frequently encounters physical conditions that require surgery before prosthetic help can be successfully administered.



"If we had a surgeon here, we could see eight to 10 patients in a weekend and change their lives forever," he says. "It's tough for people to make the choice to give up time with their families and a portion of their

***

London (CNN) -- British government ministers secretly advised Libya on how to get convicted Lockerbie bomber Abdelbeset Ali Mohmed al Megrahi released from a life sentence in a Scottish prison, American documents published by WikiLeaks allege.





A Foreign Office official explained to the Libyans how to apply for compassionate release for Megrahi after he was diagnosed with cancer, according to an October 2008 U.S. Embassy cable newly published by WikiLeaks.





The British government believed Scotland would be inclined to grant the bomber compassionate release, the cable says.





Megrahi, the only person convicted in the 1988 bombing of Pan Am flight 103, which killed 270, was released in 2009. He is now living in Libya.





Then-Foreign Office Minister Bill Rammell wrote to Libyan Deputy Foreign Minister Abdulati al-Obeidi in October 2008 to explain how to apply for compassionate release, a British official told the U.S. Embassy in London, the cable says.





The Foreign Office in London and the office of Scottish First Minister Alex Salmond in Edinburgh did not respond immediately to CNN requests for comment.





The British government has always said it was not its decision whether or not to release Megrahi, but that of the Scottish authorities because the bomber was imprisoned in Scotland. Scotland has some control over its own affairs, including justice, but London runs British foreign policy.





Some American senators, led by New Jersey Democrat Robert Menendez, have been furious about Megrahi's release. They said in a report in December that his medical condition did not justify setting him free.





The leaked U.S. Embassy cable says Megrahi had been diagnosed with inoperable cancer and that the average life expectancy for someone with his condition was 18 months to two years. It noted that he could have as long as five years to live.





The October 2008 American cable is broadly consistent with hundreds of documents about the case declassified by Scotland after Megrahi was released in August 2009.





Those documents and American diplomatic cables published earlier by WikiLeaks show that Libya was determined to win the release of Megrahi, warning London that it would react badly if the bomber died in jail.





The British have consistently denied that commercial considerations -- such as oil giant BP's desire to drill in Libya -- played a role in Megrahi's release.

***

(CNN)  -- A Tennessee detective's keen eye may have nabbed a serial killer.



Tennessee police say trucker Bruce Mendenhall implicated himself as a serial killer.



A long-distance truck driver gave statements implicating himself in six slayings in four states after Detective Sgt. Pat Postiglione discovered what appeared to be blood inside the cab of his rig, police said.



Bruce Mendenhall, 56, an independent truck driver from Albion, Illinois, is facing  homicide charges in the shooting death of Sara Nicole Hulbert, 25. Her body was found June 26 in the parking lot of a Nashville, Tennessee, truck stop, authorities said.



Mendenhall made his first court appearance Thursday via closed-circuit television. A judge declined to set bond.



Heading to the crime scene Thursday, Postiglione saw a tractor-trailer rig on the road that matched the description of a truck sought in the investigation. The rig pulled into the truck stop and stopped.  Watch police search Mendehall's truck »



Postiglione knocked on its door.



While talking with Mendenhall, Postiglione noticed what appeared to be blood on the inside of the driver's door. Mendenhall gave the detective permission to look inside the truck.



Postiglione found "some more evidence that I considered incriminating," he said.



Mendenhall was detained, police said, because he gave statements implicating himself in Hulbert's slaying. Knowing that the slaying was similar to other recent homicides in the South, Postiglione questioned Mendenhall about those as well, police said.



Mendenhall implicated himself in the death of Symantha Winters, 48, of Nashville, who was found shot to death June 6 in a trash container at a Lebanon, Tennessee, truck stop, police said.



He also implicated himself in a homicide in Alabama, one in Georgia and two in Indiana, the statement said. Those victims were not named.



Nashville police said they are in contact with agencies in those states regarding statements from Mendenhall, who is being held without bail. The truck was impounded and was being processed by the Tennessee Bureau of Investigation. E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- Celebrity chef Bobby Chinn has tried his hand at a number of things.



Chinn's face for television: Picking up his Asian TV Award in 2007.



English boarding school taught him that food could be an awful experience; Wall Street taught him that creativity was more important than money and a stint as a stand-up comedian taught him that you can't always get it right.



Half Chinese, half Egyptian, Chinn's grandmothers were his first introduction to the variety and pleasure that food can bring.



While his palate was subdued by the meals he was given at school in England when he was a boy, his meandering route to becoming a chef came some time after attaining a degree in Finance and Economics.



Moving to New York after graduating he worked on Wall Street.



"You didn't produce anything at the end of a day and you didn't breathe fresh air, you didn't know what the weather was like outside because you were on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange. It's like the dungeon of capitalism where time and money met," he told CNN's Talk Asia.



Chinn escaped "the dungeon" after a year and a half to the sunny climes of California, but it wasn't to laze around. An addiction to high-octane and challenging environments saw Chinn explore the possibility of being a stand-up comic.



"I was always afraid to talk in front of the class and now I am trying to make them laugh" he told CNN.



"One day you are really funny and then you go to another gig the same night and nobody laughs and then at the same time you are living a life of poverty. When you are bombing as a comic I don't think there can be a worse life."



While finding out the hard way how funny, or not, he was, Chinn was working front-of-house in restaurants, nurturing his love of food.



His break came when Hubert Keller from San Francisco restaurant Fleur de Lys took him on as a volunteer in his kitchen.



"He gave me a job and after one week he said 'OK, you can stay.' And then when you work with one really great chef, then I think you can work anywhere," he said.



After also training with chefs in France, Chinn made his own mark on the culinary world when he opened his first restaurant in Vietnam in 1995, and at first found the going tough.



"Supplies were not consistent, the language barrier, the taste barrier, the hygiene barriers. Those are very taxing on a person like me with very little patience."



A high-energy chef and now a TV celebrity who presents "World Café Asia" -- he won an Asian Television Award in 2007 -- Chinn is aware that being flavor of the month on TV is transitory.



"It is just a machine that feeds on people like me and then spits me out when my time is done. You just have to go with the flow."

***

(CNN) -- The 2016 Olympic Games in Rio de Janeiro will include rugby union sevens, a shortened version of the 15-player game, and golf as sports, the International Olympic Committee (IOC) announced.



The IOC announced Rio's successful bid for the 2016 Olympic Games last week.



Two months ago the IOC's executive board voted to include the sports in the program, a proposal that was ratified by the body's members at a meeting in Copenhagen, Denmark, on Friday.



Rugby sevens, a sport played with exactly the same rules as the regular version -- just with less players, garnered 81 votes in favor while eight were against and one abstained.



Golf was voted in with 63 votes to 27, with two abstentions -- it means the number of "Olympic" sports has reached the IOC's stated maximum of 28. Blog: Money, money, money should be new Olympic motto.



The vote was delayed as some IOC members cast doubt on the selection process that had seen the two sports put forward, but on announcing the result IOC president Jacques Rogge said: "Time will show your decision was very wise."



The two disciplines will be part of the 2016 and 2020 Games as a result of the vote, a move that prompted IRB president Bernard Lapasset to tell reporters: "This is an historic moment for our sport and for the global rugby community, who were united in their support."



Rugby's world governing body, the IRB, has promised to end its World Cup Sevens event in order to allow 12 men's and women's teams to take part in the competition.



Similarly, the International Golf Federation (IGF) has said that of the 60 players who will compete in the men's and women's tournament over 72 holes, the world's top stars will all be present.



The executive director of the IGF's Olympic Golf Committee, Ty Votaw,  was equally delighted.



After coordinating the successful Olympic bid of his sport, he said: "We are elated the IOC membership has accepted golf as an Olympic sport, and look forward to seeing the world's best golfers compete for gold at the 2016 Olympic Games in Rio de Janeiro."



Softball, squash, baseball, karate and roller sports all bid to be accepted as Olympic sports but were turned down by the executive board two months ago.



Golf previously featured at the Paris Games of 1900 and in St Louis in 1904, while Olympic medals could be won by rugby players who contested the 15-a-side format from 1900-24.



Meanwhile, Rogge has been re-elected unopposed as president. The Belgian will serve his final four years, which takes him through the London 2012 Olympics before stepping down in 2013, after being re-elected by 88 votes to one.

***

(CNN) -- To say the gone-too-soon series "Firefly" has a devoted fan base might be the biggest understatement in sci-fi fandom.





Eight years after Fox grounded the crew from Serenity, a loyal following still longs for any chance to return to director Joss Whedon's fully realized mashup of outer space and the Old West.





Luckily for them, Whedon is a comic-book fan.





In 2005's "Serenity: Those Left Behind" and 2008's "Serenity: Better Days" -- both produced by Whedon for Dark Horse Comics -- we get to see Captain Mal and friends in action.





Now, with "Serenity: Float Out," there's a chance to stop in for a more personal visit with one of the crew's most beloved characters.





"Float Out," released Thursday by Dark Horse, is written by actor, comedian and "Firefly" devotee Patton Oswalt based on an idea he floated to Whedon.





It focuses on Wash, the wise-cracking ace pilot whose stunning death at the end of "Serenity" can still bring some devoted browncoats to tears with a single mention.





The one-off book opens with three friends of Wash (full name: Hoban Washburne) pausing to remember him before christening a new ship -- The Jetwash -- in his honor. That setup serves as an excuse to flash back to three stories from Wash's past, each showing a different side of his endearing personality.





Diehard fans won't learn a whole lot about Wash that they didn't already know. And anyone hoping to see the entire Serenity crew back together will be disappointed.





But Wash and surprise endings apparently go together.





There's a big one in the book's final pages -- one that both offers a huge emotional payoff for "Firefly" fans and will have them desperately hoping for more.





Different from Whedon's fully involved "Buffy" series on Dark Horse, the occasional "Serenity" books feel like brief visits with old friends. And "Float Out" is a good one.





The next visit is scheduled for November, when "Serenity: The Shepherd's Tale," a look at the backstory of Shepherd Book, is due to be released.

***

(CNN) -- The news editor of the Zambian newspaper The Post has gone on trial for allegedly circulating obscene material to politicians, the newspaper states on its Web site.



Zambia President Rupiah Banda has branded the childbirth photos pornographic.



In early June, Chansa Kabwela wrote to the country's vice president, health minister and several non-governmental organizations to highlight problems in the country's health-care system -- especially the problems pregnant women faced during a strike by health-care workers.



In her letter, Kabwela included several photos of a woman giving birth in a parking lot outside a hospital from which she had been turned away, according to Reporters Without Borders.



The country's president, Rupiah Banda, branded the photos pornographic and called for Kabwela's arrest and prosecution, according to the press freedom organization.



"Kabwela's arrest is shocking and the grounds are ridiculous," the organization said in a statement on its Web site after the arrest.



Now the trial into the alleged obscene photos has begun in the Lusaka magistrate's court, the newspaper Web site says.



One of the first witnesses, Kenneth Ngosa, a senior private secretary to the vice president, told the court he was immediately disturbed by the pictures he found inside the letter, according to the paper.



The Post described the courtroom as "packed to capacity" and said "people from all works of life including musicians and opposition political party members" had come to support Kabwela.



Defense lawyer George Chisanga has asked the court to look into whether the president's order to arrest and prosecute Kabwela could influence the course of justice.



A joint statement from several Zambian media organizations, published on The Post's Web site, calls for the government to amend the law on obscenity to clarify what constitutes obscenity and material that can corrupt morals.



The statement concedes that the pictures were in bad taste, but notes that they were sent on behalf of a good cause: to end the strike.



CNN efforts to obtain comment from both The Post and the Zambian government have been unsuccessful.



According to the latest figures from the World Health Organization, in 2004 the mortality rate of children under 5 years old in Zambia was 182 per 1,000 live births. In the United States, under-5 mortality rate was 8 per 1,000 live births in 2006.



Skilled health personnel attended only 43 percent of childbirths in Zambia in 2002, according to the health organization.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- The Supreme Court has blocked the imminent release of dozens of sex offenders who have served their federal sentences after the Obama administration claimed many of them remain "sexually dangerous."

The Supreme Court has blocked the release of sex offenders  after claims they remain dangerous.

Chief Justice John Roberts on Friday ordered that the men be kept in custody while the case works its way through a federal appeals court, which had ruled as many as 77 North Carolina inmates should be released, some as early as next week.

At issue is whether the government has the power to indefinitely detain prisoners who have served their sentences but could pose a public threat upon release. Such laws are known as "civil commitments."

The Justice Department filed papers with the high court Friday, asking that any release be put on hold until the justices have more time to consider the larger legal issues raised in their appeal.

Such an early release "would pose a significant risk to the public and constitute a significant harm to the interest of the United States," wrote Solicitor General Elena Kagan, who took office this month.

The Adam Walsh Child Protection and Safety Act passed by Congress in 2006 included a provision allowing indefinite confinement of sex offenders. A federal appeals court in Richmond, Virginia, ruled lawmakers had overstepped their authority, prompting the emergency appeal to the Supreme Court.

The law was named after the son of "America's Most Wanted" host John Walsh. The boy was kidnapped and murdered by a suspected child molester in 1981.

Four inmates brought suit against the law. They were serving sentences of up to eight years for sexual abuse of a minor or possessing child pornography. Their detention was to have ended two years ago, but corrections officials and prosecutors determined they remained a risk for further sexually deviant behavior if freed. The inmates argued such continued imprisonment violates their constitutional right of due process.

The justices' actions means the men remain behind bars for now.

The case is U.S. v. Comstock (08A863).

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Britain's Prince William has helped the U.S. Coast Guard bust a drug smuggling boat carrying cocaine worth a minimum of $80 million.



Prince William has helped bust a speed boat smuggling $80 million worth of cocaine.



William, who is serving in the Royal Navy, helped make the bust last weekend when he spotted a speedboat found to be carrying nearly a ton of cocaine in the Atlantic Ocean, Britain's Ministry of Defense said Wednesday.



William, 26, was one of the crew members aboard a helicopter attached to the frigate HMS Iron Duke who spotted the ocean-going speedboat hundreds of miles northeast of Barbados, the defense ministry said



The 50-foot-long power boat raised suspicions because it was a small vessel far out to sea and resembled a "go-fast" boat commonly used for drug smuggling, the ministry said. The boat's location suggested it was en route to Europe or North Africa, it said.



The chopper's crew informed the ship's captain about the boat, and U.S. Coast Guard personnel who were on the frigate then boarded the boat. They found 45 bales of cocaine weighing a total of 900 kilograms (just under a ton), the defense ministry said.



The cocaine has a minimum street value of $80 million, the ministry said.



The bust went smoothly with no violence, defense officials said. Navy crew detained the five men on the boat, which was in poor condition and later sank.



William is in the middle of a two-month attachment with the Royal Navy as part of his continued experience with various branches of the military. The prince, who is called sub lieutenant Wales in the navy, is also expected to spend time aboard a mine hunter and submarine during his attachment, which ends August 1.



William's vessel, the Iron Duke, is a patrol boat which supports overseas British territories in the event of a hurricane and carries out counter-narcotic operations.



William completed a four-month attachment with the Royal Air Force earlier this year and received his pilot's wings on graduation in April. He learned to fly three different aircraft during the attachment and is known as Flying Officer Wales within the RAF.



William is already a second lieutenant in the British Army, where he serves in the Blues and Royals regiment of the Household Cavalry.



The attachments are designed to give the prince, who as king will be the head of the armed forces, experience with the military.

***

(CNN) -- Melissa Huckaby, the former Sunday school teacher accused of kidnapping, raping and killing 8-year-old Sandra Cantu, will face additional charges that she tried to poison two people, including another 7-year-old girl.



Melissa Huckaby is charged with killing Sandra Cantu and attempted poisoning of second child.



A revised complaint against Huckaby, 28, of Tracy, California, was made public just hours before she was due back in court on Friday.



The new charges caused another delay in the murder case, CNN afiliate KRON reported.



The complaint charged that Huckaby "did willfully and unlawfully mingle a harmful substance with food or drink" with the intent to harm the child, identified only as "Jane M. Doe."



Another alleged poisoning victim was identified as Daniel Plowman, but no age or other information was immediately provided.



The latest charges also include one count of child abuse endangerment relating to the unidentified child, who was allegedly in Huckaby's "care and custody." Read the complaint (PDF)



Huckaby did not enter a plea in the Cantu slaying in her first two court appearances last month.



At an earlier hearing, Judge Linda L. Loftis agreed to keep the autopsy and toxicology reports under seal, citing a "great danger of public outrage."



If convicted on the murder, rape and kidnapping charges, Huckaby, could face the death penalty or life in prison without parole, authorities said.



CNN's Alan Duke and Jim Roope contributed to this report

***

London, England (CNN) -- UK Prime Minister Gordon Brown described himself as a "penitent sinner" on Wednesday after personally apologizing to a voter he described as a "bigoted woman."





Brown visited the home of Gillian Duffy in Rochdale, northwestern England, after he was caught on microphone describing in blunt terms his encounter with the 65-year-old widow whom he met on the election campaign trail.





The Labour party leader had had a discussion with Duffy about the size of Britain's national debt, tax and immigration.





Brown then got into his car and was driven away but he was still wearing a radio microphone, allowing broadcasters to pick up his conversation with an aide.





"That was a disaster," Brown said about the encounter seconds earlier. "Should never have put me with that woman -- whose idea was that?" He added: "She was just a sort of bigoted woman."





Why Brown's gaffe could get worse





The woman, Gillian Duffy, told reporters she wanted an apology from Brown over his "very upsetting" comments.





Brown later visited Duffy at her home, emerging to tell reporters: "I am mortified by what has happened. I have given her my sincere apologies. I misunderstood what she said. She has accepted that there was a misunderstanding and she has accepted my apology.





"If you like, I am a penitent sinner."





The encounter was immediately seized on by users of social networking sites, with opinions polarized between those who said it would damage Labour in the May 6 general election and those who believed it could help the party, currently trailing the opposition Conservatives in opinion polls.





One Twitter user, Thermalsocks, said: "Gordon Brown has created a total survailance society. Glad to see he got caught out, now he knows how we all feel."





Another user, urbantaoist85, said: "Anyone else up for making all politicians wear a microphone at all times?" Ririnyan added: "I wonder if that was the final nail in the coffin for Labour this time." Andy_Francis said: "I think GB has just kissed goodbye to any chances Labour had left."





However CupCate wrote: "I'd be more concerned if Brown had said, "What that brilliant woman said about all those damn immigrants, too right!"





After his public apology, Brown telephoned Duffy to apologize personally. The prime minister's spokesman said: "Gordon has apologized to Mrs. Duffy personally by phone. He does not think that she is bigoted.





"He was letting off steam in the car after a difficult conversation. But this is exactly the sort of conversation that is important in an election campaign and which he will continue to have with voters."





Asked about Brown's comments, Liberal Democrat leader Nick Clegg, who has surged in the opinion polls following his appearance in the televised election debates with the other two leaders, told the Press Association: "You should always try to answer the questions as best you can."





He added: "He has been recorded saying what he has said and will have to answer for that."





But one Twitter user, SusanCalman, spoke for many when she said: "I feel sorry for Gordon Brown. If people I've met knew half the things I'd said about them when I left I would be stabbed and left for dead."

***

(CNN) -- After emerging as victor in the long and bruising contest to seize the Democratic nomination for the U.S. presidential race, Barack Obama's next move is to choose a running mate.





And that search for a vice president is getting some added support.





Caroline Kennedy has joined Obama's vice presidential selection team, a campaign spokesman said Wednesday.





Former Fannie Mae CEO Jim Johnson is heading up the search team, and former Deputy U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder is also serving on the committee.





Kennedy, the daughter of President Kennedy, formally endorsed Obama late January in a New York Times op-ed piece titled, "A President Like My Father."





"I have never had a president who inspired me the way people tell me that my father inspired them," Kennedy wrote. "But for the first time, I believe I have found the man who could be that president -- not just for me, but for a new generation of Americans."





Sen. Hillary Clinton, whose tenacious refusal to surrender the nomination contest turned the Democratic race into one of the most nail-biting in modern U.S. political history, has indicated that she would be willing to sign up on a joint ticket.





But while Clinton's appointment could help heal rifts in the party after weeks of divisive campaigning from both candidates, Obama has the pick of a broad field of candidates from across the political spectrum. iReport.com: Whom do you see as VP?





Here is a list of possible front-runners:





Other names mentioned in the running include: Former South Dakota Sen. Tom Daschle, former North Carolina Sen. John Edwards, Virginia Gov. Tim Kaine, Missouri Sen. Claire McCaskill, Arizona Gov. Janet Napolitano, former Senate Armed Services Committee Chairman Sam Nunn and Ohio Gov. Ted Strickland.





CNN's Candy Crowley and Roland Martin contributed to this report.

***

(CNN)  -- In the seven weeks since the military-backed bloodless coup in Honduras, several hundred people protesting against the de facto government have been arbitrarily arrested and beaten by government forces, a new Amnesty International report says.



The marks of a police truncheon are shown on a student's back after a protest, Amnesty International says.



The report, released Wednesday, said the beatings were meant to punish those who opposed the ouster of President Manuel Zelaya in June.



It includes testimony from, and photographs of, several people who were baton-whipped and detained by police officers who sometimes wore no visible identification and hid their faces behind bandanas as they broke up demonstrations.



"They beat us if we raised our heads; they beat us when they were getting us into the police cars," said a student whom Amnesty International interviewed in late July at the police station where he was being detained.



"They said, 'Cry and we'll stop.'"



Multiple requests to the government for comment went unanswered. The government has said in the past that the demonstrators were arrested for engaging in violence and provoking authorities.



The Honduran political crisis stems from Zelaya's defiant push to hold a referendum that could have led to extending term limits by changing the constitution. The country's congress had outlawed the vote and the supreme court had ruled it illegal.



He was ousted in a coup on June 28. The congress named Roberto Micheletti provisional president shortly after the military detained Zelaya and sent him into exile.



Micheletti and his supporters deny that a coup took place, calling the action a constitutional transfer of power.



The coup resulted in unrest throughout the country, with frequent clashes between police and military on one side and civilian protesters on the other. At least two people were shot to death, Amnesty said.



Among several examples, the Amnesty report quotes F.M., a 52-year-old teacher, who said he was demonstrating peacefully when police descended on the rally.



"They grabbed me and shouted, 'Why do you (all) support Zelaya's government?' They beat me. I have not been informed as to why I am detained."



He showed deep-red imprints on his back, which he said were from a beating with a baton.



"Detention and ill treatment of protesters are being employed as a form of punishment for those openly opposing the de facto government and also as a deterrent for those contemplating taking to the streets to peacefully show their discontent with the political turmoil the country is experiencing," said Esther Major, Amnesty's Central America researcher.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Hundreds of investigations of online child sexual exploitation and child pornography have been significantly delayed by backlogs at FBI cybercrime labs, according to a Justice Department report released Friday.



FBI Inspector General Glenn Fine says processing time for digital evidence can take up to nine months.



An audit conducted more than a year ago by the department's inspector general found 353 requests awaiting digital evidence analysis. FBI computer forensic personnel on average took about 60 days to examine evidence needed by investigators, the report says.



"The processing time for the digital evidence in some cases could take up to nine months, which we concluded was too long," Inspector General Glenn Fine said.



The digital evidence involves online communications in which potential child predators and sex offenders target juveniles for sexual exploitation or produce cyber-based child pornography.



The FBI acknowledged the challenge of keeping up with the growing problem, but said it has made improvements since the audit was conducted.



"The pervasiveness of the Internet has resulted in the dramatic growth of online sexual exploitation of children, resulting in a 2,000 percent increase in the number of cases opened since 1996," FBI Executive Assistant Director Stephen Tidwell said.



From 2003 to 2007, the number of crimes against children reported to the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children's hot line rose from 7,038 to 20,760, the report states.



Since its inception in 1995, the Innocent Images Unit has investigated more than 20,000 online cases resulting in 7,000 convictions.



Tidwell said the FBI has begun implementing a series of procedural and technical recommendations made by the inspector general to reduce the lab backlogs and improve efficiencies in other programs designed to combat crimes against children.



The other programs include wide-ranging investigations of child abductions and kidnappings by parents as well as strangers.



The report says the largest number of missing children cases involve runaways from juvenile homes. The most recent government study says 99.8 percent of children reported missing were located or returned home alive.



The number of child abductions investigated by the FBI during this decade has topped 2,000. Abductions by strangers amount to only a fraction of 1 percent of total kidnapping cases.

***

(CNN) -- The world has certainly changed since Michael Jackson last staged a concert tour in 1997 to promote the "HIStory" album.



Fans clamor in London as Michael Jackson announces his return to performing.



Since then, other performers have gained prominence -- some who have even been tagged as heir-apparents to Jackson, such as Usher and the currently legally troubled Chris Brown.



Now the original is back. Jackson announced Thursday that he'll perform 10 concerts in London in July.



But is the world ready to receive Jackson, who has had his share of financial and legal woes, with open arms?  Watch Jackson make his announcement »



Publicist and writer Howard Bragman said it's up to the public.



"He's playing off the fact that people have the wonderful ability to have short memories," Bragman said.



It was only a few years ago that Jackson was acquitted of several charges, including child molestation, in a California trial. The case, coupled with the singer's eccentric behavior, had seriously damaged his reputation.  See a timeline of Jackson's life »



Bragman said Jackson, who is slated to play the 20,000-capacity O2 Arena, is better off playing smaller venues rather than booking huge stadiums that may not sell out, an embarrassment a returning veteran can't afford to risk.



"It's sort of like the political thing, how you always want to get a small room and make it look full," Bragman said. "Have reasonably priced tickets and do some of your classics. I certainly think that at one point there were tens of millions of Michael Jackson fans worldwide and I think there have to be still some Michael Jackson fans."



Culture critic, filmmaker and former Billboard music editor Nelson George said British fans are much more forgiving of Jackson's troubles than are Americans, who expect celebrities to be "saints and heroes," George said.



"The love for Michael Jackson in the UK is undiluted by any of the stuff that's been talked about here in the states," said George, whose soon-to-be-released book "City Kid: A Writer's Memoir of Ghetto Life and Post-Soul Success" offers some insight into the era in which Jackson's popularity exploded.



"He's a huge star there still and he will sell out all of those shows," George added.



George recently returned from London, where he witnessed firsthand the adoration that European fans have for the singer. While there, he said he attended "Thriller," a sold-out tribute to Jackson in London's West End.



George points out that Jackson is pursing a similar path to the one the musical artist Prince took in 2007 when he played 21 nights at the O2 Arena. Given its London location, George observed the venue has the potential to attract fans from across Europe.



Moreover, George said, the British have long been admirers of black music and culture.



"It's the perfect place for [Jackson] to play," George said. "There will be fans there from all over the world, including the United States."

***

(CNN) -- The H1N1 virus has been confirmed in a sample taken from a pig that was displayed at the Minnesota State Fair, the first time the virus has been found in a U.S. pig, the U.S. Department of Agriculture said Monday.



The Department of Agriculture quickly issued a statement saying the food supply is safe.



"We have fully engaged our trading partners to remind them that several international organizations, including the World Organization for Animal Health, have advised that there is no scientific basis to restrict trade in pork and pork products," Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack said in the statement. "People cannot get this flu from eating pork or pork products. Pork is safe to eat."



The announcement came three days after health officials announced that three pigs that were displayed during the fair had tested positive in a preliminary test for the H1N1 flu virus. Final results on the other two pigs have not been announced.



"This, of course, may be the first indication that it is present in some swine here in the United States," Gene Hugoson, commissioner of the Minnesota Department of Agriculture, told reporters in a conference call on Friday.



The U.S. Department of Agriculture National veterinary services laboratories conducted the confirmatory testing on the sample collected at the fair, held in Saint Paul, Minnesota, between August 26 and September 1. Further testing is ongoing.



The pigs sampled showed no signs of sickness and were apparently healthy, the officials said.



The samples collected were part of a joint University of Iowa and University of Minnesota research project funded by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to determine whether animals at such events had the infection.



"Like people, swine routinely get sick or contract influenza viruses," Vilsack said.



The misconception that the virus, sometimes called the swine flu, could be contracted through eating pork has hurt sales of the meat in the wake of the expanding pandemic.



This year's crowd of 1.79 million attendees was a record.



Though an outbreak of H1N1 was reported among a group of 4-H'ers who had attended the fair, officials said it was unlikely they contracted the virus from the animals, since few of them had contact with the pigs.



The report came as no surprise to experts, since herds in other countries, including Argentina, Canada, Ireland and Norway, have been infected with H1N1.



Pigs that do get sick with H1N1 typically recover from it, the officials said.



The officials said the display animals likely were sent to slaughter.



Even if they were slaughtered while still infected, that would not be an issue for anyone eating the meat, said Dr. Jeff Bender, co-director of the University of Minnesota Center for Animal Health and Food Safety. "This virus is not in muscle tissue, so if these animals were slaughtered or processed there would be no risk to the public."



A vaccine to protect swine from H1N1 is under development but is not yet commercially available, one official said.

***

(CNN) -- Kyrgyzstan's president signed a bill Friday to close an air base that the U.S. military uses as a route for troops and supplies heading into Afghanistan, the president announced on his Web site.

Manas Air Base in Kyrgyzstan serves as a U.S. supply route for troops and supplies into Afghanistan.

The news came as two other central Asian nations -- Tajikistan and Uzbekistan -- reportedly agreed to let U.S. cargo pass through their countries on the way to Afghanistan.

Such deals, if confirmed, could help fill the void left by the closing of the Manas Air Base in Kyrgyzstan.

The Kyrgyz order became effective on Friday when President Kurmanbek Bakiyev reportedly signed legislation that the parliament in Bishkek backed on Thursday, the Pentagon said.

Pentagon spokesman Bryan Whitman said the Kyrgyz Foreign Ministry on Friday officially notified the U.S. Embassy in Bishkek that a 180-day withdrawal process is under way.

Embassy spokeswoman Michelle Yerkin told CNN the United States hopes to retain the base. Officials in Washington and Bishkek signed a deal three years ago allowing the United States to renew the arrangement annually through July 2011.

"We do remain in contact with the government of Kyrgyzstan," Yerkin said. "The Manas Air Base continues to operate under existing agreements, as per the coalition's efforts in Afghanistan."

U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates said Friday the United States will continue to work with Kyrgyzstan on keeping the base open.   Watch why Kyrgyzstan wants to close the base Â»

"I continue to believe that this is not a closed issue and that there remains the potential at least to reopen this issue with the Kyrgyz and perhaps reach a new agreement," Gates said at a NATO meeting in Krakow, Poland. "If we are unable to do that on reasonable terms then, as I have suggested, we are developing alternative methods to get resupply and people into Afghanistan."

The Manas Air Base outside Bishkek is the only U.S. base in Central Asia and is a major resupply hub for the war in Afghanistan.

Its closing could deal a significant blow to the U.S. military effort there, especially following President Barack Obama's announcement of additional troops to halt a resurgence of the country's former Taliban rulers.

The United States pays $17.4 million a year to use Manas, a major logistical and refueling center that supports troops in Afghanistan, the Pentagon said. About 15,000 troops and 500 tons of cargo reportedly move through Manas monthly, it said.

The air base currently employs more than 1,000 servicemen, 95 percent of whom are Americans, Russia's Interfax news agency reported.

"This is an important facility, it has been an important facility, but it's not irreplaceable and, if necessary, we will find other options," Whitman said.  How far is Manas from Afghanistan? View our map Â»

Tajikistan and Uzbekistan, two other Central Asian nations that border Afghanistan, have agreed to allow U.S. cargo to be transported to Afghanistan through their countries, the Russian news agency Interfax reported Friday.

The agency said Rear Adm. Mark Harnitchek, U.S. transportation command director for strategy, policy, programs and logistics, held a meeting with Tajik Foreign Minister Kharokhon Zarifi, after which he said he had also secured Uzbekistan's consent.

A Tajik government statement said only that the two sides discussed the issue, but a spokesman for the Tajik foreign ministry told CNN that "practically all issues" to allow U.S. cargo transit through the country have been resolved.

If confirmed, success would still depend on how much access the United States would have to those countries for flights and cargo, and even then, it may not totally replace the capacity lost in Kyrgyzstan.

U.S. General David Petraeus, who oversees the war in Afghanistan, was in Uzbekistan this week for talks on Afghanistan and other regional issues. A Pentagon spokesman told CNN that his discussions included the regional supply network into Afghanistan.

The U.S. military leased a base in Uzbekistan after the September 11, 2001, attacks on the United States. But after Uzbek troops were accused of killing at least 150 people during a demonstration in 2005, the autocratic government of President Islam Karimov

***

(CNN) -- CNN gave you the chance to pitch your questions to Team USA's goalkeeper Tim Howard recently and now he has answered.





The U.S. are hopeful of glory in South Africa where English Premier League star Howard will be helping his team do battle against England, Algeria and Slovenia in World Cup Group C.





Play the video at the top of the page to find out what motivates Howard ahead of the South Africa tournament, whether the goalkeeper thinks the form of his side from the Confederations Cup can be continued and if there is "smack-talk" between the Everton teammates who are Africa-bound.





The 31-year-old also tells CNN's Pedro Pinto about his thoughts regarding a move back to Major League Soccer (MLS) and which striker he fears most in the world.





Born in North Brunswick, New Jersey former Manchester United goalkeeper Howard has won 29 caps for USA.





Having replaced France's Fabien Barthez at Old Trafford, 6'2" Howard moved to Everton in February 2007 for $4.67 million where he has now made 138 appearances.





USA finished top of the CONCACAF qualifying group -- where Howard's former Everton teammate Landon Donovan set a new USA record for World Cup qualifying goals scored by contributing to his side's 2-1 win against Honduras.





He scored in the away game against Honduras to seal a 3-2 victory and secure a place at the World Cup finals.





This is now USA's sixth consecutive World Cup finals appearance and many are expecting the side to go far.

***

TOKYO, Japan (CNN) -- Japan's Prime Minister Taro Aso announced a historic ¥15 trillion ($150 billion) stimulus package Friday aimed to turn around the recession in the world's second largest economy.

Japan's Prime Minister Taro Aso has announced a $150 billion stimulus package.

Steeped in a recession, with a surge in bankruptcies and sentiment among its largest manufacturers at a record low, Japan has seen unemployment reach a three-year high. The stimulus plan is meant to keep Japan's economy from cracking open, coalition party officials told CNN. It is the biggest-ever supplemental budget to boost the ailing economy.

Japan has been hit hard by the global financial slump. Although Japanese banks were spared the brunt of the credit crisis, the drop in exports to the United States has sent the country into its worst recession since World War II.

Aso needs the package to boost Japan's economy and his government's popularity.

"This could help save his life as prime minister," said Satoru Ogasawara, a Tokyo-based economist for Credit Suisse. The Aso administration's approval rating fell below 10 percent two months ago, but has been buoyed by the stimulus package and the recent North Korea rocket launch, Ogasawara said.

If approved, the package could add two points to the country's gross domestic product, Ogasawara said. But its long-term impact remains an open question.

"It will help the economy from collapsing from this point ... [but] unless the package improves productivity or increases demand, it will be a short-term fix," Ogasawara said.

Jesper Koll, president and chief executive of TRJ Tantallon Research Japan, said the stimulus package was unlike the ¥12 trillion injections into the economy in the past eight months.

"This is the first designed with real business input, and that's reflected in the package," he said, referring to a series of meetings Aso held with business leaders last month. "That's outside the normal technocratic, bureaucratic fix. ... It isn't just pork-barrel money for the boys."

Koll cites details of the plan -- such as tax breaks for gift-giving, environmentally friendly cars, or measures to increase employment in health care -- as a step forward.

"This goes way beyond grand-standing fiscal policy. It's very specific. For Japan, that's something," he said.

Still, Japan now has one of the highest amounts of public debt in the world - a rate which could approach 200 percent of GDP next year, according to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.

"The government has since spent billions and billions of dollars to support the economy," Kirby Daley, a strategist for brokerage Newedge, said. "Japan has been trying this and has now gone into almost two lost decades and will likely enter a third lost decade if they continue down this policy path. It has not worked in Japan. It will not work again."

Among the package's highlights:

-- ¥1.9 trillion for unemployment benefits and the promotion of job sharing.

-- ¥3 trillion to boost struggling companies.

-- ¥1.6 trillion to promote green initiatives, such as the purchase of environmentally friendly cars and energy-efficient electronics.

-- ¥2.6 trillion for infrastructure, such as airport runways, train networks and road extensions.

-- ¥1.7 trillion for health and welfare.

The proposed stimulus package helped a rally in Japanese stocks this week, with the Nikkei 225 Average briefly breaking the 9000-point level for the first time in three months on Friday morning trading. The Nikkei hit a 26-year record low last month.

***

Khartoum, Sudan (CNN) -- South Sudan's government has gained control of a remote town that had been under attack by fighters from a rival tribe, the nation's information minister said Monday.





Some of the thousands who fled into the bush have begun to return to Pibor, said Barnaba Benjamin, South Sudan's minister of information and broadcasting.





Earlier Monday, a military official said that roughly 4,000 army and police reinforcements were on the way to Pibor after weekend attacks.





The United Nations also said it sent a battalion of peacekeepers to Pibor last week amid reports that members of the Lou Nuer tribe were marching toward the town, home to the Murle tribe, after attacking the village of Lukangol.





Ethnic tensions in the South Sudan state of Jonglei have flared as tribes fight over grazing lands and water rights, disagreements that have dissolved into cattle raids and abduction of women and children.





Fighters first struck Pibor on Saturday, attacking a portion that was out of the reach of U.N. peacekeepers, said Col. Philip Auger of the South Sudan army.





Benjamin said there were no casualties and no direct confrontation between the two tribes there, because most of the Murle had fled when they heard the Lou Nuer were approaching.





The nonprofit group Medecins sans Frontieres, also known as Doctors Without Borders, was still trying Monday to reach 117 of its 130 aid workers who fled into the bush along with the populations of Pibor and Lukangol before the attack, said Sarathy Rajendran, head of the group's South Sudan mission.





Rajendran said the organization was afraid for its workers' safety and "very concerned" for the people of Pibor and Lukangol.





"We believe tens of thousands are currently displaced without access to water, food and health care," he said. "The situation is tense. We don't know what is happening on the ground, so we are monitoring the situation."





The nonprofit's clinic in Lukangol was "burned and looted," spokeswoman Emily Linendoll said, adding that its Pibor clinic "has been targeted."





The attack on Pibor follows reports last week that Lou Nuer fighters raided Lukangol, burning it to the ground and forcing thousands to flee toward Pibor.





At least 50,000 people have fled the violence in the state that began last year, said Quade Hermann, chief of radio at Radio Miraya, a U.N.-backed radio station in South Sudan.





She similarly said that the town of Pibor is secure now, though the situation there remains fluid. The people who fled remain scattered, and the United Nations is working on a plan for how to distribute humanitarian aid, Hermann said.





U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon last week urged the groups to work with the government of South Sudan to find solutions.





South Sudan's vice president, Riek Machar, is leading an initiative to bridge the differences between the Lou Nuer and Murle tribes, including encouraging the armed groups to disband and go home, the United Nations has said.





The violence in Jonglei state is the latest to rock South Sudan, which officially gained its statehood in July after separating from the north.

***

(CNN) -- A Texas couple charged with killing the little girl known as "Baby Grace" now face capital murder charges, after a Texas grand jury upgraded the charges on Wednesday.



Riley Ann Sawyers was moved from Ohio to Texas by her mother.



Prosecutors said they have not decided whether to seek the death penalty against the girl's mother, Kimberly Dawn Trenor, and Trenor's husband, Royce Clyde Zeigler II.



Two-year-old Riley Ann Sawyers was beaten to death and her body was disposed of in Galveston Bay.



Riley's body was found October 29 by a fisherman on an uninhabited island in the bay. It was wrapped in black plastic bags and stuffed in a blue, plastic bin.



Her identity was not known at first, and police dubbed her "Baby Grace." Police sketches of the child were widely distributed, and Sheryl Sawyers, the girl's paternal grandmother, contacted police from her Ohio home to say the drawing resembled her granddaughter. DNA testing confirmed the child's identity.



Trenor, 19, and Zeigler, 24, were initially charged with injury to a child and tampering with evidence.



But since the initial charges were filed last month the investigation has continued and police have gathered additional evidence, in addition to confirming Riley's identity, said a statement released Wednesday by Galveston County Criminal District Attorney Kurt Sistrunk.



Based on that, the grand jury was asked to upgrade the charges, he said. A three-hour hearing was held Wednesday in which grand jurors heard testimony from five witnesses, including police and FBI investigators and the medical examiner.



The grand jury deliberated for only three minutes Wednesday before upgrading the charges, Sistrunk said.



Trenor told police Riley had been beaten and thrown across a room and that her head was held under water before she died July 24.



She said the couple hid the girl's body in a storage shed for one to two months before putting it in the plastic container and dumping it into the bay.



A medical examiner said Riley's skull was fractured in three places that would have been fatal injuries.



Trenor and the girl moved to Texas from Ohio in May to be with Zeigler, who Trenor had met online.



Sistrunk said the investigation is continuing, and a decision on whether to seek the death penalty will not be made until its conclusion. E-mail to a friend

***

JERUSALEM (CNN) -- Israeli troops Thursday killed a Palestinian militant trying to cross into Israel from Gaza and wounded another, according to Palestinian security sources.



Israeli soldiers stand in front of the Kerem Shalom crossing Thursday on the Israel-Gaza border.



Three armed militants tried to infiltrate into Israel near the Kerem Shalom crossing along the southern Gaza border, according to the Israeli military.



Israel Defense Forces said it fired at the militants, hitting two of them. It was unclear what happened to the third.



In a separate operation, Israeli forces killed another Palestinian militant Thursday near Jabalya in northern Gaza, Palestinian security sources said. The militant was part of a group trying to launch a mortar shell, sources said.



On April 9, Palestinian militants infiltrated Israel through the Nahal Oz border crossing in northern Gaza and fired on the fuel terminal there, killing two Israeli civilian workers. In response, Israel halted already reduced fuel shipments to Gaza.



It restarted some shipments on Wednesday but shut down the terminal again Thursday because of Palestinian sniper fire, according to the Israeli military.



During the brief time the terminal was open, Israel sent 437,000 liters of diesel fuel and 93 tons of gas to Gaza via Nahal Oz, the only transit route for delivering fuel supplies to Gaza.



Israeli forces also clashed early Thursday with Palestinian militants in the West Bank village of Qabatiya, killing the local Islamic Jihad leader and his deputy, the Israeli military said.



Bilal Hamuda Machmud Zaalah and his deputy, Adin Machmud Hasani Avidot, were hiding in a vehicle when Israeli soldiers and security forces spotted them and surrounded the vehicle, the military said.



"After confirming that the two men were armed, forces fired at the wanted men, killing both," according to an IDF statement.



Israel blames Zaalah for attacks against Israeli forces in the West Bank town of Jenin as well as other planned strikes inside Israel.



But Palestinian medical sources and witnesses said Israeli forces surrounded a house around 3 a.m., ordering the two members of Islamic Jihad to surrender. The militants wouldn't come out, the sources said, and they died in an exchange of fire with the soldiers.



The violence came a day after Israeli airstrikes and ground battles with Palestinian militants in Gaza left 21 dead -- 18 Palestinians and three Israeli soldiers -- according to Palestinian security sources.



A Reuters cameraman and two bystanders were killed in an apparent airstrike near El Bureij refugee camp in central Gaza, according to Hamas security sources and Palestinian medical sources. Other civilians and Palestinian militants also were killed in an Israeli strike on El Bureij.



U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, in a statement through his spokesman, said he's "gravely concerned at the escalation of violence in Gaza and southern Israel" on Wednesday.



"He condemns the reported civilian casualties among Palestinians, including children, during Israeli military operations, and calls on Israel to abide by its obligations under international humanitarian law and human rights law," the statement said.



"The secretary-general also reiterates his condemnation of rocket fire against Israeli civilian targets. He urges all parties to exercise restraint." E-mail to a friend

***

TAIPEI, Taiwan (CNN) -- A Taiwan court early Tuesday ordered ex-President Chen Shui-bian, who is facing corruption charges, back to jail after deeming him a flight risk.



Former Taiwan president Chen Shui-bian speaks to reporters on December 12 in Taipei.



Chen had been free on bail, but prosecutors sought his return to state custody.



After 12 hours of deliberation, a panel of three district court judges approved the request at 3 a.m. Taiwan time. Chen was immediately taken to jail.



The island's first former president to ever face prosecution, Chen was freed earlier in December after spending a month in jail while prosecutors prepared his indictment on several corruption charges, including embezzlement and accepting bribes.



Judges ordered Chen released after the indictment was formally presented, saying they did not believe he was a flight risk.



However, Taiwan's high court was not satisfied with the decision and assigned a new judge to the case.



Chen's attorney, Jen Wen Long, told reporters after the court order: "We question the work of the Taipei district court. Changing the judge is an interference with the justice system."



Chen, whose term ended in May, is accused of embezzling about $18 million. A trial date has not been set in the case.



Prosecutors allege he also took bribes, laundered money and illegally removed classified documents from the president's office.



Chen, 58, has denied any wrongdoing and insists the charges are politically motivated. His party favors independence for Taiwan, while the administration of President Ma Ying-jeou favors closer ties with mainland China -- from which the island split amid civil war in 1949.



If convicted, Chen faces 25 years or more in prison, although prosecutors did not seek any specific jail time in their indictment.



Thirteen others, including Chen's wife, son, daughter-in-law and brother-in-law, also were indicted.



Prosecutors have alleged that Chen's son has a Swiss bank account containing $22 million in what they believe is illegal proceeds.



Journalist Andrew Lee contributed to this report.

***

HARARE, Zimbabwe (CNN) -- Zimbabwe's President Robert Mugabe has warned that veterans he commanded in his country's liberation war will take up arms again to prevent the opposition party from taking power.



Zimbabwe's President Robert Mugabe says war veterans do not want the opposition in power.



Mugabe -- Zimbabwe's only leader since that struggle ended in 1980 -- faces a June 27 runoff with Morgan Tsvangirai of the opposition Movement for Democratic Change (MDC).



Mugabe told supporters that Tsvangirai would turn the country back over to white control if he won the runoff.



The veterans he led in a successful effort against a government dominated by the white minority were not prepared to recognize a Tsvangirai victory, Mugabe said.



"They said they got this country through the barrel of gun, so they cannot let it go by a ballot," Mugabe said Thursday at a campaign rally in Murehwa.



Tsvangirai was arrested twice Thursday. He was released Friday, but police impounded his two campaign buses.



In the general election on March 29, the opposition won a plurality in parliament. Weeks after the election, the Zimbabwe Electoral Commission announced that Tsvangirai won a plurality against Mugabe but that he failed to get the needed majority, making a runoff necessary.



Human Rights Watch issued a report this week declaring the presidential election to be dead on arrival because of violence and intimidation by Mugabe's followers -- including war veterans - against opposition supporters.



Mugabe, at a rally in Chikomba District -- about 120 miles (200 km) south of Harare -- seemed to support that conclusion.  Learn more about Zimbabwe »



"These areas, where the party lost on March 29, need to be cleansed and I am confident this would be done on June 27 when we go to the polls."



Mugabe said the MDC was a party "for whites and not blacks." He also said the party was created and funded by the British.



"You saw the whites after the March elections running around thinking that they would repossess the farms," Mugabe said. "They thought they had won."



He said the opposition would not be allowed to "give it back to whites."



"Guard your country jealously," Mugabe told supporters.



Meanwhile, Zimbabwean authorities put more pressure on opposition figures Thursday, seizing a top leader and accusing him of treason.



Police and the MDC confirmed Tendai Biti's arrest and the charges he will face.



Biti, secretary general of the MDC, was arrested when he arrived in Harare, Zimbabwe, from South Africa.



Zimbabwe's national police spokesperson Wayne Bvudzijena told CNN that Biti would be charged with treason and the communication of false information.



The treason charge relates to a document published by the MDC before the March 29 vote which, the state alleges, contains subversive statements authored by Biti.

***

BERLIN, Germany (CNN) -- Six Italian men were shot dead in the German city of Duisburg on Wednesday in an execution-style killing linked to a mafia feud.



Police remove a body from the scene.



Italian Interior Minister Giuliano Amato said the shootings appeared to be linked to a feud between two mafia clans in the southern region of Calabria, home to the 'Ndrangheta organized crime group.



Here are some key facts about the group:



ORIGINS:



-- The Calabrian "Honored Society", known as "'Ndrangheta", in the Calabria region of south Italy is the equivalent of the Sicilian Mafia.



-- 'Ndrangheta began as a defense network for impoverished rural peasants against aristocratic landlords. Members emigrated to Canada and the United States, and were discovered running an intimidation scheme in Pennsylvania mining towns in 1906.



HOW DOES IT WORK?



-- They are known as "The Honored Society", Fibbia or Calabrian mafia. Instead of the pyramid structure of bosses used by other mafia, The 'Ndrangheta" uses families based on blood relationships, inter-marriages, or being a Godfather. Each group is named after their village, or after the family leader.



TWENTIETH CENTURY EXPANSION:



-- When Calabria began the process of industrialization and urbanization in the late 20th century, the 'Ndrangheta became interested in drug trafficking, weapons sales and public works and construction.



THE PRESENT:



-- In 2004, authorities uncovered an international drugs trafficking network involving gangs in South America, Australia, and Europe. Drugs from Colombia were destined for countries such as Greece and Bulgaria.



-- Italian officials estimated at the time that 80 percent of Europe's cocaine had arrived from Colombia via Gioia Tauro's docks in Reggio Calabria.



-- Italian anti-organized crime agencies have estimated that the 'NDrangheta earns about $30 billion annually, mostly from illegal drugs, but also from ostensibly legal businesses such as construction, restaurants and supermarkets.



-- There are believed to be about 100 'Ndrangheta families in Calabria, who have become more successful than their Sicilian counterparts because their family ties are closer. E-mail to a friend

***

ATLANTA, Georgia (CNN) -- I was 14 at the time. Lebanon's civil war was in full flood. One afternoon the shells began raining down on our neighborhood in Beirut.

A Lebanese woman and her son run through west Beirut in 1989 during fighting between rival forces.

We ran from school screaming. Forget the book bags, classmates, homework. Just run. Out of breath, my knees giving way, it seemed to take forever to reach our local shelter -- a dark humid room at the back of our apartment block.

The memory of that terrifying afternoon receded -- until recently. After more than a decade of relative peace and reconstruction, the bombings and assassinations have returned to Beirut.

Every time I hear of a new explosion, I think of a frightened child sitting in darkness.

In 1988, I watched the last throes of Lebanon's civil war firsthand -- and like millions of Lebanese, sad, frustrated and often fearful.  See a timeline of Lebanon's recent history »

Now I watch from another continent, but I find those same emotions resurfacing. The conspiracies, the car bombs, the threatening rhetoric and political deadlock are eerily familiar.

The actors are like shadows from a long gone past. They are grayer perhaps --  those who have avoided assassination. But the cast in Lebanon's tragedy has changed little in two decades. Then, as now, a presidential election is the setting, and the struggle where religion and clan play the main roles threatens to set Lebanon back 20 years.  See bios of Lebanon's major players »

In 1988, the president's term was coming to an end and the warring factions were unable to agree on a new candidate. Militias prevented parliament members from reaching the assembly building. Compromise was nowhere in sight.

The West had abandoned Lebanon to the manipulation of its neighbors. Syria had its choice for president; Israel had its own allies -- a foil for growing Muslim radicalism. The country was awash with weapons.

In his last act as president, Amin Gemayel named fellow Christian and Army Chief Michel Aoun as prime minister. At a stroke, he shattered the convention that a Muslim hold that position.

Muslims refused to serve in the Cabinet and the country ended up with two governments. Aoun famously declared: "I am prime minister and six ministers in one."

Aoun's "War of Liberation" against Syria turned into defeat. Then, he turned on fellow Christians of the Lebanese Forces in the "War of Elimination." When that failed, the Syrians drove Aoun to take refuge at the French Embassy.

In August 1990, I came to CNN as a World Report panelist. I tried to explain Lebanon's chaos, the bewildering array of factions and the horrors of civil war for ordinary civilians.

I had seen people killed in front of me; children orphaned in seconds, parents burying their infants in oversize white coffins. So when I was offered the opportunity to stay at CNN, I gratefully accepted the chance to escape the anarchy.

But almost as I left, the civil war was being laid to rest. The various factions had fought each other to a standstill; Arab governments, supported by the West, helped negotiate a new constitutional framework overseen by Syrian influence. Peace came to Lebanon, but it would be five years before I returned.

In 1995, I went back and was stunned. I kept looking around for checkpoints manned by militants. I couldn't believe that I could go anywhere without being harassed or kidnapped by one faction or another.

No longer did identity -- Christian, Muslim or Druze -- define where Lebanese could go. People mixed freely in chic coffee shops and smoked the hubble-bubble, laughing at the same jokes. It was as if Lebanon's divisions had been wiped away by some magic eraser.

Downtown Beirut, once rocked by explosions and pitted with bullet holes, was rocking to Lebanese pop music. The dusty sandbags had given way to boutiques carrying the latest European fashions and deluxe hotels. Lovers had returned to Beirut's Corniche, overlooking the Mediterranean,

***

(CNN) -- English club Birmingham City have released a statement to explain why co-owner and managing director were interviewed by police in a corruption probe.



Birmingham co-owner David Sullivan was interviewed by police on Wednesday night.



The Premier League outfit temporarily suspended share trading on the London Stock Exchange on Thursday morning after David Sullivan -- who owns the club with David and Ralph Gold -- was questioned and bailed by officers from City of London's economic crime unit along with MD Karren Brady.



The club released a statement on Thursday afternoon to "clarify the situation" before trading resumed at 1300 GMT.



"The City of London Police investigation is focusing on payments to a football agent and two players dating back to 2002-03," it said.



"There is absolutely no allegation that any director of the company or the club itself has benefited financially from any of this activity.



"In so far as there may be any implications for the company, these are not considered material to its financial affairs and they are in relation to the payment, or possible non payment of PAYE and National Insurance contributions.  The club and its directors are co-operating fully with the police in this investigation and will continue to do so."



Birmingham was raided by the unit last month as part of an ongoing investigation into corruption in English football. The club said at the time that the inquiries related to an unrelated third party.



Birmingham released a statement on Wednesday night confirming that Sullivan and Brady "willingly attended" the interviews "by long-standing appointment."



"Birmingham City Football Club is fully committed to helping the police with their inquiries," read a statement on the club's Web site.



Police confirmed that they questioned a 59-year-old man and a 39-year-old woman on suspicion of conspiracy to defraud and false accounting and that they were released on bail, the UK Press Association reported on Thursday.



A London Stock Exchange statement read: "At the request of the company trading on Aim for the under-mentioned securities has been temporarily suspended from 7.30 a.m., pending an announcement."



Shares in the company had been selling for 35.5p until the announcement half an hour before the start of trading, PA reported.



Sullivan, 59, was in 2004 named Britain's 68th richest man by the Sunday Times, with assets of more than $1 billion. He made his fortune through pornography and newspapers.



Brady, 39, became Britain's youngest managing director when Birmingham floated on the stock market in 1997 and is married to professional footballer Paul Peschisolido. She is also non-executive director of Channel 4, Mothercare and Sport England.



PA reported that she made no comment as she left her home in Knowle, Solihull, shortly before 8 a.m. today. Dressed in a dark suit, Brady left the gated property at the wheel of a black 4x4 Porsche.  E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- Critics took to the social networking site Facebook to voice their fury over Pope Benedict's remark that condoms do not prevent HIV.



Pope Benedict XVI's anti-condom comments have raised the ire of some Facebook users.



Thousands have pledged to send the pontiff millions of condoms to protest the controversial comment he made to journalists as he flew to Cameroon last week.



"You can't resolve it with the distribution of condoms," the pope told reporters. "On the contrary, it increases the problem."



Pope Benedict XVI has made it clear he intends to uphold the traditional Catholic teaching on artificial contraception. The Vatican has long opposed the use of condoms and other forms of birth control and encourages sexual abstinence to fight the spread of the disease.



About a dozen Facebook groups have sprung up, mostly from European countries, criticizing the pontiff.



"The clergy aren't supposed to have sex at all, but they are free to tell people how to conduct themselves? That's like a girl who wears no make-up as the CEO of CoverGirl," one member posted on the page, "Condoms for Pope Benedict XVI."



"It frightens me that a man who has devoted his life to moral guidance ... and is undeniably a learned, intelligent man can be at the same time so narrow-minded, bigoted and irresponsible," posted another person on a different page.



The online campaign added another voice to a deluge of criticism, which includes the governments of France, Germany and Belgium. Aid agencies and other health organizations have also chimed in.



The Lancet, a British medical journal, urged the pope Saturday to issue a retraction for the "outrageous and wildly inaccurate" statement to journalists aboard his plane.



"When any influential person, be it a religious or political leader, makes a false scientific statement that could be devastating to the health of millions of people, they should retract or correct the public record," The Lancet said in an editorial.



"Anything less from Pope Benedict would be an immense disservice to the public and health advocates, including many thousands of Catholics, who work tirelessly to try and prevent the spread of HIV/AIDS worldwide."



Some in the Catholic Church have rallied to the pontiff's support.



Cardinal Angelo Bagnasco, head of the Italian Bishops Conference, told Times Online in Britain that Benedict was simply pointing out that condoms "had not solved and could not solve the AIDS problem."



Despite the controversy, the pope's pilgrimage spurred excitement in Africa. An estimated 1 million people turned out to hear him preach a Mass in Angola on Sunday, the last major event of his trip. He spoke of the need for reconciliation in the country, which has endured a brutal civil war.



"Look to the future with hope, trust in God's promises and live in his truth. In this way you will build something that will stand and endure," he said.

***

Madison, Wisconsin (CNN) -- Republicans retained four of the six state Senate seats that were in jeopardy in Tuesday's recall elections in Wisconsin, news media in the state reported.





Democrats won two seats but needed three to take control.





The Wisconsin Government Accountability Board, which certifies election results, said official results will begin to come in Thursday and will be certified that day at the earliest. The unofficial results released Wednesday were collected by The Associated Press and distributed to newspapers, television and radio stations.





The recall election stems from the bitter battle last winter that saw pro-union protesters camping out in the state Capitol and Democratic senators fleeing the state in an unsuccessful attempt to halt legislation by Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker that some felt was anti-union.





Democrats were angling to win GOP-held seats to capture control of the upper chamber. Before the election, Republicans held a 19-14 majority in the state Senate. With a victory, Democrats had hoped to build momentum for a planned effort to recall Walker.





Walker, who was elected in November with strong support from tea party activists, can't be recalled until after he serves a year in office.





Republicans have countered with their own recall attempts against three Democrats.  One of them survived a challenge in July, while two others will be on the ballot next week.





Republican National Committee Chairman Reince Priebus applauded the results of the Tuesday vote.





"Today, Wisconsin voters rejected the reckless spending of Wisconsin Democrats and the downgrade-inducing policies of their Washington counterparts. They have given their seal of approval to Republicans' successful efforts to balance the budget and ensure a healthy economy,"  he said.





Priebus also said the vote was an affirmation of Walker's policies.





Walker set off a firestorm in January when he moved to curtail the collective bargaining rights of most state employees. With majorities in both houses of the Legislature, Walker and his GOP allies voted to limit raises for public employees except police and firefighters to the rate of inflation, bar unions from deducting dues from workers' paychecks and force them to hold a new certification vote every year.





Republicans insisted that the legislation was necessary to control skyrocketing public employee benefit costs and close a budget shortfall, while Democrats called it an attempt to gut public-sector labor unions, one of their core constituencies. The state Supreme Court upheld the legislation in June.





While Democrats would not have been able to roll back the union restrictions with control of only one chamber of the Legislature, they would have been able to block any of Walker's other initiatives.





Tea Party Express chief strategist Sal Russo said he was pleased about the vote.





"The importance of those achievements cannot be overstated," Russo said. "Wisconsin has set an example that the nation as a whole should follow."





CNN's Ted Rowlands, Gabriella Schwarz, Paul Steinhauser and Ashley Killough contributed to this report.

***

COMO, Mississippi (CNN) -- Mary Dowden smiles when she thinks about this moment in history. At 80 years old, she's the granddaughter of a slave who was born in a cotton field outside of Como, Mississippi.



Mary Dowden, 80, is the granddaughter of a slave. Barack Obama is bringing white and blacks together, she says.



It's difficult to put into words how she feels about Barack Obama, the issues so complex for a black country girl who lost both her parents by the age of 18 and then had to work a hard-scrabble life as a sharecropper.



"I was really afraid for him, because I didn't want nobody to kill him," she says when asked about casting her ballot for Obama.



But she pauses and smiles. "I'm awfully proud of him, as a black person."  Watch "white and black is coming together" »



Did she ever think she would see this moment?



"No, I didn't," she says. "I always thought that, you know, the white was over the black, that they was the leading folks, that one nation is gonna be over another one, and that would be the white over the black. I never thought it would be a black president."



With Obama's election, CNN.com traveled to the town of Como to talk with African-Americans about their experience growing up black in Mississippi and what this moment in history means to them.



Como is a town of 1,400 people 45 miles south of Memphis, Tennessee, along Interstate 55. It is a hard-hit rural community, home to a school with the dubious distinction of being among the worst-performing schools in the nation. In 2007, the IRS froze the town's bank accounts for not paying payroll taxes.



A railroad track cuts through the middle of town. Even to this day, blacks largely live on one side of the track; whites on the other side.  See the hard-scrabble life of a slave's grandson »



Dowden is a living testament to a life of struggle, sacrifice and ultimately success. When she was 10 years old, her mom cooked a dewberry pie after working the cotton fields all day. She then went to a friend's house and died.



"It was real devastating," Dowden says softly. "I was 10. My sister was 12, and we didn't know how to do nothing. And we had to take care of our little brother."



She missed one year of schooling because her father, Moses Wilson, couldn't afford schoolbooks. He died four days after she turned 18.



She had two photos of her parents, but they were lost over the years. She knows even less about her grandparents.



"All I know is, he said that his momma was sold. She was auctioned off," Dowden says. "I don't know where she was from. I don't know anything about her."



Dowden is a mother of 12. One son died when he was 3; another died when he was 47. "It was hard both ways."



Across town, a group of African-Americans have gathered at Cistern Hill Church to talk about the good times and the hard times -- and hope for a better future. They range in age from 74 to 18.  Watch "I started working when I was 6 years old" »



Aubrey "Bill" Turner, 26, perks up when talking about Obama.



"He's going to bring a sense of respect in Mississippi, that it's not just a white man's country. You can be young, you can be black, and you can do anything that you want to do," Turner says. "You do have a chance. And he's gonna put that all on the table for us."



Turner has a tattoo across his neck that reads "Mr. Ssippi." His grandfather was well-known fife musician Otha Turner, whose music was

***

(CNN) -- Almost nine years into the basketball legend's retirement, a new version of Michael Jordan athletic shoes can still send fans into a mad frenzy: Stores nationwide were the scenes of violence and police officer injuries Friday, authorities said.





In Richmond, California, police investigated a gunshot fired outside a mall where the latest version of shoes named after Jordan went on sale for about $180 a pair Friday morning, police told CNN affiliate KGO.





A 24-year-old Richmond man was taken into custody in connection with the gunfire, said police Lt. Lori Curran.





"It appears right now it may have been just a negligent discharge," Curran said.





Even as early as 1990, a new pair of Air Jordans was so coveted that youngsters became violent in stealing the shoes. Jordan and his Chicago Bulls won six NBA championships in the 1990s.





Thursday evening in Austin, Texas, three Foot Locker stores each drew 1,000 people for a midnight sale of the new Air Jordan Retro XI, replicas of a 1996 version of the shoe, and police shut down one mall when two police officers were injured, CNN affiliate KVUE reported. Police said each store had only 150 pairs of the shoes, the station reported.





One of the officers was taken to a hospital after he was rushed by the crowd and suffered bruises and a rolled ankle, KVUE said. Police are reviewing surveillance tapes to find the assailant, police said, according to the station.





"It's been crazy," one woman shopper named Andrea told KVUE, adding that officers threatened to use mace on crowds. "People have been trying to run over the officers to get in the building."





At a suburban Seattle mall Friday, police used pepper spray to bring order to an unruly crowd of 2,000 shoppers seeking the new shoe, said Mike Murphy of the Tukwila, Washington, Police Department.





The Seattle area store wasn't prepared to handle such a large crowd, Murphy said. CNN affiliate KIRO reported that crowds lined up Thursday night for the sale, which started at 4 a.m. Friday.





In Lithonia, Georgia, police took four people into custody after a mall's doors were damaged, CNN affiliate WSB reported. Also, police questioned a mother who witnesses said left her kids, ages 2 and 5, in a car as she went into the mall to buy the shoes, WSB reported.





In Charlotte, North Carolina, police were called to three malls after crowds became rowdy, CNN affiliate WCNC reported. At one mall, customers pried open a door at 6 a.m. Friday, and one person was arrested for resisting an officer, the station reported.





In Taylor, Michigan, a Detroit man was charged with attempting to incite a riot after 300 people became unruly waiting for the mall to open Friday morning, police Cmdr. Mary Sclabassi told CNN.





In Louisville, Kentucky, public safety dispatchers said they received a report of 75 to 100 people in a fight over the shoes at a mall, CNN affiliate WDRB reported.





In Indianapolis, Indiana, police dispatchers said officers at the mall were "having problems" after the shoes apparently sold out, and additional officer were sent to help manage the crowd of about 300 people, CNN affiliate WISH said. The crowd ripped doors off their hinges, police said, according to WISH.





On Friday afternoon, eBay was featuring new pairs of the Air Jordan Retro XI selling between $219.99 and $510.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN)  -- Some $700 million in economic stimulus money intended to upgrade baggage screening systems at airports will go further than originally expected, Department of Homeland Security officials said Wednesday.



The new systems can process up to 500 bags an hour, compared to the 150 to 160 bags per hour on the older machines, the TSA said.



The DHS said the money will now upgrade systems at 10 additional airports. Earlier this year the DHS announced funding for baggage screening at airports in 15 cities.



The money will be used to speed up construction of in-line baggage screening systems, which take advantage of the airline's existing conveyor belt systems to check bags, eliminating the need for minivan-size bomb detection systems now found in many airport lobbies.



Government auditors have long complained about existing systems, which the Transportation Security Administration rushed into place to meet congressional deadlines after the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.



At airports with in-line systems, airline workers at the ticketing counters place the bags on conveyor belts, which pass through explosive detectors on their way to the aircraft. That is more efficient than stand-alone systems, which the TSA employees must staff.



In addition, in-line systems can process up to 500 bags an hour, compared to the 150 to 160 bags per hour processed by stand-alone machines, the TSA said.



Department of Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano said in a statement that DHS was able to "stretch our resources" by managing the recovery money and by negotiating with airports.



In addition to the $700 million intended for checked baggage systems, $300 million is being allocated for checkpoint technology, such as new X-ray machines, "whole body imaging" technology and bottled liquid scanners.



The new airports expected to get stimulus money for in-line explosive detection systems are:



• Washington Dulles International Airport (Chantilly, Virginia)



• Lambert-St. Louis International Airport (St. Louis, Missouri)



• Yellowstone Regional Airport (Cody, Wyoming)



• William P. Hobby Airport (Houston, Texas)



• St. Petersburg/Clearwater International Airport (St. Petersburg, Florida)



• Gallatin Field Airport (Bozeman, Montana)



• Little Rock National Airport (Little Rock, Arkansas)



• Tulsa International Airport (Tulsa, Oklahoma)



• Charlotte Douglas International Airport (Charlotte, North Carolina)



• Colorado Springs Airport (Colorado Springs, Colorado)



Earlier this year, DHS announced funding for airports in the following cities: Atlanta, Georgia; Columbus, Ohio; Dayton, Ohio; Honolulu, Hawaii; Huntsville, Alabama; Jackson, Wyoming; Maui, Hawaii; New Orleans, Louisiana; Orange County, California; Orlando, Florida; Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Portland, Maine; and Sacramento, San Francisco and San Jose, California.



To learn more about the DHS Recovery Act projects, visit www.dhs.gov/recovery.

***

(CNN) -- Rebel attacks north of Goma in the Democratic Republic of Congo prompted thousands more civilians to flee Tuesday, and U.N. officials said a U.N. convoy trying to provide security near Goma also was attacked.



Thousands of displaced Congolese on Tuesday line the road near the Kibati camp north of Goma, Congo.



"Five rockets were fired on two U.N. armored personnel carriers that were part of the convoy of MONUC Blue Helmets near Kalengera," according to a report on the Web site of the U.N. Mission in the Democratic Republic of Congo, known by its French acronym, MONUC.



"MONUC reiterates that under its mandate it will continue to intervene with all of its means to ensure the protection of civilians and to protect the urban centers of North Kivu," MONUC said, referring to the province in eastern Congo.



The attacks by rebels of the National Congress for the Defense of People, or CNDP, led civilians to seek refuge in Goma, the provincial capital, where national army forces surround the city, said MONUC spokesman Jean-Paul Dietrich.



He said U.N. helicopters flew overhead to provide cover until darkness fell, when the aircraft were grounded for the night.



Dietrich said a U.N. official in Goma reported that the town of Rutshuru had been captured, although he had not confirmed the information with the military. Rutshuru is a territorial capital about 37 miles (60 kilometers) north of Goma. The U.N. convoy that officials said was attacked was providing security on the road from Rutshuru.



Dietrich said clashes between the rebels and government forces had taken place during the day in scattered locations.



Bertrand Bisimwa, a spokesman for the rebels, told The Associated Press the rebels' front lines are within within 12 miles (19 kilometers) of Goma, a city of 600,000.



U.N. refugee agency spokesman Ron Redmond said the Kibati camp for displaced persons tripled in size in a matter of hours Tuesday, The AP reported.



Congolese hurled rocks at U.N. armored personnel carriers that were headed away from the fighting, according to an AP report.  Watch as Congolese throw rocks at tanks »



"What are they doing? They are supposed to protect us," AP quoted displaced person Jean-Paul Maombi as saying.



Between 800,000 and 1 million displaced persons are living in camps run by the United Nations and other organizations in the area, Dietrich said, including about 150,000 people who came to the camps after August 28.



"I think right now it's a very delicate situation," he added.



The spokeswoman for the U.N. mission in Goma, Sylvie van den Wildenberg, said the situation in Goma is under control for now. "We have reinforced our presence there."  Watch as crowds target U.N. offices in Goma »



On Monday, U.N. gunships supported army forces as they fired on the CNDP rebels in an effort to halt their advance on Kibumba, to the north, Wildenberg said.



"We have put all our resources on alert to deter any further progression, trying to contain the aggression in those areas. CNDP is not listening to anyone anymore," she said.



Renewed fighting erupted Sunday when the CNDP, led by renegade Gen. Laurent Nkunda, seized a major military camp and gorilla park just one week after a U.N.-brokered peace accord, according to U.N. and park officials.



The rebels, according to Wildenberg, are surrounding areas where displaced persons are housed as a "strategy used to put more pressure on government and on the international community to get some of their requests satisfied. This is unacceptable and a violation of humanitarian law."



Although the civil war in Congo officially ended in 2003, recent fighting in eastern Congo between government forces and rebels has displaced thousands. Fighting and the related humanitarian crisis have killed some 5.4 million people since 1998, and 45,000 people die there every month, according to an International Rescue Committee report in January.

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- He is iconic, there's no doubt.



George Hamilton gets his life story on screen in "My One and Only."



With the elegant suit and tie, the impeccable grooming, the tan (Did I mention the tan?), George Hamilton is still a charmer, and he comes across like a born bon vivant.



Sure, his acting may have taken a backseat to his bronzed visage years ago, but what did happen to him years ago? Well, there's a story there, one now coming to the big screen. Hamilton's formative years are loosely depicted in the film "My One and Only," opening in wide release September 4.



"My One and Only" has the style of a film produced during Hollywood's golden age, but the tale is easily relatable to today. In the film, Hamilton's mother, Anne, played by Academy Award winner Renee Zellweger, walks in on her bandleader husband and another woman. She hits the road in a brand new Cadillac Coupe de Ville with her two sons, George and Robbie, en route to find a new husband and a new life.  Watch a preview of 'My One and Only' »



Hamilton, 70, spoke with CNN about the film, old Hollywood and his mother. The following is an edited version of the interview.



CNN: There is a lot of heartache in this story. Why did you want to share it?



George Hamilton: I don't know that I really did want to share it. It's a fictional story based on a real story loosely about me. And I went to the movie to hate it.



And I looked at the movie and I thought, my God, [Zellweger] looks nothing like my mother, but she was able to portray the emotions just the way it was then. I couldn't speak. I was completely overwhelmed by what Renee did. That's a great actress.



CNN: Do you think that your mother shaped your life more than your father?



Hamilton: I think they're kind of like sand and a rock, kind of -- you keep rubbing up against them and they form you.



I knew that I was the man of the family from the time I was 10, 12 -- you know, I had to be. But I knew I had to get away from it. So I signed onto military school. Then my mother said, if you're bad I'm sending you to your father, and I said, send me. I ... lived a whole year with my father -- I got to know him, I got to understand the two sides to the story. My mother didn't say bad things about him. I presumed that he was this foreign person who left and abandoned us. He didn't at all.



And when I made it in Hollywood and I didn't want to be an actor, there they arrived. It was their triumph, not mine. I wanted to be a doctor.



CNN: Now in hindsight, do you understand what your mom was doing?



Hamilton: That's a very good question. No, I didn't, I didn't get her. What I knew was I would work -- I was ... with people who had millions of dollars, and they just accepted me, and I would go out and buy a tuxedo in the thrift shop, and go to the coming-out party of a very wealthy socialite, and they would say oh, now chic. You wore your grandfather's or your father's tuxedo. And I had bought it for $5.



And I realized there was a whole reverse way of acting, and people just presumed you were old money, and I played that. That was my game. But when I looked at my mother I realized that she was born almost like a child, with the theory that we would be divinely supported. Always trust that, don't be afraid. Poverty, or [being] poor, is a mentality, it

***

(CNN)  -- It is possible more U.S. troops could be added in Afghanistan if the new U.S. commander there needs them, but Defense Secretary Robert Gates said he does not expect a significant increase.



U.S. Marines sweep for bombs in  Afghanistan this week.



During a visit to troops at Fort Drum, New York, on Thursday, Gates said he is waiting to hear what Gen. Stanley McChrystal recommends after he completes a review of operations in Afghanistan.



McChrystal is expected to complete a classified report for Gates by the end of this month, assessing  where the war stands, and what needs to be done.



He will tell Gates whether he needs more U.S. troops to fight the escalating conflict, according to a senior U.S. military official.



Gates asked McChrystal  to "state his requirements for resources," said the official -- who did not want to be identified because the report is not completed.



The review is also expected to recommend that the number of Afghan troops be increased beyond the goal of 134,000, other military sources said.



During a speech and question-and-answer session with troops at Fort Drum, Gates acknowledged he would consider a recommendation to boost U.S. troops beyond the level of 68,000 already approved.



"We'll see what Gen. McChrystal recommends," he said. "But I think there will not be a significant increase in troop levels in Afghanistan beyond the 68,000, at least probably through the end of the year. Maybe some increase, but not a lot."



Gates has made clear in the past he is reluctant to approve additional major increases in troop levels, preferring to keep the U.S. at a lower profile in the nation.



About 57,000 U.S. troops are in Afghanistan, with the other 11,000 to arrive by the end of this year. Gates has said he wants to see if that level of troops would be sufficient.



Gates' press secretary, Geoff Morrell, told CNN the Fort Drum comments "are not necessarily a foreshadowing of what's to come."



He said Gates "doesn't want to impose an artificial troop cap on the commander," but does want to see if the strategy can be carried out with the approved troop levels.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Former GOP presidential nominee John McCain warned Wednesday that the United States is losing the war in Afghanistan.

Sen. John McCain recommended expanding the Afghan army to between 160,000 and 200,000 troops.

The Arizona senator, the ranking Republican on the Senate Armed Services Committee, said that while he approved of President Obama's recent decision to send 17,000 more troops to the country, he believed an additional allied military and civilian surge would be necessary to prevent it from once again becoming an al Qaeda safe haven.

The Obama administration is conducting a review of overall U.S. policy in the troubled Islamic republic, the president said in his joint address to Congress on Tuesday.

"With our friends and allies, we will forge a new and comprehensive strategy for Afghanistan and Pakistan to defeat al Qaeda and combat extremism," Obama said Tuesday. "Because I will not allow terrorists to plot against the American people from safe havens halfway around the world. We will not allow it."

But McCain said on Wednesday, "When you aren't winning in this kind of war, you are losing. And, in Afghanistan today, we are not winning." He delivered his remarks at the American Enterprise Institute, a Washington-based think tank.

McCain claimed that while the situation in Afghanistan is "nowhere near as dire as it was in Iraq," the number of insurgent attacks had spiked in 2008 and violence had increased more than 500 percent in the past four years.

Growing portions of the country "suffer under the influence of the Taliban," he added.

McCain's comments echoed those of Defense Secretary Robert Gates, who acknowledged last Friday that the United States is facing a "very tough test" in Afghanistan.

"But I'm sure we will rise to the occasion the way we have many times before," Gates told a news conference in Krakow, Poland, where NATO defense ministers were meeting.

McCain said that the U.S. was winning the war in Afghanistan through early 2005, when some troops were withdrawn and "our integrated civil-military command structure was disassembled and replaced by a Balkanized and dysfunctional arrangement."

A Vietnam War veteran, former prisoner of war and longtime member of the Armed Services Committee, McCain said that while he knows Americans "are weary of war ... we must win [in Afghanistan]. The alternative is to risk that country's return to its previous function as a terrorist sanctuary, from which al Qaeda could train and plan attacks against America."

Among other things, McCain stated that the U.S. needs to establish a larger military headquarters capable of executing "the necessary planning and coordination for a nationwide counterinsurgency campaign."

He also said plans to expand the Afghan army from 68,000 to 134,000 troops were insufficient. He recommended expanding the Afghan army to between 160,000 and 200,000 troops.

At the same time, he said, the U.S. needs to boost the country's nonmilitary assistance to help strengthen "its [civilian] institutions, the rule of law, and the economy in order to provide a sustainable alternative to the drug trade."

Southern Afghanistan provides about two thirds of the world's opium and heroin. Over the years, those two drugs have served as a major source of revenue for the insurgency, including the Taliban.

McCain warned that, even if his recommendations are adopted, the violence in Afghanistan is "likely to get worse before it gets better. The scale of resources required to prevail will be enormous."

The timetable, he concluded, "will be measured in years, not months."

***

Jerusalem (CNN) -- Palestinian negotiators put forward proposals on security and borders during talks with Israeli representatives in Jordan, Palestinian media reported Tuesday.





Israel's special envoy, attorney Yitzhak Molcho, and chief Palestinian negotiator Saeb Erakat met in Amman with representatives of the Middle East Quartet -- made up of the United States, the European Union, the United Nations and Russia -- in an effort to relaunch negotiations after more than a year of deadlock.





Jordanian Foreign Minister Nasser Judeh told reporters that "serious and constructive talks" had taken place, the official Palestinian Authority news agency WAFA said.





He said the talks focused on the two-state solution, according to the Jordanian state news agency Petra.





The Israelis said they would consider the Palestinian proposals, and the two sides agreed to meet again in Jordan, the agency cited Judeh as saying.





However, no significant breakthrough was made, Judeh acknowledged. "The gap is wide between the two sides on all issues," he is quoted as saying by WAFA. "The issues are complicated and we do not expect to resolve them in a day or two."





Petra quoted Judeh as saying, "We don't want to raise the expectations about this meeting and we don't want to underestimate its importance in the same time."





Peace talks between Israel and the Palestinians fell apart more than a year ago over disagreements on the issue of Israeli settlements in the West Bank.





In September, Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas made a bid for the United Nations to recognize a Palestinian state, a move Israel called premature without direct talks to address its long-standing security concerns.





Filling the vacuum created by the removal of Egypt's former President Hosni Mubarak, Jordan's King Abdullah has taken a more active role in trying to bridge the gulf between Israelis and Palestinians.





In November, King Abdullah made a rare visit to the Palestinian political capital of Ramallah in the West Bank, followed by a meeting in Amman a week later with Israeli President Shimon Peres.





The United States has voiced its support for the new initiative.





"We are hopeful that this direct exchange can help move us forward on the pathway proposed by the Quartet," Hillary Clinton, the U.S. secretary of state, said Sunday night in a statement. "The status quo is not sustainable and the parties must act boldly to advance the cause of peace."





But while both sides thanked the Jordanian government for its role in bringing about the meeting, few expected any serious breakthroughs.





Speaking to Voice of Palestine radio beforehand, Erakat said the meeting would not constitute the resumption of negotiations, but rather would be one that could lead to the restarting of talks.





Former Quartet participant and American diplomat Robert Danin wrote Sunday for the Council on Foreign Relations that, while the resumption of contacts between the two sides would be a positive development, it "inadvertently makes the situation on the ground riskier."





"Abbas is returning to talks without attaining his long-standing demand that negotiations resume with an Israeli settlement freeze," Danin wrote. "Unless he can demonstrate quickly that talks produce tangible benefits for the Palestinians, he will feel compelled to break them off."





This, Danin said, could add impetus to Abbas concluding ongoing talks with Hamas about forming a Palestinian unity government -- an idea vehemently opposed by representatives of Israel and the United States, who consider the Islamist group a terrorist organization.





Sami Abu Zuhri, a spokesman for Hamas, said Monday he was surprised by the meetings. He said Hamas considered them a repetition of a failed initiative and called on the Palestinian Authority to cancel the meeting Tuesday with Israeli representatives.





Hamas spokesman Fawzi Barhoum told CNN that the meeting of the Palestinians with the Israeli occupying forces "is a mockery."


Israeli government spokesman Mark Regev told CNN last week that "if Mahmoud Abbas walks toward Hamas, he is walking away from peace."





CNN's Kevin Flower contributed to this report.

***

LOS ANGELES (CNN)  -- Pop singer Britney Spears must submit to random drug tests, a judge has ordered after finding she engaged in "habitual, frequent, and continuous use of controlled substances and alcohol."



Kevin Federline and Britney Spears are in the middle of a bitter custody battle over their two sons.



The ruling by Superior Court Commissioner Scott Gordon provided no details and did not name any specific drugs, stating only that the findings were "based on the evidence presented."



Spears must also spend eight hours a week working with a parenting coach who will observe her interactions with her children, according to the ruling released Tuesday.



Efforts to contact the singer's lawyers, Marci Levine and Mel Goldman, were unsuccessful late Tuesday.



The ruling comes during Spears' custody battle with ex-husband Kevin Federline.



The documents underscore the bitter nature of the fight over their two sons, Sean Preston and Jayden. The two have split custody equally, but Federline is asking for the arrangements to be shifted to 70-30 in his favor.



After a closed hearing Monday, Gordon ordered Spears, 25, to undergo random drug tests twice a week. He told both parents to avoid alcohol or "other non-prescription controlled substances" 12 hours before taking custody of the children.



He also barred the exes from making "derogatory remarks about the other party and the other party's family or significant other" during the case, ordered them to go through "joint co-parenting counseling" and barred them from using corporal punishment on the boys.



Spears and Federline were married for two years before their divorce was finalized in July. Federline's attorney, Mark Vincent Kaplan, told reporters on Monday he didn't see the custody battle being resolved before scheduled hearings in November and December.



Tuesday's order comes amid a career freefall for Spears, who has a new album due in stores November 13. Critics said her September 9 "comeback" performance on the MTV Video Music Awards was lackluster and said she appeared overweight in her sequined, two-piece costume.



Her former divorce lawyer, Laura Wasser, resigned as her legal representative in the past few days after defending her outside the courthouse on Friday, telling reporters the singer "just wants to be a mom."



And Spears' management company, the Firm, has quit after representing the singer for a little more than a month.



"It saddens us to confirm media reports that we have terminated our professional relationship with Britney Spears," the company announced Monday. "We believe Britney is enormously talented and has made a terrific record, but current circumstances have prevented us from properly doing our job. We wish Britney the best." E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- Brazil turned on the style to defeat their South American rivals Chile 3-0 on Monday and set up a World Cup quarterfinal against the Netherlands.





The five-time world champions, who showed little of their usual dazzling play during the group phase, sent an ominous warning to their rivals as they comprehensively outplayed Chile in Johannesburg, with Juan, Luis Fabiano and Robinho all on target.





"We have to improve in all sectors of our play, but it was a nice game against Chile," Brazil coach Dunga told AFP.





"We have already said we are trying to play the open football which everyone wants to see. The players did well and we got forward a lot.





Dutch outclass Slovakia to reach quarters





Brazil, who welcomed playmaker Kaka back from a one-match ban, took the lead after 34 minutes from a straightforward corner routine.





Right-back Maicon crossed for central defender Juan, who rose above the Chilean defense to power his header into the net.





Brazil's second goal, four minutes later, was more characteristically Brazilian in its style and execution.





Robinho carried the ball down the left flank before squaring to Kaka, who cushioned a pass into the path of Luis Fabiano, who rounded the goalkeeper and scored.





The third goal, after 60 minutes, stemmed from a swift counter-attack, with Ramires charging down the center with the ball and passing to Robinho, who curled his finish around the goalkeeper.





Chile, who reached the semifinals on home soil in 1962, struggled to break down a well-drilled Brazilian back line and were restricted to half chances for Humberto Suazo and Jorge Valdivia.





Robinho came close to adding a fourth when he was released down the right, but his low shot was tipped around the post by goalkeeper Claudio Bravo.





The victory was Brazil's eighth in a row over Chile, who became the first South American side to go out of the tournament.





Brazil will play the Netherlands in the quarterfinals in Port Elizabeth on Friday, July 2.





"We know the Netherlands are a very difficult team to beat and they are very able technically, they play their football like South Americans," said Dunga.





Meanwhile, the president of the French Football Federation Jean-Pierre Escalettes said he will resign following the country's disastrous World Cup showing.





France, the 1998 winners and 2006 runners-up, were eliminated in the group stage after collecting just just one point and scoring one goal in a campaign marred by infighting.





"After a weekend of reflection during which I consulted my elected colleagues and those close to me, I have decided that I must resign," Escalettes said in a statement on the federation website.

***

Editor's note: Reza Sayah is one of the few Western journalists reporting from Tehran after the Iranian government placed restrictions on coverage.



A man in the crowd holds up a photo of Ahmadinejad during Khamenei's address at Friday prayers.



TEHRAN, Iran (CNN) -- People in the crowd sang songs of tribute as they waited.



When he arrived, they stood and welcomed him in unison: "Praise be to God and to his prophet, Mohammed."



Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, Iran's supreme leader for two decades, took the stage during Friday prayers at Tehran University with a few notes on small pieces of paper in his left hand. He leaned on the lectern with his right arm, crippled in an 1981 assassination attempt.



He was ready to put an end to a week of unrest.



First, a sermon about the dangers of division and disunity, using the language of Islam. Then came secular sentences, decidedly direct.



He praised the huge turnout at the polls as a victory for Iran but criticized post-election turmoil as the work of Iran's enemies -- the United States, Israel and Britain.



"The enemies want to destroy our confidence. They want to create doubt about the election," Khamenei said.



A full hour passed before he delivered a verdict that supporters of opposition presidential candidate Mir Hossein Moussavi did not want to hear.



"Eleven million votes difference?" he asked. "Sometimes there's a margin of one hundred thousand or two hundred thousand, or one million, maximum. Then one can doubt, be concerned that there has been some rigging or manipulation.



"But there's a difference of 11 million votes. How can vote rigging happen?"



To be clear, he reminded the crowd of the victor at the polls. It was the man sitting in the front row: Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad.



He was the "the absolute victor," Khamenei said.



"If political elites want to ignore or break the law and willy-nilly take wrong measures which are harmful, they will be held accountable for all violence and  blood and rioting."



Few in the crowd were disappointed with the cleric's words. "Death to America!" the people chanted repeatedly, interrupting Khamenei's speech. "Death to Israel."



Noticeably absent Friday was Moussavi, the man who had sparked Iran's unrest by calling for a recount of the votes. Absent, too, were Moussavi's supporters, who did not take to the streets to protest as they had done in previous days. There were no signs and placards on the streets. Or people clamoring for change.



The tens of thousands who showed up for Friday prayer were a stark contrast to the demonstrators. They were mostly religious conservatives, supporters of Ahmadinejad.



And they had a message for the president's opponent, though it was not always consistent. Some were conciliatory. "The nation should come together," one said. "We are all one."



Others took a hard line: "They must stop with the demonstrations, otherwise there will be consequences."



Just what those consequences might be may become apparent Saturday afternoon, when the demonstrators are expected again on the streets of Tehran.



But for now, Iran's supreme leader had issued his warning clearly: Enough is enough.

***

Los Angeles, California (CNN) -- Actor Corey Haim was the "poster child" for the problem of addicts "doctor shopping" for dangerous drugs, California's top law enforcement official said Tuesday.





Investigators found that the former child actor was supplied with prescriptions for five controlled substances by seven doctors in the last 10 weeks of his life, Attorney General Jerry Brown said.





"Corey Haim actually obtained 553 dangerous drugs in just this year, as late as five days before he died," Brown told reporters at a news conference in Los Angeles.





The drugs included Vicodin, Valium, Soma, Oxycontin and Xanax, Brown said.





The coroner has not yet ruled on what killed Haim, 38, who died last month after collapsing at the Los Angeles apartment he shared with his mother.





Toxicology lab results are expected to be available this month for Haim, who battled drug addiction for decades.





Haim visited several emergency rooms and urgent care clinics with complaints of an injured shoulder or depression issues, according to Sara Simpson, head of the state task force investigating doctor shopping.





Los Angeles County Deputy Coroner Ed Winter revealed last month that Haim obtained drugs using prescriptions written under the names of 20 Los Angeles doctors in the past year. The coroner subpoenaed medical records from those doctors.





Haim also obtained at least one prescription of Oxycontin through the use of an illegally obtained prescription pad, Brown said.





State agents arrested one person last month in connection with what Brown said was a massive drug ring that obtained and sold the counterfeit doctor's pads.





Although Haim battled drug addiction for decades, his manager said his death came when Haim "was making major progress" with a program to wean him from pills.





Still, Haim sometimes threatened to find other doctors to prescribe him drugs when his primary physician wouldn't give him what he wanted, manager Mark Heaslip said Monday.





"I would be the only one who could talk him out of it," Heaslip said Monday night.





His doctor was providing pills only in one-day supplies in an effort to wean him, Heaslip said.





Haim's primary care doctor would constantly follow up with urgent care centers that he believed were writing prescriptions for Haim, Heaslip said. The doctor later gave the information to investigators, he said.





Simpson confirmed to CNN that Haim's doctor was helping investigators.





Haim had a prescription for the muscle relaxer Soma and the narcotic pain reliever Norco filled at a pharmacy February 26, a source with knowledge of the transaction told CNN. Two days after Haim picked up the drugs, his primary care doctor called the San Fernando Valley pharmacy to ask about the prescriptions, the source said.





An autopsy revealed that Haim suffered from pneumonia, an enlarged heart and water in his lungs when he collapsed March 10, Winter said.





Heaslip said he and Haim's family are convinced his death was not from a drug overdose, but was perhaps a bad reaction to a single pill he took in the hours before his death.





The pills, prescribed by an addiction specialist, came with a warning that they should not be taken by someone with a heart condition or flulike symptoms, both of which Haim had, Heaslip said.





"This kid was making major progress," Heaslip said.





His manager said that if Haim was cheating on his addiction program, he would probably not have admitted it to him since he would have dropped Haim as a client.





Haim began his acting career in 1982, with his first television appearance on the Canadian series "The Edison Twins." His first film role was in the 1984 American movie "First Born."





Haim also won rave reviews for his title role in the 1986 film "Lucas." Film critic Roger Ebert said of him at the time, "If he continues to act this well, he will never become a half-forgotten child star, but will continue to grow into an important actor."





His most famous role was in the 1987 movie "The Lost Boys," in which Haim played a fresh-faced teenager whose

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- President George W. Bush granted pardons Tuesday to 19 citizens charged with a variety of crimes, but none was prominent.

President Bush walks down the White House Collonade on Tuesday as he departs for Camp David.

Presidential pardon lists are being closely monitored in the final weeks of the Bush administration, particularly to see whether former vice presidential aide Lewis "Scooter" Libby will be granted the presidential favor.

One of the men pardoned is Charles Winters, who died almost 25 years ago. His son had worked on winning a presidential pardon for his dad, who had helped smuggle weapons to Jews fighting in what was then Palestine in the late 1940s.

A Protestant from Boston, Massachusetts, Winters spent 18 months behind bars. He was the only U.S. citizen to serve time for helping fly weapons to Jews struggling to create Israel.

A 20th person received a commutation of a life sentence for possession of methamphetamine with intent to distribute. That individual, Reed Raymond Prior, was ordered released from prison in February 2009. He will have served more than 12 years.

"We commend President Bush's decision to grant a commutation to Reed Prior, who is deserving of a second chance," Julie Stewart, president of Families Against Mandatory Minimums, said in a written statement.

"Of course, clemencies only underscore the larger problem -- the systemic injustice caused by mandatory minimum sentences that fill the prisons with low-level drug offenders in the first place."

Bush has granted 191 pardons and nine commutations, far fewer than Presidents Clinton and Reagan in their two-term administrations. Read the full list of pardons

Among the more notable who have applied for some form of clemency are:

• Former Rep. Randall "Duke" Cunningham, Republican from California, who was convicted of receiving bribes. • Publishing executive Conrad Black, who was found guilty of fraud. • Former junk bold salesman Michael Milken. • Former WorldCom CEO Bernard Ebbers, convicted of accounting fraud.

The parents of John Walker Lindh, who was given a 20-year sentence after pleading guilty to supporting terrorists in Afghanistan, held a news conference last week urging Bush to commute their son's sentence.

It is unclear how many more requests Bush may grant before leaving office, although administration officials have said they do not expect any last-minute announcements, as was seen when President Bill Clinton pardoned fugitive financier Marc Rich, setting off a firestorm of controversy.

A commutation reduces a convict's prison term, but the conviction remains on the person's record. A pardon, however, wipes the slate clean by erasing the record of the conviction.

A president has the sole authority to grant clemency and to whom, although a Justice Department office usually reviews applications and makes recommendations after considering standards such as a person's degree of remorse and ability to lead a responsible and productive life after release.

Those applying for a pardon through the Justice Department are required to wait at least five years after their conviction or release from confinement.

Roughly 1,300 requests for commutation and 860 pardon applications are still pending.

There is a long tradition of presidents issuing pardons and commutations during the holiday season.

***

(CNN) -- Hundreds of people attending Comic-Con in San Diego, California, will transform into zombies on Thursday.



A "zombie walk" at Comic-Con will promote the upcoming "Zombieland" movie.



They'll converge in a "zombie walk" through the San Diego Convention Center to promote Woody Harrelson's upcoming post-apocalyptic comedy, "Zombieland."



Comic-Con is an annual gathering of 125,000 people whose interests include comic book and science fiction film and TV, anime, toys and video games. Major movie studios and TV networks use the convention to launch their latest productions.



Zombie movies have been on the rise in recent years, and the type of zombies on the big screen has been evolving with the times.



George Romero's 1968 film "Night of the Living Dead" -- followed by "Dawn of the Dead" -- popularized zombies "based on the original Haitian voodoo kind of zombie, the supernatural being, the walking dead or the undead," said "Zombieland" director Ruben Fleischer.



Zombie films made "a seismic shift in zombies with Danny Boyle's film '28 Days Later,' where it became a more viral-based thing, a diseased population, as opposed to from the grave," Fleischer said.



In "Zombieland," living people are infected by a fast-spreading virus that turns them into "this other being" that is fast, ferocious and flesh-eating, he said.



"These modern zombies are reflective of some of the perils of what can happen with overpopulation and disease control and how quickly things can spread and become a problem." iReport.com: Going to Comic-Con?



Fleischer, along with screenwriters Rhett Reese and Paul Wernick, consulted a disease expert "to get to the bottom of what the modern pandemic would be," he said.



"When swine flu happened, it was after we finished shooting, but it just really reminded me of how these things can spread so quickly and a whole population can be devastated," he said.



While about 500 extras were hired to be zombies in Fleischer's movie, even more Comic-Con participants could take part in Thursday's zombie walk. Sony has hired professional makeup artists to get them ready.



Fleischer said those portraying a modern zombie should think like "a rabid dog."



Don't lumber along like Frankenstein's monster, but move with "a real furious anger and intensity" and "a lot of grunting and snarling and growling," he said. "Zombies don't talk."



Hunger is a modern zombie's chief motivation, he said: "I think that they're definitely cannibalistic. They want to eat people."



What does a modern zombie wear?



Fleischer's zombies come as they are, whether in a work uniform or dressed for the mall.



"It's as if you were at the mall and some zombies attacked and everyone there got turned into a zombie," he said. "They'd be wearing the same clothes that they had before. They'd be dressed in the same way."



Fleischer developed a list of 150 types of zombies for his film, including construction workers, moms, a punk rocker and preppie zombies.



"They're just people who got infected, like a modern pandemic," he said.



"Zombieland" -- which hits theaters October 9 -- brings out the humor in killing zombies, which is Harrelson's specialty.



"They're not easy to kill, so sometimes you've got to get them more than once," Fleischer said. "You've got to make sure you get them because they'll keep coming if you don't."



Harrelson blamed post-traumatic stress from filming for his scuffle with a TMZ photographer at an airport the day after shooting wrapped in Georgia in April.



"With my daughter at the airport I was startled by a paparazzo who I quite understandably mistook for a zombie," Harrelson said.



While Harrelson will be at Comic-Con to promote the movie, it was

***

Islamabad, Pakistan (CNN) --  The militants behind Wednesday's deadly strike on a Pakistani marketplace that killed at least 90 people -- most of them women -- are "on the losing side of history," U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said at a joint news conference with her Pakistani counterpart.



"If the people behind the attacks were so sure of their beliefs let them join the political process, let them come forth to the people and make their case that they don't want girls to go to school, that they want women to be kept back, that they believe they have all the answers," Clinton said in response to the car bombing in Peshawar.



"They know they are on the losing side of history but they are determined to take as many lives with them as their movement is finally exposed for the nihilistic, empty effort that it is."



Pakistani Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi also condemned the deadly attack, offering his condolences to the victims and their families and directly addressing the attackers.



"We will not buckle, we will fight you because we want stability and peace in Pakistan," Qureshi said. "You are on the run and we know that. We defeated you in Swat and Malakand. You think by attacking innocent people and lives you will shake our determination? No, sir, you will not."



The blast at the Meena Bazaar killed at least 90 people, most of them women, and injured more than 200 others, according to North West Frontier Province's information minister. The market is a labyrinth of shops popular with women in the Peepal Mandi section of the city.



The attack is the deadliest ever carried out in Peshawar, the capital of North West Frontier Province.



Clinton arrived in Pakistan on Wednesday for a series of meetings with top Pakistani officials.



Talking with reporters en route to the country, Clinton said she wants to "turn the page" on what has been, in the past few years, "primarily a security-anti-terrorist agenda."



"We hold that to be extremely important, and it remains a very high priority," she said. "But we also recognize that it is imperative that we broaden our engagement with Pakistan."



Clinton said there have been "a lot of misconceptions" about American intentions.



"We have a relationship that we want to strengthen, but we don't want it to be lopsided. We don't want it to be just about security and just about our anti-terrorist agenda," she said.



"It is unfortunate that there are those who question our motives, who perhaps are skeptical that we are going to commit to a long-term relationship, and I want to try to clear the air up on that while I am in the country," she said.

***

CHICAGO, Illinois (CNN)  -- At a debate in front of thousands of labor union activists Tuesday, Sen. Barack Obama's Democratic presidential rivals blasted him for his remarks about Pakistan.



Last Wednesday, the Illinois senator said that if it were necessary to root out terrorists, he would send U.S. forces into Pakistan without the country's approval.



"You can think big, but remember, you shouldn't always say everything you think if you're running for president, because it has consequences around the world," Sen. Hillary Clinton said during a 90-minute Democratic presidential forum in Chicago sponsored by the AFL-CIO.



Chicago is Obama's hometown, and Clinton's statement drew boos. The New York senator responded, "We don't need that right now."



Despite the frosty reception, Connecticut Sen. Chris Dodd joined Clinton in criticizing Obama. He said Obama's stance could undermine Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf, the country's military ruler, who has been a U.S. ally in the fight against al Qaeda.



"While General Musharraf is no Thomas Jefferson, he may be the only thing that stands between us and having an Islamic fundamentalist state in that country," Dodd said.



"So while I would like to see him change, the reality is, if we lose him, then what we face is an alternative that could be a lot worse for our country."



Obama jumped into the fray.



"I find it amusing that those who helped to authorize and engineer the biggest foreign policy disaster in our generation are now criticizing me for making sure that we are on the right battlefield and not the wrong battlefield in the war against terrorism," he said.



"If we have actionable intelligence on al Qaeda operatives, including [Osama] bin Laden, and President Musharraf cannot act, then we should," Obama said. "That's just common sense."



He also said Americans had the right to participate in the debate over such a key aspect of American foreign policy.



But Clinton countered by saying that while U.S. forces might have to pursue action inside Pakistan "on the basis of actionable intelligence," it was "a very big mistake to telegraph that and to destabilize the Musharraf regime, which is fighting for its life against the Islamist extremists who are in bed with al Qaeda and the Taliban."



"Remember, Pakistan has nuclear weapons. The last thing we want is to have al Qaeda-like followers in charge of Pakistan and having access to nuclear weapons."



Sen. Joe Biden of Delaware responded later in the debate, noting that the strategy Obama outlined was already U.S. policy.



"Everyone's entitled to their own opinion, but not their own facts," Biden said. "It's already the policy of the United States -- has been for four years -- that there's actionable intelligence, we would go into Pakistan." E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- An armed airman who allegedly barricaded himself inside a building on a Colorado air base is awaiting sentencing on unrelated charges and will likely face additional charges, the base said Tuesday.





Airman 1st Class Nico Cruz Santos, 21, surrendered to authorities late Monday night after an hours-long standoff with authorities at Schriever Air Force Base. No one was injured.





"While there are lessons to be learned from every situation, by and large yesterday's incident was resolved with the best possible outcome," said Col. James Ross, 50th Space Wing commander, in a Tuesday statement. "Our law enforcement and community partners worked together to ensure the security of our mission and people while helping this airman through a troubling situation."





The airman -- who belongs to the base's 50th Security Forces Squadron -- locked himself around 10 a.m. inside a building where personnel get paperwork and equipment before being deployed, said Lt. Marie Denson, a spokeswoman at the Colorado Springs base.





Soon thereafter, that building and the surrounding area was evacuated. Law enforcement units and other first responders from the Schriever base, nearby Peterson Air Force Base and the El Paso County, Colorado, Sheriff's Office SWAT team rushed to the scene, Lt. Col. Harold Hoang said.





The man was armed with a personal handgun, authorities said.





He also had his cell phone, which he had been using -- along with a land-line phone -- to communicate with military officials outside. Mental health professionals were also on site, Denson said.





The airman "is currently facing legal action in a civilian court as well as disciplinary action and possible discharge from the Air Force," Hoang said.





The base said in a statement Tuesday that Santos is awaiting sentencing in Gilpin County on unrelated charges earlier this year.





"It is expected that once the investigation of yesterday's incident is complete that additional charges may be filed in either the military or civilian court systems," the statement said. The incident remained under investigation Tuesday.





Santos was being held in a Teller County detention facility, the base said.





Schriever Air Force Base is also home to the Space Innovation and Development Center, the Missile Defense Agency, 310th Space Wing and other units and groups, according to its website.





CNN's Larry Shaughnessy, Greg Botelho and Ashley Hayes contributed to this report.

***

KATHMANDU, Nepal (CNN) -- Nepalese authorities Thursday detained at least 650 Tibetan exiles protesting against China's policies in the province ahead of this weekend's Olympic torch relay in Tibet, security officials in Kathmandu said.



A protester is grabbed by Nepalese police during a demonstration in Kathmandu.



Police also arrested and charged three local Tibetan community leaders with organizing the protest, after seizing them from their homes Thursday morning.



It is the largest single-day round-up of Tibetan protesters in Nepal since the demonstrations broke out in March following China's bloody crackdown on protesters in Tibet.



It is also the first time that Nepalese authorities have charged any Tibetan exiles in connection with the protests.



Nepalese police forcefully dragged some of the protesters to awaiting vans and drove them to police stations across the capital. Tibetan exile groups said 900 protesters were detained Thursday.



Authorities said the three arrested leaders -- two women and a man -- were responsible for the near-daily protests since March and will be held for 90 days under Nepal's public security act.



"They have been arrested for damaging the diplomatic relations between Nepal and China," said civilian security officer Jaya Mukunda Khanal.



The two women arrested and charged for organizing the protests were Ngwang Sangmo, president of Tibetan Women's Association, and Tashi Dolma, vice president of the association.



Also charged was Kelsang Chung, director of the Tibetan Reception Center, which helps Tibetan refugees in Nepal emigrate to India, where the Tibetan spiritual leader, the Dalai Lama, lives in exile.



While they are the first Tibetan exiles formally arrested, protesters have previously been detained and released hours later.



The crackdown comes days before the Olympic torch relay in Tibet.



The torch relay wrapped up in China's Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region on Wednesday, and will continue in Tibet's capital of Lhasa on Saturday, according to China's Olympic Web site.

***

(CNN) -- Cambodia and Thailand have agreed to redeploy some troops away from the site of a border temple at the center of a tense military standoff in its second week.



Thai soldiers take a rest near the Preah Vihear temple in Preah Vihear province.



The decision came after the two sides met to resolve the impasse.



Government officials from both nations plan to meet again to decide how many troops will remain at the site of the Preah Vihear temple, the Thai News Agency reported Monday.



At a later meeting, the two sides plan to discuss how to tackle the thorny issue at the center of the ongoing dispute -- the question of whether land around the temple belongs to Thailand or Cambodia.



The 11th century temple sits atop a cliff on Cambodian soil but has its most accessible entrance on the Thai side. The two countries differ on whether some territory around the temple forms part of Thailand or Cambodia.



The decision to redeploy troops took place after a Monday meeting in Siem Reap, Cambodia.



Last week, an eight-hour meeting between Thai and Cambodian officials ended with both sides agreeing on only one point: that troops each country has amassed at the site of the temple will not fire on each other.



The International Court of Justice awarded the temple to Cambodia in 1962. Thailand claims, however, that the 1.8 square mile (4.6 sq. km) area around it was never fully demarcated.



Thailand says the dispute arose from the fact that the Cambodian government used a map drawn during the French occupation of Cambodia -- a map that places the temple and surrounding area in Cambodian territory.



This month, the United Nations approved Cambodia's application to have the temple listed as a World Heritage Site -- a place the U.N. says has outstanding universal value.



The decision re-ignited tensions, with some in Thailand fearing it will make it difficult for their country to lay claim to disputed land around the temple.



Opposition parties in Thailand used the issue to attack the government, which initially backed the heritage listing.



Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Sen, who has been in power since 1985, portrayed the U.N. recognition as a national triumph in the run-up to the general elections.



Analysts believe that the nationalist sentiments stirred up by the military standoff helped Hun Sen's ruling party win enough seats in Sunday's parliamentary elections so that it can form a government without the need for a coalition.



The current flare-up began July 15, when Cambodian guards briefly detained three Thais who crossed into the area. Once they were let go, the three refused to leave the territory.



Cambodia claims Thailand sent troops to retrieve the trio and gradually built up their numbers. Thailand denies that, saying its troops are deployed in Thai territory.

***

(CNN) --   He performed to a watching audience of millions at the closing ceremony of the Beijing Olympic Games, but conducting the Hong Kong Philharmonic Orchestra has been the most nerve-wracking thing the American-Chinese pop star Wang Leehom has undertaken for some time.

From the Olympics to holding the baton himself, Leehom has tackled a variety of projects.

"I think I always throw myself in these impossible situations and then see if I can scramble out of them and gain something from these experiences," he told CNN during rehearsals for the December performances.

"Standing in front of the orchestra was intimidating at times, but I think we got through it, and I think we made some exciting waves in town. We definitely got the crowd excited about it."

Leehom has certainly made waves with his Mandarin-language pop music, having sold around 15 million records, but as his recent foray in classical music confirms, he's more than just another voice with an interesting haircut.

Growing up in the U.S. to a family of doctors, he excelled at school but decided to take a different path to his parents.

After shunning the opportunity to study at an Ivy League university, he spent some time at Williams College of liberal arts before getting his big break in pop in Taiwan in 1995. At that time he admits he knew nothing about Chinese music and didn't speak Mandarin.

Learning Mandarin was just another challenge Leehom rose to meet and he believes that having Chinese as a second language has been to his advantage, and his interest in the linguistics of the language has led to some of his more innovative work.

"I always think for artists to take their shortcomings and turn them around and make them into what define them as an artist is a real trick," he told CNN.

"I think it's a wonderful thing for people to understand how language can be transformed and mutilated for musical reasons and actually bring out something special orally," he said.

Musically he's often been put in the same box as Mando-pop sensation Jay Chou, and has similarly has been the subject of rumor about ever aspect of his life, from his school grades to his sexuality.  Watch Wang Leehom talk about his rivalry with Jay Chou ».

Adding his face to a number of endorsements, the pressures of being in the public eye have made him become increasingly protective of his privacy.

"It's definitely changed me. It's like some defense mechanism I guess, to just be private, to keep things to myself, to protect myself or my loved ones. I am the same person, but just a different way of life," he said.

However it hasn't stopped him from branching out and taking on an acting career. He made his big screen debut in 2000 in the Hong Kong action flick "China Strike", but it was his role in Ang Lee's international success "Lust, Caution" that brought him wider international attention.

As for taking on new projects in the future, be they film, singing or even holding the baton once again, Leehom will stay true to his policy of challenging himself with different ventures.

"Sometimes it gives me a lot of trouble, sometimes it ends up launching a career which has been very good for me," he said.

***

(CNN) -- Ed McMahon, the longtime pitchman and Johnny Carson sidekick whose "Heeeeeeerre's Johnny!" became a part of the vernacular, has died.



Ed McMahon had suffered several health problems in recent years.



McMahon passed away peacefully shortly after midnight at the Ronald Reagan/UCLA Medical Center, his publicist, Howard Bragman, said Tuesday



McMahon, 86, was hospitalized in February with pneumonia and other medical problems.



He had suffered a number of health problems in recent years, including a neck injury caused by a 2007 fall. In 2002, he sued various insurance companies and contractors over mold in his house and later collected a $7 million settlement.



Though he later hosted a variety of shows -- including "Star Search" and "TV's Bloopers and Practical Jokes," McMahon's biggest fame came alongside Carson on "The Tonight Show," which Carson hosted from 1962 to 1992. The two met not long after Carson began hosting the game show "Who Do You Trust?" in 1957. iReport.com: Share your memories of Ed McMahon



"Johnny didn't look as if he was dying to see me," McMahon, who was hosting a show on a Philadelphia TV station, told People magazine in 1980 about the pair's first meeting. "He was standing with his back to the door, staring at a couple of workmen putting letters on a theater marquee. I walked over and stood beside him. Finally the two guys finished, and Johnny asked, 'What have you been doing?' I told him. He said, 'Good to meet you, Ed,' shook my hand, and I was out of the office. The whole meeting was about as exciting as watching a traffic light change."  Watch McMahon discuss meeting Johnny Carson »



Though McMahon was surprised to be offered the job as Carson's sidekick, the two soon proved to have a strong chemistry. Carson was, by nature, introverted and dry-witted; McMahon was the boisterous and outgoing second banana, content to give Carson straight lines or laugh uproariously at his jokes (a characteristic much-parodied by comedians).  Watch Comedian Joan Rivers recall McMahon »



Carson made cracks about McMahon's weight, his drinking and the men's trouble with divorce. McMahon was married three times; Carson, who died in 2005, had four wives.



McMahon was also the show's designated pitchman, a talent he honed to perfection during "Tonight's" 30-year run with Carson, even if sometimes the in-show commercial spots fell flat.



For one of the show's regular sponsors, Alpo dog food, McMahon usually extolled the virtues of the product while a dog eagerly gobbled down a bowl. But one day the show's regular dog wasn't available, and the substitute pooch wasn't very hungry.



McMahon recalled the incident in his 1998 memoir, "For Laughing Out Loud."



"Then I saw Johnny come into my little commercial area. He got down on his hands and knees and came over to me. ... I started to pet Johnny. Nice boss, I was thinking as I pet him on the head, nice boss. By this point the audience was hysterical. ... I just kept going. I was going to get my commercial done.



" 'The next time you're looking at the canned dog food ...' -- he rubbed his cheek against my leg --  ... reach for the can that contains real beef.' Johnny got up on his knees and started begging for more. I started petting him again ... and then he licked my hand."



McMahon also promoted Budweiser, American Family Insurance and -- during the most recent Super Bowl -- Cash4Gold.com. Entertainment Weekly named him No. 1 on its list of TV's greatest sidekicks.



Edward Leo Peter McMahon Jr. was born in Detroit, Michigan, on March 6, 1923. His father was a promoter, and McMahon remembered moving a lot during his childhood.



"I changed towns more often than a pickpocket," McMahon told People.



He later joined the Marines and

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- FIFA will announce its Player of the Year for 2008 at a ceremony in Zurich today, and here is a look at the leading contenders for the award.



Favorite: Portugal and Manchester United star Cristiano Ronaldo is in line for the FIFA award.



To see the full list of contenders for the prize and vote for who you think should win, click here.



Cristiano Ronaldo (Manchester United, Portugal)



Ronaldo has emerged as favorite for the award after he and his Manchester United club enjoyed a superb season. The Portugal international was a central figure in the club's English Premier League, UEFA Champions League and World Club Championships titles. He scored 42 goals in the season. Critics would say he didn't perform well enough on the international stage, as Portugal exited at the quarter-final stage of Euro 2008, and Ronaldo was disappointing. However, he has already picked up the Ballon d'Or award for Europe's player of the year, and for the previous three years the winner of this has gone on to claim the FIFA prize (Ronaldinho, Fabio Cannavaro and Kaka).



Lionel Messi (Barcelona, Argentina)



Messi appears to be Ronaldo's main challenger for the prize -- if public opinion matters, anyway. Messi won an Olympic gold medal with Argentina and made a stunning start to the current season with Barcelona. In the Primera Liga his 10 goals early in the season helped open up a significant gap on the side's main rivals, and he has also scored five goals in the UEFA Champions League season. The 21-year-old is often compared to Argentina's legendary Diego Maradona.



Fernando Torres (Liverpool, Spain)



The Spaniard enjoyed an incredible first season in the Premier League -- scoring 24 league goals for Liverpool -- a new record for a foreign striker in his debut season. After that success he went on to Austria-Switzerland and played an integral part in Spain's Euro 2008 victory, scoring the winning goal in the final. If top-level international performances are the key to this award then Torres should go close.



Iker Casillas (Real Madrid, Spain)



Casillas was recently awarded the Best Keeper of the World in 2008 title by the International Federation of Football History and Statistics. Casillas played a large part in helping his Real Madrid side to the Spanish La Liga title, put in strong performances in the UEFA Champions League, and was a key part of Spain's Euro 2008-winning team.



Xavi Hernandez (Barcelona, Spain)



Also part of the Spanish team which won Euro 2008, Xavi claimed the Player of the Tournament award, which would make him a worthy winner of the FIFA Player of the Year. Aside from his stunning performances at Euro, Xavi scored seven goals for Barcelona last season, and was one of their standout players, while this season he has continued his good form and helped Barcelona to the top of La Liga.

***

JAKARTA, Indonesia (CNN) -- Another strong earthquake rocked Indonesia early Thursday as the Southeast Asian nation was reeling from an earlier jolt that killed more than 200 people.





A resident stands next to building that collapsed onto a car in Padang, Indonesia, on Wednesday.





The 6.8 magnitude quake Thursday hit southern Sumatra at 8:52 a.m. local time (0152 GMT), the Pacific Tsunami Warning Center said. Wednesday's earlier quake was 7.6 magnitude.





At least 236 people are dead and more than 500 injured, the Indonesian Social Ministry's Crisis Center said Thursday. It said it had little information on the missing and feared the death toll would climb into the thousands.





The second quake was on a smaller scale than the first, said meteorology official Fauzi, who uses only one name. There were no damage reports yet.





Indonesian Health Minister Siti Fadilah Supari expected "the casualties and the damage of this earthquake to be bigger than the 2006 Yogyakarta earthquake, given the intensity and the spread of the damage."





The magnitude-6.3 Yogyakarta quake in central Java in May 2006 killed more than 5,000 people, triggered fears of an eruption of a nearby volcano and caused significant damage to a 9th century Prambanan temple.





Thousands may be trapped by collapsed buildings and houses, Rustam Pakaya, the head of the Health Ministry's crisis center, told CNN on Wednesday.





State-run Antara news agency cited Pakaya as saying he had received reports that part of a hospital had collapsed and that people were buried under the debris.





The temblor struck around 5 p.m., about 33 miles (53 kilometers) from Padang, the capital city of West Sumatra and home to more than 800,000 people.





The quake caused widespread power and phone outages, making it difficult to assess damage.





Aid agencies kicked into gear to help those in need.





"We had aid ready because this area of Indonesia is susceptible to this type of tragedy," said Jane Cocking, humanitarian director for Oxfam. "Communications with the quake-zone are difficult and we are hoping for the best but having to plan for the worst."





"The situation is quite devastating," said Amelia Merrick, the operations director for World Vision Indonesia.





"Bridges have gone down, phone lines are in total disrepair. It's difficult for us to assess the situation," she said. The organization had said it would send assessment teams to the area Thursday morning.





"We know there's no electricity tonight... many of the families will be spending the night outdoors, in pitch black. I'm very afraid of what might happen next," she said, referring to the possibility of aftershocks.





Hundreds of houses have been damaged, Wayne Ulrich, the Red Cross disaster management coordinator in Indonesia, told CNN. "We do not know the [exact] numbers."





"We have concerns that a hospital has been partially damaged, a market has caught on fire, the airport was closed down for inspection because of the fear if they landed any planes," it might cause problems, Ulrich said.  Watch Ulrich discuss the rescue efforts »





Access to the affected areas was obstructed in parts, he added.





It's "blocked by all kinds of problems: frightened people out in the streets, cars, and people trying to get out of the city."





The earthquake was felt in nearby cities, such as Medan and Bengkulu, where people panicked and ran outside in search of higher ground, fearing a tsunami.





But it was also felt as far away as Singapore and Malaysia.





"I did feel the tremor in office today somewhere between 5 - 6 p.m.," said Ratna Osman, who works in a single-story office building in Petaling Jaya, just outside Malaysia's capital Kuala Lumpur.





"I asked [a co-worker] if there's an earthquake somewhere -- either that or I was hallucinating."





"At first, I thought the chair I was sitting on had a screw loose or something," Osman said.





The region is accustomed to earthquakes, and locals

***

WASHINGTON (CNN)  -- A form of liquid morphine used by terminally ill patients will remain on the market even though it is an "unapproved drug," according to a decision by the Food and Drug Administration.

Last month, the FDA warned nine companies to stop selling unapproved pain-relief drugs.

After talking with hospital and hospice organizations, which expressed concern that taking the product off the market would result in hardship for terminally ill patients and their caregivers, the agency decided to extend the usage of morphine sulfate oral solution 20 mg/ml.

The agency wants to ensure there is no shortage of the drug while patients wait for an approved product to take its place.

"While the FDA remains committed to ultimately ensuring that all prescription drugs on the market are FDA approved, we have to balance that goal with flexibility and compassion for patients who have a few alternatives for the alleviation of their pain," Dr. Douglas Throckmorton, deputy director of the FDA's Center for drug Evaluation and Research, said Thursday.

"In light of the concerns raised by these patients and their health-care providers, we have adjusted our actions with regard to these particular products."

Last month, the FDA sent warning letters to nine companies telling them to stop manufacturing 14 unapproved narcotics that are widely used to treat pain.

Seven of those companies made or distributed the oral morphine.

The morphine elixir is widely used by terminal patients in hospital and home hospice care settings and is manufactured by Lehigh Valley Technologies Inc., Mallinckrodt Inc. Pharmaceuticals Group, Boehringer Ingelheim Roxane Inc. and Cody Laboratories, Inc.

In its warning letter last month, the agency gave the companies 60 days to stop manufacturing the drug before enforcement action was taken.

Thursday's announcement did not prompt immediate reactions from the companies. A spokesman for Cody Laboratories said the firm did not have all the details of the decision. Other companies did not immediately return calls from CNN.

The FDA estimates there are several thousand drugs, mostly older products, marketed illegally without FDA approval in this country. Once an illegally marketed drug is identified, enforcement action begins because the agency does not have information on the quality of these drugs and has not had an opportunity to approve their labeling. In 1976 the agency began a program to bring companies manufacturing these drugs into compliance.

Thursday's announcement applies only to the morphine sulfate elixir 20mg/ml, and the warning letters sent to the other product manufacturers are still in effect.

Currently there are no approved morphine sulfate oral solution 20mg/ml products on the market. Until there are, the FDA says it will allow companies making and distributing the unapproved drugs to continue, until 180 days after any company receives approval to manufacture a new morphine replacement drug of the same dosage.

The FDA says it expects all companies marketing unapproved drugs to submit the necessary applications to get approval for those drugs.

***

Editor's note: CNN affiliates report on where job seekers are finding work across the country and how those looking for employment are coping with the situation.



Baltimore Mayor Sheila Dixon, shown in April, once worked in a city jobs program as a youth.



(CNN) -- Some of the stimulus money from the U.S. government is going to programs that help young adults find jobs.



In Baltimore, Maryland, the city wants to put more than 7,000 to work, mostly in local government jobs. It will use more than $6 million from the federal government and sponsorship money, according to WBAL-TV in Baltimore.



Baltimore Mayor Sheila Dixon recalled her days as a young worker.



"I worked at a camp, and then in high school, I was able to continue to work in the program," she said. Read the full report on WBAL



In Palm Beach Gardens, Florida, Kahtoya Wesley, 20, has had difficulty finding a job, but she has a better chance of finding work now because she has joined the Summer Youth Employment Program, according to WPBF-TV in West Palm Beach.



So far 200 people have landed jobs through the program, an initiative of the Workforce Alliance of Palm Beach County, WPBF reported. The organization is using $3 million of stimulus money to fund the positions the young adults find, the station said. iReport.com: Share your job hunt story



The group also prepares the job seekers for interviews and provides seminars in how to deal with work-life situations.



"I got fired like five times. It was bad," John Hill told WPBF. He chose a seminar on working better with a supervisor.



"Because I usually don't," he told the station. Read the full report on WPBF



The state of Arkansas is using federal money to fund jobs for at-risk students in Springdale, according to KHBS-TV in Fort Smith, Arkansas.



The town's youth center hired five teens to work in clerical and maintenance positions, KHBS reported. David Cook told the station he has had trouble motivating himself to go to school. The summer job was helping him with a shift on focus.



"It gives me a sense of responsibility of showing up on time, working on a schedule and with other people," he told KHBS. Read the full report on KHBS



West: FedEx center brings 650 jobs to Oregon



Even before a new FedEx shipping center brings hundreds of jobs to Troutdale, Oregon, it is helping with employment through road construction jobs, according to KPTV-TV in Portland.



The new hub, which is expected to be completed in July 2010, will bring more than 1,000 additional cars to the area, so the Oregon Department of Transportation called for two additional lanes at a nearby major intersection, KPTV reported.



FedEx is expected to employ 650 workers at the facility once it opens, according to KPTV.



"We're creating family wage jobs, because this project will take place this summer," Troutdale Mayor Jim Kight told the station.



Oregon's unemployment rate was a record 12.4 percent in May. Read the full report on KPTV



South: No job? Create your own



He was once a senior loan officer who had been laid off and was looking every day for a job anywhere there might be an opportunity.



When he couldn't find the right chance, he created his own.



Kenneth Hodge is now a small business owner, the founder of SFG Records.



"If you look at your failures, if you stare at your failures too long, you'll never go anywhere," Hodge told WPBF. "But if you look beyond your failures, you can move to and fulfill your dreams. You can do that. I think I can do that, and we are doing that."



Six recording artists are featured on his Web site, and Hodge told the West Palm Beach station that he has already hired seven employees. Read the full report on WPBF



Midwest: Iowa town sees trickle-down effect from stimulus



Federal stimulus

***

(CNN) -- Described as "serious," "intelligent" and a "good strategic planner" by a former colleague, Louis Neal ReVille worked in child-related jobs for a decade prior to his arrest last month in a case involving criminal sexual conduct with a minor, officials said Wednesday.





The former Citadel cadet-turned-camp counselor now faces a series of sex charges, including three counts of criminal sexual conduct with a minor and three counts of lewd act on a minor, according to Mount Pleasant, South Carolina, police.





"Those of us who worked with him were in complete shock," said Brent Egan, school board chairman of Coastal Christian Preparatory School, where ReVille, 32, served as vice principal. "He was just very effective (in his job as an administrator). He was a serious, intelligent guy, and a good strategic planner."





In 2007, The Citadel received an allegation from a former camper that, five years earlier, ReVille had invited a boy into his room at The Citadel Summer Camp to watch pornography. Another camper was also present. They did not touch each other, but engaged in sexual activity, The Citadel said. On Monday, the military college in Charleston, South Carolina, said authorities there should have pursued the matter further at the time.





The Citadel has said a review of ReVille's records in 2007 revealed no other complaints, and his file included a clean background check. He was a highly respected cadet and denied the accusation, the school added.





The case has drawn national attention in the wake of the Penn State child sex abuse scandal involving former coach Jerry Sandusky. Sandusky faces 40 counts in what authorities allege was the sexual abuse of eight boys. The case also led to the ouster Penn State President Graham Spanier and head football coach Joe Paterno. Both Penn State and The Citadel have come under fire for how authorities at each institution handled the separate accusations.





Citadel accuser says there are more victims





"It's amazing the number of places he worked at and volunteered," said Ken Ayoub, director of Mount Pleasant, South Carolina's recreation department where in the summer of 2001 ReVille began volunteering as a children's tennis coach. "He's a married guy. It's all just very disturbing."





Ayoub said each volunteer undergoes criminal background checks, and that ReVille's had come up clean.





The volunteer role was one of many involving children that ReVille, nicknamed "Skip," pursued throughout his career.





The former Alabama resident first took a job as a summer counselor at the South Carolina military college in 2001, one year before he graduated, according to a statement from the school.





There he worked with groups of children between the ages of 10 and 15 during two summer sessions at the college, the school said.





A year later, ReVille became a foster parent for the South Carolina Department of Social Services, said Marilyn Matheus, a spokeswoman for the agency.





Between 2004 and 2006, he assumed child-care responsibilities that included providing room and board to children who commonly suffer from abuse or neglect, said Matheus.





His volunteering continued at Charleston's Moultrie Middle School before taking a job as vice principal at the state's Coastal Christian Preparatory School, according to Egan.





Egan said ReVille "seemed to have a genuine interest in doing things the best way possible." He added that the former vice principal was "involved in his church" and had been pursuing advanced studies at Charleston Southern University.





ReVille's attorney, Craig Jones Jr., has said his client is sorry for what he did, according to CNN affiliate WCBD.





"Hopefully the way he's cooperated, that's one way he can hopefully show ... do what he can to help the victims to whatever extent he can," Jones said. "There's no way that, obviously, he can repair the damage that's been done."





An attorney who represents the camper who originally reported the alleged abuse to The Citadel told reporters on Monday that the victim's family had asked the college

***

Alhambra, California (CNN) -- At first, the pool builder thought his Bobcat bulldozer struck garbage as he dug a hole in a residential backyard. After all, in the older neighborhoods of San Marino, California, people used to bury their garbage.





But the plastic bag didn't contain trash.





Jose Perez, operating the Bobcat with his father as a co-worker, asked his dad what was inside. His father grabbed an 18-inch piece of reinforcement bar to poke around.





"He looked inside it, and he mouthed to me that there were bones in it," Perez testified Wednesday in a Los Angeles County court. "He thought it was a dog, but it didn't look like a dog.





"I told him to drop it, and he did," Perez continued. "It was a human skull."





As the prosecution witness referred to the plastic bag and the pool digging project in a photograph on a big screen in court, defendant Christian Karl Gerhartsreiter, in a blue jail jumpsuit, stared intently at the scene where prosecutors accuse him of murdering a man in 1985.





The skull was found nine years later, on May 5, 1994, Perez testified.





The testimony was evidence that Los Angeles County prosecutors began presenting during a preliminary hearing for the German-born Gerhartsreiter, who has garnered renown for impersonating a Rockefeller and inspiring a movie about the caper. He is now accused of killing a Southern California man who has been missing since the mid-1980s.





Frank Sheridan, a forensic pathologist, testified the skull suffered at least one blow to the forehead and at least two blows to the right side. The several fractures were made at or about the time of death, said Sheridan, who is also the medical examiner of San Bernardino County in California.





The shape of two fractures also indicated an object with a curved surface, such as a baseball bat, was used to deliver the blows, Sheridan said under questioning by a prosecutor.





"This individual was alive when these fractures occurred," said Sheridan, who examined a reconstructed version of the skull. In his career, he has performed 8,000 autopsies, he said.





"There's a lot of force involved in these blows," Sheridan added. "Each one of them would have rendered the person unconscious.





"The injuries we're talking about here would have very clearly been fatal in the absence of medical care, and they could have been fatal even with medical care," he said.





At the pool construction site, investigators eventually found nearly the entire skeleton of a man whose height was between 5 feet 4 inches and 5 feet 7 1/2 inches, testified Judith Daye, a physical anthropologist who worked for the Los Angeles County's coroner office and reviewed the bones at the site.





The missing bones included a kneecap, four fingers and a few toes, a common occurrence with buried remains, "especially the hands and feet because the bones are very small," Daye testified.





Many discovered bones were inside clothing that was wrapped in plastic, such as the pelvis inside jeans and the upper torso bones inside a shirt, Daye testified.





The preliminary hearing, to determine whether Gerhartsreiter should be bound over for trial, is expected to last six days, said Sandi Gibbons, a spokeswoman for the Los Angeles County District Attorney's Office.





Gerhartsreiter, 50, is accused of killing John Sohus, who was 27 at the time of his 1985 disappearance. His mother once owned the San Marino home where the remains were found.





During the Wednesday hearing, Los Angeles County Judge Jared Moses rejected a defense request that Gerhartsreiter be referred to as "Mr. Rockefeller" in court. The defense attorney said he and other attorneys on the team knew Gerhartsreiter as "Mr. Rockefeller."





But the judge said: "I get individuals in court who have a number of akas," a police term meaning "also known as," but "I have never seen a circumstance in court where a person is referred to by one of his akas."





Gerhartsreiter, who has

***

(CNN) -- Any kid can dream up a roller coaster. But those who visit a new exhibit at Walt Disney World's Epcot theme park can actually take a ride on their fantasy creations.



An artist's rendering of the "Sum of All Thrills" interactive ride, opening Wednesday at Disney World.



Epcot on Wednesday opened a new attraction called "Sum of All Thrills," which lets kids use computer tablets to design a virtual roller coaster, bobsled track or plane ride. After inputting their designs, kids climb into a robotic carriage that uses virtual-reality technology to help them experience the ride they've created.



"This is really the next generation -- where there's a lot more personalization involved" in the amusement-park experience, said Eric Goodman, Disney's lead project manager on the ride.



This make-your-own-ride approach appears to be a growing trend in the world of amusement parks and museums. Taking cues from the video game industry, park and ride designers have realized that people -- especially young ones -- want to interact with and even design their own thrill rides.



In addition to the new Epcot ride in Orlando, Florida, two Disney theme parks feature a ride called "Toy Story Mania," which lets riders shoot at targets as they roll down the track and, in doing so, shape their own ride experience. Another Disney attraction, CyberSpace Mountain, caters to adults and kids by letting them customize their own virtual ride from a menu of drops, loops and other features.



Universal Studios in Florida opened a roller coaster in August called the "Hollywood Rip Ride Rockit," which lets people create their own personal musical soundtrack for their ride.



Interactive rides are in the "baby stages" so far, since roller coasters and theme-park attractions are so expensive to build, but interaction and personalization promise to be running themes in the industry, said Bob McTyre, president of Apogee Attractions, which has has helped design rides for Disney, Universal Studios and others.



McTyre was not involved in the new ride at Epcot.



He said theme park designers frequently bring up ideas such as roller coasters with three possible endings, allowing riders to choose which path to take.



But those big ideas quickly hit a roadblock: the high costs of implementing such a project, he said.



Shawn McCoy, vice-president of marketing and business development at Jack Rouse Associates, another amusement-park design firm, said this desire for interactivity in amusement parks takes its cues from video games.



"There's also a definite need to compete with video games or the gaming industry -- where [players] have control over all of the elements, from the environment to the players' movement," he said, noting that museums and zoos also are taking notice of the trend.



The "Sum of All Thrills" ride at Epcot employs a robotic arm -- more commonly seen assembling cars at an auto plant -- to let kids experience their roller coaster creations.



Sitting in a carriage with their legs and arms outside the ride, kids watch a video version of their ride while the arm moves them from side to side and up and down to simulate the feeling of a real roller coaster. Fans blow air at the riders at various speeds to give people the sensation that they're moving forward.



Goodman, the Disney designer, said the robotic arm and carriage come "pretty darn close" to replicating the real roller coaster experience.



Kids design their experience on touch-screen computers, using a digital ruler and pre-selected track options to construct their rides. If a person tries to build something physically impossible -- a hill that's too steep for the cars to climb, for example -- then they're asked to retool their ideas.



Disney hopes the interactive nature of the Epcot ride also helps kids learn that math and science can be fun.



"I think it's really empowering for the kids to realize that the math doesn't control them. They get to control the math," Goodman said.



The Raytheon Company, a

***

(CNN) -- Floyd Mayweather Jr. has said he is ready to make the big-money fight with newly crowned WBO welterweight world champion Manny Pacquiao happen.





After victory in Las Vegas over Puerto Rico's Miguel Cotto on Saturday, Pacquiao's trainer Freddie Roach said the "whole world" now wanted to see a fight with Mayweather.





Reacting to the proposition the undefeated 32-year-old, who formerly held the WBC title at welterweight, told British broadcaster Sky Sports: "If he wants to fight Floyd Mayweather all he has to do is step up to the plate."





The twice-voted Ring magazine fighter of the year added that he felt Pacquiao's approach was one-dimensional but the Filipino would be a favorite with the crowd.





"The thing is with Pacquaio I don't see any versatility as a fighter; he's a good puncher but just one-dimensional. Is Pacquiao the greatest?





"The world's going to go 'wow' if Floyd Mayweather gets beaten. That's what everyone is looking to see.





"If I beat Manny Pacquaio do you know what they are going to say? 'You are supposed to beat him, you are Floyd Mayweather, you are the bigger man'. If I knock him out they'll say 'you're supposed to knock him out he's been knocked out before'.





"I'm in a no-win situation and when I beat him no one is going to be surprised because he's been beaten before; whatever I do to Pacquaio has been done before - he's been beaten on three occasions. And if I knock him out I don't want the world shouting because he's been knocked out twice before."





If the fight goes ahead it is expected to challenge the mark set by Oscar De La Hoya's bout with Floyd Mayweather for the most profitable in history.





Money generated from pay-per-view subscriptions earned the two fighters an estimated combined total of $77 million in 2007.





Mayweather, whose nickname is "Money," said: "If I go out and make $60-75 million in one night; come on - I'm not losing."

***

Washington (CNN) -- An expanded team of civilian technical experts from a "quick-reaction force" is on the ground in Libya, tracking down and destroying "MANPADs," shoulder-fired, heat-seeking missiles that the U.S. fears could be used to bring down a civilian airliner.





The United States currently has a State Department officer and 14 technical experts who are embedded with munitions and destruction teams from Libya's National Transitional Council, according to Andrew Shapiro, assistant U.S. secretary of state for political-military affairs.





Officials hope to ramp up the search effort "significantly," Shapiro said, with the number of specialists on the ground increasing to 50.





The joint teams are sweeping, surveying and securing stockpiles of the weapons that were previously under control of the Moammar Gadhafi regime.





The joint teams already have surveyed 20 out of 36 known ammunition storage sites, a State Department official said, and have disabled or destroyed hundreds of MANPADs. The official was not authorized to speak on the record. At each site they have found from several dozen to several hundred storage bunkers.





The United States estimates there were as many as 20,000 surface-to-air missiles in Libya when NATO began its operations to aid rebels in ousting Gadhafi.





Shapiro declined to say how many weapons might be missing, but U.S. Gen. Carter Ham, commander of U.S. Africa Command, expressed concern that the missiles could be crossing the border.





"There are some worrying indicators ... that some of these portable air defense systems have left Libya," Ham said, adding that he didn't have enough information to know how many have possibly moved, "but there's enough ... churn out there in the information I see to cause me to be very concerned."





U.S. officials are working with Libya's neighbors on "how best to address this threat," Shapiro said.





The United States is distributing thousands of pamphlets in multiple languages, including Arabic and English, to neighboring countries, including Egypt, Algeria and Morocco, to inform their border guards what the MANPADs look like and to be on watch for any attempts to move them out of Libya.





Ham noted that the MANPADs are a threat "to anything that flies," including commercial airliners upon takeoff and landing.





The United States also is working through NATO to alert the Libyans to stockpiles NATO was aware of and may have targeted during the conflict.





"When it comes to the conventional weapons destruction challenge, the NTC have not only have talked the talk, they've walked the walk," the State Department official said. "They have really taken leadership on this and we are committed to helping them secure the weapons stockpiles."





The U.S. experts involved in the operation are mostly retired military personnel who were specialists in munitions handling and ordnance destruction at the Department of Defense, Shapiro said. Many of them work with nongovernmental organizations on de-mining. Shapiro noted the United States paid $3 million to two non-governmental organizations in Libya "to help secure weapons that they discovered."





CNN Pentagon correspondent Barbara Starr contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Pandora, the music-streaming service that's a soundtrack for many a desk-bound music lover, rolled out a slate of changes Wednesday, even as a host of up-and-comers are emerging in the online music space.





"New Pandora," according to a post on the music service's blog, is "more responsive, easier to use, and better integrated with the friends and music lovers in your life."





"For the last two months we've been gradually rolling a preview of the new site out to our listeners, taking their feedback, fixing bugs and making improvements here and there," Tom Conrad, Pandora's founder, said in the post. "With all those little fixes and refinements in place, today we're rolling out the new site for everyone."





Among the new features on the site, which uses what creators call the "Music Genome Project" to predict users' tastes based on the songs they've already liked, are:





-- Simplified station creation





-- A bigger focus on social interaction. Enhanced user profiles let friends "like" or comment on what they've been listening to and share songs or stations with friends on Pandora as well as on Facebook, Twitter and other networking sites.





-- More information about the song that's playing and its artist -- including lyrics and detailed biographies.





-- Removing the 40-hour per month listening cap to let users listen for as long as they want for free. (An "abuse prevention limit" of 320 hours a month still exists, so if you plan to listen for more than 13 entire days, watch out).





The social changes will roll out to users over the next few days, according to the blog post. Users may edit what others can see using Pandora's privacy settings page.





The changes also place ads more prominently on Pandora's pages. As of July, Pandora had 100 million registered users and 36 million monthly active users.





Eric Mac of PCWorld gave the Pandora overhaul high marks.





"The new design certainly feels a lot less 2005," he wrote. "It has a clearer, more intuitive user interface that includes a large control bar at the top of the screen with the familiar play, next track, thumbs up, and thumbs down buttons. Loading times do seem faster, although not always instantaneous as promised."





The overhaul comes as sites like Spotify and turntable.fm have emerged as hot new commodities in the increasingly crowded online music space.





And Facebook is expected to unveil a free music service as early as Thursday -- potentially leveraging its massive user base as an audience.

***

JERUSALEM (CNN)  -- Pope Benedict XVI completed his eight-day tour of the Holy Land on Friday with an exhortation to both Israelis and Palestinians to work through their decades-old conflict.



Pope Benedict XVI prays in Jerusalem on Friday at what's believed to be the burial site of Jesus.



"No more bloodshed! No more fighting! No more terrorism! No more war! Instead let us break the vicious circle of violence. Let there be lasting peace based on justice, let there be genuine reconciliation and healing," the pontiff said.



Benedict made the comments at a farewell ceremony at Ben Gurion International Airport in Tel Aviv before Israeli President Shimon Peres and other religious and secular leaders.



In his concluding remarks, Benedict called his visit to Israel's Holocaust memorial Yad Vashem and his conversations with survivors a "deeply moving encounter." He seemed to address some criticism he received within the country for not speaking in stronger terms about anti-Semitism and Holocaust denial.



Referring to the Holocaust, Benedict spoke of the victims who "were brutally exterminated under a godless regime that propagated an ideology of anti-Semitism and hatred."



After Benedict's Monday speech at Yad Vashem, the memorial's chairman, Holocaust survivor Rabbi Yisrael Lau, criticized the pope, saying the pontiff did not "participate in the pain of the Jewish people" and "used the term 'killed' when talking about Holocaust victims and not the word 'murdered' as his predecessor did."



Benedict drew the ire of Jews and German Catholics earlier this year by rehabilitating an excommunicated bishop who had disputed the number of Jews killed in concentration camps during World War II. The bishop's excommunication was unrelated to his Holocaust denial.



Friday, Benedict repeated his call for Palestinians to enjoy a "sovereign independent homeland" and "to live in dignity and to travel freely."



He remarked that "one of the saddest sights for me during my visit to these lands was the wall" -- a reference to the 20-foot concrete barrier he saw in Bethlehem during his visit to a Palestinian refugee camp. Israel says the structure, which it calls a security fence, was built to prevent terrorist attacks; Palestinians consider it an illegal land grab.



Benedict began the day with a busy morning in Jerusalem's Old City, including meeting the patriarchs of the Greek Orthodox and Armenian Apostolic churches.



Between sessions with the patriarchs, Benedict toured and prayed at the Church of the Holy Sepulcher, believed to be located on the site where Jesus was crucified and buried.



On his Middle East visit, the pope has navigated the region's treacherous political landscape, which often pits Jew against Muslim and Muslim against Christian.



Benedict has repeatedly called for reconciliation between the peoples of the region during his visit, urging Israelis and Palestinian to put aside their grievances and divisions.



"Just and peaceful coexistence among the peoples of the Middle East can only be achieved through a spirit of cooperation and mutual respect, in which the rights and dignity of all are acknowledged and upheld," the pope said. Celebrating Mass on Thursday, Benedict covered similar territory in his message to over 30,000 parishioners gathered at the Mount of the Transfiguration, outside Nazareth.  Watch the reaction of one visitor who attended Mass »



"Christians readily join Jews, Muslims, Druze and people of other religions in wishing to safeguard children from fanaticism and violence, while preparing them to be builders of a better world," he said.



Benedict's trip marks the first papal visit to some of Christianity's most holy places since Pope John Paul II made the pilgrimage in 2000.

***

CHARLESTON, South Carolina (CNN)  -- Tropical storm Cristobal was forecast to move "parallel and very close" to the North Carolina coast Sunday morning, but the storm is not expected to make landfall along the eastern U.S. shores.



Satellite image taken at 1:15 p.m. Saturday shows Tropical Storm Cristobal off the coast of the Carolinas.



At 11 p.m. ET Saturday, the center of the storm was about 45 miles southeast of Cape Fear, North Carolina, and about 170 miles southwest of Cape Hatteras, North Carolina. The National Hurricane Center said Cristobal was moving northeast at about 6 mph, with maximum sustained winds of about 45 mph and some higher gusts.



"The center of the tropical storm is expected to move parallel and very close to the coast of North Carolina for the next day or so," the NHC said. It is expected to dump between three and five inches of rain along the Carolina coast this weekend, it said.



The storm had not strengthened beyond the 45 mph top winds measured earlier on Saturday, according to the NHC.



A discussion posted online by NHC forecasters called Cristobal "convectively challenged" and predicted the storm would "become absorbed ahead of an approaching cold front" by late Monday.



Although the center of the storm was forecast to remain off the coast through the weekend, tropical storm warnings were in effect from the South Santee River in South Carolina to the North Carolina-Virginia state line, including Pamlico Sound.



Flood advisories were posted for coastal counties, and Wilmington, North Carolina, received 2½ inches of rain Saturday, said Stephen Keebler, a meteorologist at the National Weather Service there. Cristobal's winds were not expected to be a problem, Keebler said.



"It's some rain and a little bit of relief for the coastal areas and a lot of excitement, but that's about it," he said.



The rain bands were weakening as they spun farther inland, providing little relief for parched areas near Interstate 95 in North Carolina, he said.



Forecasters predicted up to 5 inches of rain along the North Carolina coast, with heavier amounts in some areas.



Eastern North Carolina is under a moderate drought, and areas along South Carolina's northern coast are considered abnormally dry, according to the U.S. Drought Monitor. Officials have blamed the persistent drought for a massive wildfire that has burned more than 40,000 acres in eastern North Carolina since it began June 1 with a lightning strike.



As Cristobal lurked offshore, the storm was keeping many boaters off the waters -- and surfers in the waves.



On North Carolina's Outer Banks, surfers reveled in the waves as the storm churned offshore well to the south.



Bradley Rose, a surf instructor at SandBarz in Carolina Beach, North Carolina, said the waves were a bit choppy.



"It looks pretty fun out there," Rose said.



At the By the Sea Motel in North Myrtle Beach, South Carolina, out-of-state vacationers took to the beach, trying to photograph the outer rain bands of Cristobal, hotel manager Charlie Peterson said. Intermittent rain showers during the afternoon were not enough to chase them away, and there were even brief moments of sunshine.



"They've got their cameras set, and they think there is going to be lightning over the water and all," he said. "They have never seen this."



Elsewhere Saturday, Hurricane Fausto strengthened far off Mexico's Pacific coast, while Hurricane Bertha, located east of Cape Race, Newfoundland, was downgraded to tropical storm status. Neither of those storms currently threatens land.



Bertha had blustered across Bermuda this week, knocking out electricity to thousands there.

***

BAGHDAD, Iraq (CNN) -- Iraq's government has authorized Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki to submit to Washington amendments to a draft security agreement with the United States, an Iraqi government spokesman said Tuesday.



Students protest the status-of-forces agreement Tuesday at Baghdad's Mustansiriya University.



Ali al-Dabbagh said the Iraqi government approved several amendments that were "necessary, essential and appropriate" to the draft status-of-forces agreement, which would set the terms for U.S. troops in Iraq after the United Nations mandate on their presence expires at the end of this year.



"The Iraqi government authorizes the prime minister to bring up these amendments to the U.S. side in order to reach a draft agreement that will preserve the fundamental principles and the sovereignty of Iraq and its high interests," al-Dabbagh said.



It is unclear when al-Maliki will submit the changes to the draft document. U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates recently said that there was "great reluctance" to make any more changes to the agreement.



However, senior U.S. officials -- speaking under the condition of anonymity -- are not ruling out possibly renegotiating parts of the deal with Iraq if the country's parliament does not approve it.



The most vocal opponent of the draft security deal in Iraq has been the political party of radical Shiite cleric Muqtada al-Sadr, which opposes any U.S. military presence in Iraq.



U.S. military helicopters Tuesday flew over Baghdad's Mustansiriya University, where hundreds of students took part in a demonstration organized by the Sadr movement against the status-of-forces deal.



"We are against this agreement between the Iraqi government and between the American government because it is against Iraqi sovereignty," said law student Ahmed Fadhil Abbas, one of the demonstrators.



Fellow demonstrator and law student Hisham Mohammed said the students plan to organize a sit-in and a strike across universities in Iraq to protest the agreement.



The draft status-of-forces agreement, according to a copy obtained by CNN, calls for U.S. combat troops to be out of Iraqi cities and villages by July 30, 2009, and out of the country entirely by December 31, 2011. The agreement allows for an earlier withdrawal or an extension of the U.S. forces' stay in Iraq, by agreement of both parties.



It also allows the Iraqi government to ask "the United States government to leave certain forces for training and for support purposes for the Iraqi forces."



Legal jurisdiction over U.S. forces in Iraq has been a sticking point in the negotiation, with the U.S. side preferring that its troops and contractors remain immune from Iraqi law.



Baghdad had sought the power to arrest and try Americans accused of crimes not related to official military operations, plus jurisdiction over troops and contractors who commit major crimes in the course of their duties.



Under the draft agreement, U.S. forces or contractors who commit "major and premeditated murders" while off duty and outside U.S. facilities would fall under Iraqi jurisdiction, according to the copy obtained by CNN.



All other crimes -- and murders committed inside U.S. facilities or by on-duty forces -- would fall under American jurisdiction, the agreement says.

***

(CNN) -- You don't need to be a teenage boy to realize how scary girls can be. Girls know it too.



Megan Fox plays a demonic cheerleader in "Jennifer's Body," written by Diablo "Juno" Cody.



Certainly Diablo Cody does.



The Academy Award-winning "Juno" scribe proves as much in her second screenplay, a horror comedy about BFFs Jennifer (Megan Fox) and Needy (Amanda Seyfried).



These bosom buddies have a relationship that stretches back to the sandbox. They're inseparable opposites: Jennifer is a babe, head cheerleader and a bit of a snot. Needy is nerdy, conventional and a soft touch.



Except that when we first meet her, she's locked up in the local mental hospital, kicking back at the guards and muttering darkly about the murders that put her here.



Looking back, she dates this disastrous turn of events to the day Jennifer talked her into seeing an up-and-coming indie band at the roadhouse. The gig ends in a deadly inferno that claims the lives of several schoolmates, then Jennifer drives off with the band for an al fresco after-party involving satanic rites and virgin sacrifice. She survives on a technicality, but shows up later that night at Needy's place covered in blood, barfing blue goo and craving fresh flesh.



In the days after the tragedy the entire school seems to be suffering from post-traumatic stress. Only Jennifer seems unfazed by the community's second sucker punch: the gruesome fate of the star quarterback in the woods.



What's a girl to do if her best friend turns into a heartless boy-eating demon? Needy cleans up the mess and hopes it's just a phase.



The last time a horror flick tried for a distinctly female point of view the result was "Twilight," which was more of a wan gothic romance than a chiller. Directed by Karyn Kusama, who made "Girlfight" and "Aeon Flux," "Jennifer's Body" isn't anything like that. It's a much edgier, snappier, bloodier film, aimed primarily at young hipsters and horror fans -- plus anyone else curious to see Megan Fox get nasty. (That's got to include a sizable chunk of the audience, surely?)



So smoldering hot that at one point she coolly sets fire to her tongue, Fox makes a convincing vixen, callously picking up victims whenever her luster begins to fade. It's not hard to imagine she can have anyone who takes her fancy -- even Needy is not immune to her charms.



Ironically, though, Jennifer is really the needy one here, while her friend eventually finds the self-possession to stand up to her. Similarly, you might come for Fox, but it's Amanda Seyfried's expressive range and toughness that leaves a more lasting impression. The "Mamma Mia" starlet is destined for good things. iReport.com: Share your review of "Jennifer's Body"



The bitingly smart, funny teen-speak is carried over from "Juno," along with sharp pop culture references and a sassy feminist attitude, but the million-dollar question has to be: Is it scary?



Only occasionally, I'm afraid.



The gore scenes come with weird little flourishes: Jennifer's mounting body count attracts a crowd of curious woodland creatures, sounding a sweetly sick echo of "Bambi," and a climactic showdown is set in a spectacularly fetid abandoned swimming pool (don't they drain those things?). But the jokiness does tend to undercut the terror.



I suspect the film will prove too freaky for "Juno" boosters, and could have used more straight-ahead scares and sustained suspense to appease the hardcore horror geeks.



That said, this entertainingly oddball offering does twist fresh kinks into a genre that's always crying out for new blood.



"Jennifer's Body" is rated R and runs 102 minutes.

***

(Travel + Leisure) -- Breakfast, beer breaks and goat's-milk ice cream: The ultimate two-day tasting itinerary in Turkey's largest city.





Savor the flavors of Istanbul in between visits to the city's landmarks.





Day 1: Sultanahmet (The Old City)





Breakfast





On a street lined with carpet shops near the Arasta Bazaar, Tamara Restaurant (breakfast for two $20), whose owners hail from Turkey's eastern Lake Van area, serves up the region's puffy breads, herb-flecked otlu cheese, and addictive tahini spread. Eggs baked with spicy soujuk sausage might seem like overkill, but order them anyway.





Mid-Morning Fix





It would be a crime to miss the Süleymaniye Camii mosque, an Ottoman masterpiece; it would be sadder still not to visit the nearby Vefa Bozacisi (boza for two $4). Decked out in weathered marble, this vintage cubbyhole specializes in boza -- a cross between pudding and a beverage, which is made from fermented bulgur. Traditionally it's consumed with leblebi, nutty roasted chickpeas.





Lunch





Famished after haggling for kilims at the Covered Bazaar? It's worth tracking down Seyhmus (lunch for two $30), a macho kebab dive colonized by gaggles of mustached vendors. Order lahmacun -- wafer-thin lamb-slathered pizza -- with seyhmus kebap (an epic charcoal-grilled lamb patty) and a vegetable salad dressed with pomegranate molasses. Washing your meal down with ayran, a tart yogurt drink, is a sure way to pass for a local.





Beer Break





Unwind with a frosty glass of Efes Pilsen on the rooftop terrace of Seven Hills Hotel (drinks for two $10), which feels like it is suspended between the Blue Mosque and Hagia Sofia against the backdrop of the Marmara Sea.





Dinner





Though certain Istanbullus swear that fish should be eaten at the water's edge, the suave, smart-suited businessmen and bejeweled matrons who patronize Balikçi Sabahattin (dinner for two $65) know better. A waiter appears as soon as you settle in your seat, carrying a tray of meze, small plates meant to be sampled with raki, Turkey's signature anise liquor. Order platters of smoky eggplant salad and buttery lakerda (cured bonito) -- then choose grilled levrek (sea bass), moist and perfectly cooked. Travel + Leisure: World's top late-night restaurants





Day 2: Other Neighborhoods





Breakfast





Even if contemporary Turkish art isn't your cup of çay, visit Istanbul Modern (breakfast for two $45), a museum in a renovated warehouse, for its stylish café and waterfront terrace. With luck, giant cruise ships won't obstruct the postcard-perfect view of the Old Town as you tuck into a breakfast of simit (sesame bread rings), creamy beyaz peynir (feta), crunchy cucumbers, and sour-cherry jam.





Ice Cream





Farther along the Bosporus road, stop in the village of Ortaköy for a stroll through craft shops and the neo-Baroque mosque. At Mado (ice cream for two $2), sample the goat's-milk ice cream, which is thickened with the powdered root of wild orchids. Splurge on a triple scoop of pistachio, pomegranate, and black mulberry.





Lunch





Continue on to Sabanci University Sakip Sabanci Museum, a 19th-century mansion in Emirgan that houses an impressive collection of Ottoman paintings. Espousing a different aesthetic, the museum's Muzedechanga restaurant (lunch for two $98) is noted for its neo-60s interior of unpolished oak and black-leather banquettes. Try the olive oil-braised celery root enlivened with tangerine, and rosy lamb chops, from the smart modern-Mediterranean menu.





Drinks





Time your visit to Leb-i Derya (drinks for two $16) with the sunset -- and the evening call to prayer. That's when young locals file in for cocktails, like fresh-ginger-and-muddled-lime mojitos, and jockey for steel stools on the open-air terrace overlooking the city's two coastlines and the Bosporus strait in between.





Dinner





Beyoglu is known for its raucous drinking

***

(CNN) -- There are typically two types of comic book movies -- movies like "Ghost Rider" and movies like "Batman Begins."





That is, there are some comics that should be really good movies, but because of a bad script, director or actors (sometimes all of the above) they end up cinematic duds like "Ghost Rider."





And there are some comics that make the transition to the big screen really well with the help of great writers, directors and actors, like "Batman Begins."





Movie producers are bringing a fairly serious comic book character, DC Comics' "Jonah Hex," (played by Josh Brolin) to the big screen on Friday. The trailer from Warner Brothers (whose parent company, Time Warner, also owns CNN) looks like it's anything but.





Early reviews aren't kind. By mid-Friday morning, the film had earned a rotten 11-percent rating on Rotten Tomatoes.





If you're not already familiar with the character, here's the gist: As a boy, Jonah Hex's drunk and abusive father sells him to an Apache tribe. Hex lives with the Apaches as a slave but wins the favor of the chief and becomes a free member.





He gets separated from the tribe as an adult, ends up fighting for the Confederates in the Civil War -- even accidentally shooting Stonewall Jackson -- and ultimately wanders out West. But when he comes back to the tribe, a fight with a rival leads to his banishment and a new life as a bounty hunter. See Techland's brief history of Jonah Hex.





The original run of the comic spanned the 1970s and 1980s, but the title was revived in the early 1990s and more recently in 2006. In later issues of the first run, Hex would be pulled through time, meeting up with Batman and a handful of other DC superheroes.





"Jonah Hex" falls prey to a common problem with comics-turned-movies: The stories span years, sometimes decades.





Most fans are only familiar with a comic book's story from the point when they start reading. But even so, fans of Jonah Hex know him as the star of a Western comic, not a superhero comic.





Hollywood producers, however, know DC Comics as a powerhouse of superheroes, and they seem to have different expectations of "Jonah Hex."





Based on the trailer, Hex now has mystical and magical abilities to raise and speak with the dead.





His place in the Civil War is downplayed. There are no major characters who are Native American.





Megan Fox stars as a gun toting prostitute, a never-before-seen friend of our hero. And "Q" from the James Bond franchise apparently had forerunners in frontier towns who provide Hex with horse-mounted Gatling guns and hand-held, dynamite-firing crossbows.





Hex's story should make a good movie. "Jonah Hex" should be one of those comic-based movies that doesn't need many changes to work.





But instead of trying to stay true to the comic, it appears that producers are hoping to attract a casual movie-going audience by sacrificing the original flavor of the character and story.





The result appears to be a campy movie that alienates both fans and regular moviegoers.





Looks like we're in "Ghost Rider" territory.

***

(Budget Travel) -- Even the most sophisticated traveler could be forgiven for thinking that there's little more to Panama than its iconic canal, seaside capital, and snorkeler-packed Bocas del Toro islands.



The Los Santos region of Panama has spectacular rolling farmlands and blissfully empty beaches.



But there's a more secret and equally spectacular side to the country about a five-hour drive west from Panama City: the Pacific coast region of Los Santos. Here, rolling farmlands and stands of mahogany and cocobolo trees hug an azure coastline, luring surfers, nature buffs, and, increasingly, travelers and second-home owners from all over.



Although roadside real-estate billboards suggest a far more developed future, Los Santos has managed to stay blessedly free of resorts. In their place are a handful of low-key -- and far more affordable -- boutique hotels.



The most stylish is the seven-room Villa Camilla, just outside the fishing village of Pedasí. The red-tiled hideaway, located on an 800-acre parcel of the Azuero Peninsula, started out as a private escape for French interior designer Gilles St.-Gilles and his wife, Camilla.



"The area reminded us of Tuscany," says St.-Gilles, who landscaped the estate with fragrant jasmine, plumeria, and hibiscus. In 2005, the couple opened their place as a hotel, and last fall they added 20 new seaside duplex lofts.



As stylish as they are family-friendly, the setups come with full-size kitchens, extra guest beds, and mosaic-tile flooring. An in-house stable is ready for shoreline horseback rides, and you can sign up for snorkeling trips to nearby Isla Cañas, a palm-fringed refuge where thousands of leatherback turtles converge to build nests.



Farther inland, the center of Pedasí has a cow-town vibe: Picture low-slung cottages painted bright green and yellow, and ranchers wearing handmade Panama hats.



Yellow is also the color of choice at the new Casita Margarita. This five-room B&B comes with locally crafted cocobolo furniture and a wraparound veranda overlooking Pedasí's main street.



Perhaps best of all, it's within walking distance of local hangout Mano Surf Community, a pro shop that does double duty as a café and juice bar, and El Gringo Dusek, a no-frills, alfresco cantina run by retired U.S. Navy officer Joseph Dusek, which serves the best barbecue ribs in Los Santos.



Of course, beyond the culinary surf and turf, the region's big draw is its blissfully empty beaches: Some of Panama's most scenic -- Los Destiladeros, Modroño, and the black-sand Playa Venao with its eight-foot breaks -- are short drives from Pedasí.



Closer to home, Pedasí's El Arenal is a good launchpad for day trips to Iguana Island. (Fishermen stationed by the pier rent their motorboats, captain included, for about $50 round trip.) The hotel-free and nearly visitor-free isle is named for its resident black and green iguanas. Sign up for an Iguana Island Foundation snorkeling and hiking tour; you might just get a good look at some hatchlings.



While it may be hard to top that sight, 77-year-old Dalila Vera de Quintero knows how to command equal wows. Her lemon-yellow bakery in a bungalow, Dulceria Yely, is famous across Panama for its home-style sweets, like almond queques (pound cakes) and creamy chicheme, a shake blended from sweetened milk, fresh corn, and crushed vanilla beans.



She also stashes a cake or two in the kitchen for favorite customers, such as former Panamanian president and Pedasí native Mireya Moscoso. Swoon loudly enough and Quintero may just reward you with a thick presidential slice.



If you go ...



LODGING



Villa Camilla Los Destiladeros, 011-507/232-0171, , from $250



Casita Margarita, Calle Central, 011-507/995-2898, from $99



FOOD



Mano Surf Community, Calle Estudiante and Calle Bolivar



El Gringo Dusek, Av. Central, 011-507/995-2869, entrées from $5



Dulceria Yely, Calle Ofelia

***

(CNN) -- Police violated the rights of a man charged in the death of a Little Rock, Arkansas, anchorwoman by interviewing him twice without his lawyer present, defense attorneys said in a motion.



Anne Pressly spent five days in the hospital before she died from her injuries.



The motion requests a judge bar police from "interviewing, interrogating or otherwise communicating with" Curtis Lavell Vance. In their response, however, prosecutors note that Vance initiated both interviews with police and waived his right to have an attorney present.



A hearing is scheduled Tuesday on the issue, according to the Pulaski County court clerk's office.



Vance, 28, is charged with capital murder, rape, residential burglary and theft in the death of Anne Pressly.



Pressly, 26, was found unconscious in her home October 20 and died five days later at a hospital. She was the morning news anchor for KATV, a CNN affiliate. Authorities have said Vance is linked to Pressly's death through DNA testing.



Little Rock Police spokesman Lt. Terry Hastings and prosecutor John Johnson declined comment to CNN Monday, citing a gag order imposed in the case. However, in Johnson's response to the motion, he notes Vance initiated both of the interviews.



In the defense motion filed earlier this month, Vance's public defenders wrote they notified the court in December that he intended to assert his right to remain silent and communicate only through his counsel. A judge issued an order directing that police provide sufficient notice to defense counsel before transporting Vance.



However, the defense alleges Little Rock Police transported Vance to a police station and interviewed him without notifying them in December and again in February.



In December, the attorneys said they were notified by jail staff that Vance had been taken for a police interview. They went to the jail and waited at the inmate entrance in hopes of seeing him as he arrived but police "deviated from normal practice and took him through an entrance on the opposite side of the building from that which is ordinarily used, thereby avoiding the possibility that Mr. Vance would see his attorneys."



They said in December, police did not allow them to speak with Vance. In February, they claim in the motion, Vance was not notified of their request to speak with him during the police interview.



Although police claim that both of the interviews were initiated by Vance, "the detectives' lack of candor with Mr. Vance during the interviews violates his Sixth Amendment right to counsel," the defense motion said.



"LRPD detectives have engaged in subterfuge and have violated both the meaning and the express language of a standing court order in their successful attempts to interrogate Mr. Vance outside the presence of counsel."



But, prosecutors point out in their response, a defendant is allowed to initiate contact with authorities, even if represented by counsel.



"The only issue here is whether the defendant waived his Sixth Amendment right to counsel by initiating contact with the police, and clearly he did," Johnson wrote.



They also said defense attorneys were notified in December that Vance was being transported from the jail -- by the jail staff. And in February, they said, police could not have violated the district court order in the case because the district court lost jurisdiction over the case when it was filed in circuit court -- as spelled out in the order itself.



Prosecutors also note that despite requests by the defense to speak to Vance, "As counsel knows ... law enforcement is under no obligation to allow an attorney access to their client under these circumstances unless the defendant asks for the attorney."



Vance's trial has been set for September 9, according to court documents.

***

(CNN) -- The Catholic Church in Ireland is going high-tech in a bid to reverse a dramatic decline in the number of priests.





An establishment viewed as a bastion of tradition is turning to a new app to encourage more "applications." The app, says the church, is "designed to promote vocations to the priesthood."





It is being hailed as a "world first" by the church in Ireland.





"The app is an original approach to assist current and future generations seeking to investigate and find information on vocations to the diocesan priesthood in Ireland," a statement issued ahead of the launch said.





The number of new recruits to the priesthood has fallen sharply in the recent decades -- and as Ireland has become engulfed in a series of child sex abuse scandals over the past few years.





The situation led to a respected former Catholic bishop in Ireland to call for an end to clerical celibacy.





Edward Daly, the retired bishop of Derry, said allowing clergymen to marry would ease many of the church's problems.





Daly told CNN he was worried about the decreasing number of priests and the number of older priests.





The issue "needs to be addressed and addressed urgently," Daly said, adding he found it "heartbreaking" priests were forced to resign or prospective priests were unable to join the priesthood because of the celibacy rule.





The new 'Vocations' app was designed by Father Paddy Rushe and developed by the company Magic Time Apps, based in Dublin. It is available to download for free from the Apple iPhone App Store, said the church.





Some of the features of the app, according to the church, are: Connection to Twitter and Facebook; Social networking at the service of vocations; Contact details and statistics on the 26 dioceses of Ireland; Frequently asked questions to assist a person to discern his vocation; News feed running from the national vocations website; Novel and cursory 'tests' to enable the user to reflect on vocation potential.





"Future updates will include a "prayer counter" to allow people pledge a period of prayer for vocations and a picture gallery which will include some images from the life of a seminarian," the church statement said.





The launch of the new app marks the official handover from Rushe as the National Coordinator for Diocesan Vocations to Father Willie Purcell and his team, said the church.





The app is part of a campaign promoted on the church website -- http://www.vocations.ie -- and follows 'Priesthood Sunday,' which was on September 25. The website called it "an opportunity to highlight and promote particularly the vocation to the priesthood."





A statement on the website stressed more priests are needed: "The number of priests per Catholic has declined over the past 40 years. This makes it more difficult for individual parishioners to establish a close relationship with any one particular priest."





"Also, priests are no longer the only ones who offer pastoral care to our people," the statement continued. "Yet without a priest, no parish is able to be a Eucharistic community. It is important to reaffirm the importance of the priesthood of Jesus Christ and its central place in the life of our church."

***

(CNN)  -- The Wu-Tang Clan -- the New York hip-hop supergroup that spawned millions of album sales, nine solo acts and a few acting careers -- almost never was.



If RZA, left, had been jailed or Method Man killed, Wu-Tang may have never formed, RZA says.



Method Man, the group's most recognizable voice, was nearly killed before the band formed, Wu-Tang's chief producer, RZA, writes in his forthcoming memoir.



Meth was walking to buy marijuana at 160 Park Hill Avenue in Staten Island -- the house in Wu-Tang's "Protect Ya Neck" video -- when RZA saw him across the street, he writes in the book.



"Come over here, yo!" RZA beckoned, according to "The Tao of Wu" (Riverhead). "He stopped and came running over. A few seconds later -- pow-pow-pow-pow-pow! -- a guy started shooting up the front of 160. A buddy of ours, Poppy, an innocent, school-going, nice guy -- he was shot and killed right there."  Interactive: Where's the Wu been? »



It wasn't the only close call RZA said could have snuffed the band that rewrote the rule book for hip-hop acts. The year before the group formed in 1993, RZA was acquitted on an attempted murder charge that could have put him behind bars for eight years, he writes in "The Tao of Wu," out Thursday.



Expanding on the book's anecdotes in an interview with CNN, RZA explained that if he had been imprisoned or if Method Man, aka Clifford Smith, had been killed, the band never would have come to fruition.



RZA, whose real name is Robert Diggs and whose stage name is pronounced "Rizza," also talked about his role in the death of his cousin, Russell Jones, better known as Ol' Dirty Bastard or ODB. Two days before his 36th birthday in 2004, ODB died in a New York recording studio from an overdose of cocaine and painkillers.



RZA writes in the book that he once witnessed ODB force his own son to watch him do drugs. RZA tried to leave, he writes, but ODB wouldn't let him. Now, RZA told CNN, he wishes he would've been tougher with ODB about his drug problem.



Following are excerpts from the interview, which has been edited for language, flow and length:



CNN: Could your imprisonment or Method Man's death have derailed Wu-Tang's formation?



RZA: Either one of those incidents could definitely have derailed it. Of course, myself being the abbot, the one who came with the idea, if I wouldn't have made it out of that tumultuous time -- it seemed like I wasn't going to make it out of it; there was a lot of odds against me -- but we stood strong, and self-defense made sense to the jury. We beat that ...



It was the victory over that incident that made me change my whole direction. In a way, it's double-edged in that incident. One, if I would've lost that, yeah, Wu-Tang wouldn't have happened, but also it's the victory of it that inspired me and gave me the drive also to go and really get serious about Wu-Tang and the things I was dealing with.



Same thing with Meth, he always brings it up ... that that day saved his life. He actually said, if it was anybody else calling him, he wouldn't have came.



CNN: In the book, you cite lessons from Eastern religions, Christianity, Islam, [Nation of Islam offshoot] Five Percent, numerology, comic books, kung fu, chess. What would you say to someone who says it's difficult to reconcile these dogmas?



RZA: Like it says in the Bible, "In the beginning was the word, and the word became flesh" -- if we go to the root of the word,

***

Tehran, Iran (CNN) -- Iran issued a warning to Israel on Wednesday, with a top military figure saying Iran will "punish" any threat.





"The United States is fully aware that a military attack by the Zionist regime on Iran will not only cause tremendous damage to that regime, but it will also inflict serious damage to the U.S.," said Gen. Hassan Firouzabadi, commander of the joint chiefs of staff, according to the semi-official Fars News Agency.





"We, as the military, take every threat, however distant and improbable, as very real, and are fully prepared to use suitable equipment to punish any kind of mistake," he added, according to a CNN translation of his remarks.





Another semi-official Iranian news agency, ISNA, published a story in English quoting Firouzabadi as saying, "The U.S. officials know that Zionist regime's military attack against Iran will inflict heavy damages to the U.S. seriously as well as Zionist regime."





The Israeli Ministry of Defense said Wednesday that Israel "carried out the test-firing of a rocket propulsion system from the Palmachim military base. This had been planned by the Defense Establishment a long time ago and was carried out as scheduled."





"This is an impressive technological achievement and an important step in Israel's advances in the realms of missiles and space," said Defense Minister Ehud Barak.





The comments from Iran and the Israeli missile test come as a very public debate is taking place in Israel about the possibility of a military strike on the Islamic republic.





Last week, Israel's largest newspaper, Yedioth Ahronoth, published a report that suggested Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and Barak both supported a strike against Iran's nuclear program.





That story was followed up Wednesday by a report in the Israeli daily Haaretz that Netanyahu was lobbying members of his cabinet to support a military strike against Iran despite the various difficulties inherent in such an operation. The paper attributed the information to a senior Israeli official, but did not disclose identity of their source.





Israeli and U.S. officials have expressed concerns that Iran is building nuclear weapons, despite Tehran's insistence that its nuclear program is for peaceful energy purposes.





The publication of the two reports in the Israeli media brought criticism from cabinet members.





"A public debate about this is nothing less than a scandal. I don't think we've ever had anything like it," Dan Meridor, deputy prime minister and intelligence minister, told the Israeli newspaper Maariv. "The public elected a government to make decisions about things like this in secret. The public's right to know does not include the debate about classified matters like this."





Speaking to Israeli radio, Benny Begin, a minister without portfolio, called the public debate about Iran "a crazy free-for-all" and criticized former Israeli intelligence officials for speaking too openly about government deliberations on Iran.





The prime minister's office would not comment on the newspaper reports and referred reporters to comments he made about Iran on Monday.





"Regional powers who have control in the Middle East will try to ensure they have greater influence on the new regimes -- influence that will not always support us or be of benefit to us, to say the least," Netanyahu said to Israeli legislators during the opening session of the Knesset.





"One of these regional forces is Iran, which continues its efforts to obtain nuclear weapons. A nuclear Iran would pose a dire threat on the Middle East and on the entire world. And of course, it poses a grave, direct threat on us too... We operate and will continue to operate intensely and determinately against those who threaten the security of the state of Israel and its citizens."





Shirzad Bozorgmehr reported from Iran; Kevin Flower reported from Jerusalem.