(CNN) -- Pictures of Brad Pitt and Angelina Jolie's newborn twins have been published for the first time after a magazine bidding war which news agencies claim topped $14 million.



Hola! magazine, the Spanish sister publication to Hello!, has also published images of the Jolie-Pitt twins.



Hello! magazine, which won international rights to the images, and People magazine, which took U.S. rights, published the photographs in their latest editions, which hit newsstands Monday.



The two publications, which have previously secured image rights to the couple's elder children, are believed to have shared the costs, The Associated Press reported over the weekend.  The agency quoted an unnamed source, not authorized to speak about the deal, as saying the pictures had fetched $14 million.



The images show the couple, newborns Knox Leon and Vivienne Marcheline and the rest of the Jolie-Pitt family -- Maddox, 7, Pax, 4, Zahara, 3, and Shiloh, 2.



The twins were born by Cesarian section at the Lenval hospital in the French Riviera resort of Nice on July 12.



Hello! magazine, which heralds its coverage as the "biggest exclusive of the year," devotes 17 pages of coverage to the twins' arrival.



In an interview published in the magazine, Jolie says: "Wanting a big family is one of the things that brought Brad and I together."



Pitt adds: "When Ange and I were told we were having twins we burst into hysterics... We didn't see this one coming."  Watch why the photos went for so much money »



Larry Hackett, the managing editor of People said that it was "thrilled" to have carried the images. People, like CNN, is owned by Time Warner.



Jonathan Klein, co-founder and CEO of Getty Images, which organized the photo shoot, said that all the proceeds would go toward the Jolie-Pitt Foundation, which earlier this year donated $1 million to help children in Iraq.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- The Department of Homeland Security will bypass environmental and land-management laws to build hundreds of miles of border fence between the United States and Mexico, Homeland Security Secretary Michael Chertoff said Tuesday.



A border fence stands at Juarez, Mexico. More than 360 miles of fence are supposed to be finished by year's end.



"Criminal activity at the border does not stop for endless debate or protracted litigation," Chertoff said.



"These waivers will enable important security projects to keep moving forward."



Chertoff cited a congressional requirement that 361 miles of fence be completed by the end of the year. He also pointed out that Congress had given him the authority to bypass laws.



But the executive director of the Sierra Club, an environmental group, said the move "threatens the livelihoods and ecology of the entire U.S.-Mexico border region."



"Secretary Chertoff chose to bypass stakeholders and push through this unpopular project on April Fools' Day. We don't think the destruction of the borderlands region is a laughing matter," said Carl Pope.



The Sierra Club says the waivers will affect a range of federally protected lands, including national parks, monuments, wildlife refuges, forests and wilderness areas.



The Sierra Club says the waivers themselves are unconstitutional and has asked the Supreme Court to rule on the question.



This is the fourth set of waivers issued by the department, and is the most sweeping.



Chertoff's orders Tuesday affect two areas. First, the department proposes to place fencing, towers, sensors, cameras, detection equipment and roads along a 470-mile stretch of the border in California, Arizona, New Mexico and Texas.



Second, it plans to integrate a concrete wall into proposed levee reinforcements along a 22-mile section of the Rio Grande in Hidalgo County, Texas.



The department said it is committed to working in an environmentally sensitive manner and cooperating with resource agencies so it does as little damage as possible. E-mail to a friend

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- A letter penned by George Washington praising the new Constitution sold for $3.2 million at an auction, the highest price for a letter by America's first president.





The four-page letter in Washington's slanting penmanship was written to his nephew Bushrod Washington in November 1787, according to Christie's, the company that auctioned it.





It was in the possession of an unidentified British descendant of his family, Christie's said.





Washington led the Philadelphia Convention, at which the Constitution was drafted in 1787. After the Constitution was produced, a nationwide debate ensued on whether to ratify it.





In the letter written from Washington's Virginia estate, Mount Vernon, he endorses the Constitution and highlights the benefits of compromise and of states merging into one nation.





"The central issues must be consolidated -- and local views as far as the general good will admit, must be attended to," he says in the letter, according to Christie's.





The company said the president confided in his nephew.





"Washington professed neutrality in public, but to Bushrod expressed his unequivocal conviction that the new Constitution must be ratified, in spite of opposition from many special-interest groups," Christie's said.





The buyer was not identified.





Christie's had earlier estimated that the letter would fetch $1.5 million to $2.5 million at Friday's auction.





Washington served from 1789 to 1797, then died of a throat infection two years later. He died at his beloved Mount Vernon at age 67, plunging the nation into months of mourning.





Last year, a 1864 letter in which President Abraham Lincoln replies to the abolitionist pleas of youth sold for $3.4 million.

***

(CNN) -- Two high-profile political officials linked to Guinea-Bissau's recently assassinated president were killed Friday, according to a statement from the West African country's interim army chief. The killings raised fears that a military coup may be under way.



Guinea-Bissau Prime Minister Carlos Gomes Jr, left, and interim President Raimundo Pereira are currently out of the country.



The military confirmed the killings of former Defense Minister Helder Proenca and presidential candidate Baciro Dabo, saying the men were killed because they were plotting a coup against the current government.



The military said several members of the ruling party have been arrested on allegations of taking part in the plot, which included a plan to assassinate the current prime minister and the interim president, according to the statement from interim army chief Zamora Induta.



However, the move by the military has raised fears that the military itself is plotting to take over the government, particularly since the arrests and killings took place while Prime Minister Carlos Gomes Jr., interim President Raimundo Pereira, and defense minister Artur Da Silva are out of the country.



President Joao Bernardo Vieira, 69, was assassinated on March 2 during an attack on the presidential palace. The attack happened a day after Gen. Tagme Na Waie, chief of Guinea-Bissau's military, was killed in a bomb explosion in his office.



The army and Guinea-Bissau's president clashed in the months prior to Vieira's assassination. Guinea-Bissau, a former Portuguese colony, has a history of military coups.

***

DAVID, Panama (CNN) -- Dozens of families frightened by aftershocks slept outside overnight Wednesday after a magnitude 6.2 earthquake shook coastal Panama near the border with Costa Rica.



The quake was centered about 235 miles (380 km) west of Panama City, near the town of David, according to the U.S. Geological Survey .



The temblor occurred at 1:11 a.m. ET and residents reported feeling three aftershocks.



There were no immediate reports of casualties, but damage was reported in the cities of Paso Canoa, David and Puerto Armuelles. The extent of the damage was not immediately known.



Many families opted to stay outside their homes, saying that they felt as if the earth were swallowing them and that trees and their houses were falling down.



One resident, Carlos Estribi, said he picked up his children in his arms and ran to the public plaza in David, seeking protection since he felt like his house was collapsing.



Family members told CNN that patients at the Regional Hospital of David went outside and refused to go back in because aftershocks were still being felt. Patients at the Materno Infantil Jose de Obaldia Hospital and the Regional Rafael Hernandez Hospital also fled their rooms.



Cyclists from Costa Rica, Colombia, the Dominican Republic and Germany, who were in David for a bicycle race, also had to leave their hotel rooms.



Police and other security officials were inspecting schools, hospitals and private and public buildings for damage.



Journalist Demetrio Abrego in David contributed to this report.

***

BAGHDAD, Iraq (CNN) -- A suicide bomber killed at least 40 people and injured 70 -- many of them women -- during a Shia pilgrimage in northwestern Baghdad Sunday, Iraqi officials told CNN.



Pilgrims, pictured above, have gathered to celebrate the Shia holy period of Ashura.



The dead included at least 16 Iranians who had come to mark the Shia holy period of Ashura, which commemorates a central event in the history of the movement. At least 32 Iranians were among the wounded. The other casualties were Iraqi, an Interior Ministry official said.



The bomber was a woman wearing an abaya, a robe-like dress, said Maj. Gen. Qassim Atta, military spokesman for Fardh al-Qanoon, an interagency domestic security body. She seems to have been targeting women, Atta and an interior ministry source said. The Interior Ministry official declined to be identified.



The attack appears to be the single deadliest suicide bombing in Iraq since a bomber killed 47 people in Kirkuk in December 11.



It took place in Baghdad's Kadhimiya neighborhood, not far from the Imam Moussa al-Kadhim holy shrine.



Hundreds of thousands of Shiite pilgrims are expected in Baghdad and the southern Iraqi city of Karbala for Ashura, which falls on January 7 this year. Ashura commemorates the martyrdom of Hussein, the grandson of the Prophet Muhammad. He was killed in battle in Karbala in 680, one of the events that helped create the schism between Sunnis and Shiites, the two main Muslim religious movements.



CNN's Mohammed Tawfeeq in Baghdad contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Actor Gary Coleman, who had suffered from a brain hemorrhage from an accident in his home Wednesday, died Friday in a Utah hospital, a hospital spokeswoman said.





Family members and close friends were at his side when life support was terminated at 12:05 p.m. (2:05 p.m. ET), Janet Frank said.





Coleman's wife, Shannon Price, issued a short statement Friday afternoon saying details of how the former child actor died will be made public later.





"Now that Gary has passed, we know he will be missed because of all the love and support shown in the past couple of days," Coleman's spokesman, John Alcantar, said in a written statement. "Gary is now at peace and his memory will be kept in the hearts of those who were entertained by him throughout the years."





Coleman, 42, was rushed by ambulance to a hospital after the accident in his Santaquin, Utah, home Wednesday, Frank had said in a statement released earlier Friday.





Later Wednesday night he was taken to another hospital -- Utah Valley Regional Medical Center in Provo -- where he had been listed in critical condition, she said.





While Coleman appeared "lucid and conscious" Thursday morning, his condition worsened by the afternoon, leaving him unconscious and on life support, she said.





Coleman is best known as the wisecracking youngster Arnold on TV's "Diff'rent Strokes" from the late 1970s to the mid-1980s.





"There was a touch of magic and a different stroke in Gary Coleman," said TV legend Norman Lear, who produced the show. "He was the inspiration behind his show's title."

***

(CNN)  -- South Africa inflicted the first home series defeat on Australia in almost 16 years as they wrapped up a nine-wicket win over the world's number one ranked Test nation in Melbourne on Tuesday.

South African captain Graeme Smith led from the front with 75 as his team wrapped up victory.

Captain Graeme Smith hit a fluent 75 as his side successfully passed a modest victory target of 183 on the final day at the MCG to take an unassailable 2-0 lead.

It was the South African's first-ever Test series triumph in Australia and victory in the third and final match in Sydney will see them leapfrog the home side at the top of the global rankings.

Hashim Amla (30 not out) scored the winning runs shortly after lunch as South Africa became the first team to overcome Australia at home since the West Indies in 1992-93.

South Africa were never under any pressure in their run chase and did not lose a wicket until just before lunch when the inspirational Smith was trapped leg before wicket by Nathan Hauritz.

Smith had dominated a 121-run opening stand with Neil McKenzie, hitting 10 boundaries.

McKenzie struggled to a half century and survived strong lbw shouts from Brett Lee, who was bowling despite an injured foot that will keep him out of the Sydney Test.

South Africa's victory was set up by a brilliant maiden Test century from JP Duminy, who shared a stunning 180-run ninth wicket partnership with pace bowler Dale Steyn.

It gave the tourists a priceless 65-run lead on first innings before man of the match Steyn worked his magic with the ball as Australia were bowled out on the fourth day for 247 in their second innings.

The pugnacious Smith was virtually lost for words in his victory speech.

"It has been such a special moment for all of us, it has been an incredible team effort," he said.

"I have been smiling non-stop since we hit the winning runs.

"To be 2-0 up after this game was something we only dreamt of."

South Africa won the first Test in Perth from an unlikely position, chasing 414 for victory for the loss of only four wickets.

***

PANAMA CITY, Panama (CNN)  -- Ricardo Martinelli, the multimillionaire owner of a supermarket chain, was inaugurated as president of Panama on Wednesday.



Ricardo Martinelli is a pro-business conservative who defeated a candidate from the ruling center-left party.



National Assembly President Jose Luis Varela performed the swearing-in and placed the presidential sash on Martinelli, a pro-business conservative who defeated a candidate from the ruling center-left party in May.



The citizens of Panama "want things to be done differently," Varela said at the inauguration. "An attitude of change starts today."



In his first speech as president, Martinelli promised a smaller government budget but raises for public workers.



Public safety, an issue that the outgoing administration of Martin Torrijos struggled to maintain, will be a priority, Martinelli said.



"Our prisons will be rehabilitation centers, not schools for criminals," he said.



Panama will also work with Mexico and Colombia to combat drug trafficking in the region, Martinelli said.



Among the dignitaries at the inauguration was deposed Honduran President Jose Manuel Zelaya, who was ousted in a military-led coup Sunday. The Organization of American States has condemned the coup, and Zelaya has continued to carry out his presidential duties.



The son of Italian immigrants, Martinelli, 57, is a self-made businessman who is chairman of the Super 99 supermarket chain, one of the largest private companies in Panama.



The U.S.-educated president previously served as minister and chairman of the board of directors of the Panama Canal Authority and formerly was director of social security for Panama, according to his Web site.



Martinelli won the presidency with 60 percent of the votes in a race against ruling-party candidate Balbina Herrera.

***

(CNN) -- Manchester United defender Patrice Evra has been ruled out for a minimum of three weeks after suffering a foot injury during the 3-0 Premier League win over title rivals Chelsea.



France defender Patrice Evra will be out for a minimum of three weeks after hurting ankle ligaments.



It was Evra's first game back after a four-match suspension imposed by the Football Association for his involvement in a post-match fracas involving groundstaff at Stamford Bridge last season.



The French left-back was hurt after firing over a cross for Wayne Rooney's goal and now faces another spell on the sidelines as United chase trophies on four fronts.



Evra suffered ligament damage and manager Alex Ferguson said: "He will be out for three weeks minimum and maybe four. It shouldn't be any more than that.



"He just went over on his foot and has done the little ligament in his foot, so we need to get the swelling down and that will take about 7-10 days."



Evra sits out Wednesday's Premier League clash with Wigan, the trip to Bolton three days later and next week's League Cup semifinal return at home to Derby when United will be expecting to overturn a 1-0 deficit.



Central defender Rio Ferdinand remains on the sidelines for at least another week although a scan on his back problem confirmed there is no long-term damage.



Ferdinand, out for a month, needs more rest and Jonny Evans will continue in central defense with Wes Brown still two weeks away from a comeback after ankle surgery.



Ferguson hopes Ferdinand will be back for the televised FA Cup fourth round home clash against Tottenham on Saturday January 24.

***

MADRID, Spain (CNN) -- A heavy snowstorm caused chaos Friday at Madrid's Barajas Airport, where flights were suspended for hours before Europe's fourth-busiest airport reopened in the late afternoon.



A woman enjoys the snow in Madrid, where the airport suspended flights because of the weather.



Planes were flying again at 4:40 p.m. (10:40 am ET).



"It's a huge snowstorm. You don't see this in Madrid often," an airport spokeswoman said.



The airport has 1,205 daily inbound and outbound flights. But for the first time, the airport halted operations due to a weather problem, the spokeswoman said.



The temporary shutdown began about noon (6 a.m. ET). Visibility was low, and the storm was so intense that the airport's snow clearing and de-icing equipment couldn't keep up, said the spokeswoman, who by custom is not identified.



The first plane to depart when the airport reopened was a Finnair flight bound for Helsinki, a second spokeswoman said.



The delays from the storm affected hundreds of travelers at the airport. Many others could not even reach the airport because of poor road conditions.



Madrid is one of the highest capitals in Europe, at an elevation of 646 meters or 2,120 feet, but it does not often snow in the city itself, especially with the ferocity seen Friday.  Watch snowy scenes from Madrid »



As children and even some adults gleefully tossed snowballs, city officials urged motorists to stay off the roads and use public transportation.



Large traffic jams formed on the major highways leading from Madrid to Barcelona and other cities, and numerous vehicles ran off the roads and got stuck in the snow. iReport: Are you snowed in in Spain? Send us your photos, videos



Bus service was suspended in many areas, although subways and commuter trains were operating, with delays in some cases.



Weather forecasters said the snow was expected to continue through Saturday morning, although diminishing in intensity.

***

(CNN) -- The U.S. Embassy in Beirut is asking for assistance in locating two missing American journalists who were on vacation in Lebanon and have not been heard from since they left the Lebanese capital last week.

Holli Chmela, 27, was last heard from when she and a fellow journalist left Beirut, Lebanon, on October 1.

Holli Chmela, 27, and her male companion, Taylor Luck, 23, arrived in Lebanon on September 29 from Amman, Jordan, the embassy said.

They left Beirut on October 1, telling friends they were headed for the northern Lebanese cities of Byblos and Tripoli that day.

No one has reported any contact with them since then, the embassy said.

"They were then to cross by land to Syria before returning to Jordan," the embassy said. "Chmela and Luck were due to report to work in Jordan on October 4."

Luck is an editor with The Jordan Times in Amman, and Chmela had been working as a freelancer for the newspaper, said Sameer Barhoum, the paper's editor.

After flying into Beirut last week, the two planned to travel by land to the northern Syrian city of Aleppo before returning to Jordan -- also by land -- by Saturday, Barhoum said.

Luck's mother called Barhoum on Sunday after not hearing from her son in three days, he said. She also said the last time Luck used his credit card was October 1 in Lebanon.

"We are hoping that both are safe and looking forward to see them with us soon," Barhoum said.

Abdul Wahab Zugaylat, the head of Jordan's press association, said, "We are waiting to hear officially from the U.S. Embassy that they did not depart the Lebanese borders."

The U.S. Embassy said it is working with the Lebanese Internal Security Force to investigate the whereabouts of the pair.

"In addition, the U.S. Embassy in Beirut is coordinating efforts with the U.S. embassies in Amman and Damascus [Syria] as well as with the Department of State in Washington," the embassy said.

In Washington, State Department spokesman Sean McCormack said he had no details about the missing Americans.

CNN's Caroline Faraj in Dubai contributed to this report.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Photographer Terry O'Neill is famous for his iconic images Hollywood stars in the 1960s and 1970s.



One of the 1970s hottest actresses, Faye Dunaway photographed by Terry O'Neill in 1976.



He made his name capturing the era's A-listers including Audrey Hepburn, Orson Welles and Brigitte Bardot in a uniquely relaxed and natural way.



Always polite and professional in his approach, his informal and spontaneous style captured the spirit of the times.



Rising stars, including rock bands The Rolling Stones and The Beatles, did not want the wooden, pre-fabricated images typical of the 1950s. As a result O'Neill became much in demand and his star began to rise alongside that of his subjects.



During the 1980s Terry became the photographer of choice for Hollywood, and his commissions from the time are nothing short of a catalogue of global superstardom.



Terry's success continued into the 1990s and with 65 pictures held by London's National Portrait Gallery, he is today revered as one the great British photographers.



Born in the east end of London in 1938, he began his photographic career working for an airline at Heathrow Airport as part of their photographic unit.



Terry O'Neill's images will be on exhibition through Getty Images Gallery in a pop-up gallery at Westfield, London from 7th July until 3rd August.

***

(CNN) -- The possibility of engine fires has prompted General Motors to recall nearly 1.5 million passenger sedans manufactured between 1997 and 2003, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration announced Monday.





The recall involves certain GM vehicles in which oil apparently can leak and ignite.





The recall covers certain mid- and full-size passenger sedans under GM's Chevrolet, Buick, Oldsmobile and Pontiac brands.





The affected vehicles have naturally aspirated 3.8 liter V6 engines -- that is, engines that use atmospheric pressure rather than a mechanical blower to bring in air for combustion -- according to documents that GM filed with federal regulators last week.





On Friday, the federal government acknowledged the filing and agreed to the plan.





The problem involves a potential for oil to leak on the exhaust manifold during hard braking. When a car operates under normal conditions, the manifold can get very hot.





Oil that runs below the manifold's heat shield could ignite and spread to plastic channels that hold spark plug wires.





As a solution, the company recommends a change in the bracket that holds spark plug wires, which will be done free of charge.





Owners and dealers affected by the recall will be notified by letter next month with details.





The vehicles involved are: • 1997-2003 Buick Regals. • 1998-2003 Chevrolet Luminas, Monte Carlos and Impalas. • 1998-1999 Oldsmobile Intrigues. • 1997-2003 Pontiac Grand Prix.





GM issued a recall on a similar engine in 2008, according to the company's filing with the government. That problem was traced to a faulty gasket on the engine rocker cover.

***

NEW DELHI, India (CNN) -- Police in India have charged 63 people with murder in the beating death of a company boss who fired them.



Labor minister Oscar Fernandes was criticized for saying Chaudhary's death was warning to management.



The 63 were among 137 people police had rounded up by Wednesday -- two days after a mob of fired employees attacked L.K. Chaudhary, the chief executive of an Italian car parts manufacturing company.



The others were charged with disturbing the peace in the Monday incident in Noida, located in the outskirts of the capital New Delhi.



More arrests are likely, said R. K. Chaturvedi, the senior superintendent of police in Noida.



The former employees of Graziano Transmissioni had gone to meet with company management over their reinstatement, said Noida police Inspector Manoj Pathak.



The meeting turned violent, and the mob attacked Chaudhary with iron rods, Pathak said.



On Tuesday, India's labor minister, Oscar Fernandes, drew sharp criticism after he said Chaudhary's death should serve as a warning to management, according to CNN's sister network in India, CNN-IBN.



"The workers should be dealt (with) with compassion and should not be pushed so hard that they resort to whatever that had happened in Nodia" CNN-IBN quoted Fernandes as telling reporters.



The minister later apologized, telling CNN his comments had been taken out of context. He said the murder of the boss could never be justified.



The Italian Embassy said the company had, for several months, been facing "violent forms of protest by self-proclaimed workers' representatives."



"The situation had been repeatedly brought to the attention of the competent Indian authorities, both at central and local level," it said in a statement.



Business groups condemned the killing with the Confederation of Indian Industry calling it "tragic, unwanted and gory."



"Such instances of industrial violence cannot be a solution to any problem and must not be tolerated," said Salil Singh, chairman of the group that promotes industrial growth.



Meanwhile, authorities sought to appease businesses that police were aggressively investigating the case.



"The legal course will be followed and all culprits brought to book," Commerce Minister Kamal Nath said. "This stray tragic occurrence would not be allowed to mar India's position as an investment-friendly destination."



CNN's Harmeet Shah Singh contributed to this report.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Britain's Home Office said Wednesday it is banning the military wing of Hezbollah, the Lebanese political movement, because of its support for "terrorism" in Iraq and the Palestinian territories.



Hezbollah fighters with the Shiite militia's yellow flags during ceremony for slain commander Imad Mughnieh.



Parliament must approve the order for it to become law.



The announcement would make it a crime to belong to or encourage support for Hezbollah's military wing. The order does not apply to Hezbollah's political or social activities.



"It sends out a clear message that we condemn Hezbollah's violence and support for terrorism," Home Office minister Tony McNulty said in a statement.



Britain's Terrorism Act allows Home Secretary Jacqui Smith to ban any group that she believes is involved in terrorism.



"Hezbollah's military wing is providing active support to militants in Iraq who are responsible for attacks both on coalition forces and on Iraqi civilians, including providing training in the use of deadly roadside bombs," McNulty said.



"Hezbollah's military wing also provides support to Palestinian terrorist groups in the occupied Palestinian territories, such as Palestinian Islamic Jihad."



British Prime Minister Gordon Brown said the ban came after "new evidence" of Hezbollah's involvement in terrorism in Iraq and the Palestinian territories. In the House of Commons, Brown called on Hezbollah to lay down its arms and participate in the Lebanese political process "on the same terms as other political parties."



Hezbollah is the largest Shiite Muslim political movement in Lebanon and maintains an armed force that fought a month-long war with Israel in 2006.



The group has been linked to numerous terrorist attacks against American, Israeli, and other Western targets and the United States lists it as a terrorist organization. But many in Lebanon and other parts of the Middle East, particularly Shiites, view Hezbollah militants as freedom fighters.

***

(CNN) -- Bayer Leverkusen moved to within three points of German Bundesliga leaders Bayern Munich after a comfortable 4-2 home victory over Hamburg on Sunday.



A double from Stefan Kiessling helped Leverkusen on their way to another three points, leaving them clear in third, a point behind second-placed Schalke, with the top three now pulling away in the race for the title with just eight games left.



Kiessling opened the scoring after running onto Tranquillo Barnetta's through-ball and out-pacing two defenders before firing past goalkeeper Frank Rost.



But Ze Roberto volleyed home a 33rd-minute equalizer for Hamburg after a defensive mix-up involving Sami Hyppia and goalkeeper Rene Adler.



Eren Derdiyok restored Leverkusen's lead in the 55th-minute when heading home Daniel Schwaab's ball into the box -- and Kiessling quickly added a third with a simple tap-in after some great work from Renato Augusto.



Czech defender David Rozehnal gave Hamburg some brief hope when converting an 83rd minute Piotr Trochowski free-kick but the victory was confirmed just a minute later when Gonzalo Casto fired home from just inside the area.



Meanwhile, in the day's other match, Claudio Pizarro scored his 11th league goal of the season to give Werder Bremen a 1-0 home win over Hoffenheim.



The Peruvian striker lobbed goalkeeper Timo Hildebrand with just nine minutes remaining to leave Werder sixth in the table, one point away from a place in Europe.

***

Mecca, Saudi Arabian (CNN) -- A teenager and three elderly people in Saudi Arabia for the hajj pilgrimage have died of the H1N1 flu virus, the Saudi Health Ministry said.



The victims of the virus were a 17-year-old Nigerian female and a Sudanese man, an Indian man and a Moroccan woman who each were 75 years old.



"These cases were discovered too late," said Dr. Khaled Al-Marghalani, the ministry spokesman. "Some were old, and the others had pre-existing chronic conditions."



Al-Marghalani said the Sudanese man initially went to a doctor who treated him, but not for H1N1.



"So when his doctor sent him to the hospital, and he was treated for H1N1, it was too late," he said.



The annual pilgrimage to Mecca, Saudi Arabia, is required of Muslims at least once in their lives, and millions of people around the globe make the trek to attend. This year, the hajj begins Wednesday, and many pilgrims have been arriving days and weeks ahead of the event, which coincides with flu season.



When Arab health ministers met in Cairo, Egypt, a few months back, it looked like several groups might even be banned from this year's event because of the flu. They were children under 12, adults over 65, pregnant women and people with chronic illnesses.



The Saudis didn't ban anybody from coming and left the responsibility to the pilgrims' countries of origin. In effect, officials issued guidelines only for people at risk.



Two days ago, Saudi Arabia's health minister, Dr. Abdullah Al-Rabeeah, gathered representatives to discuss efforts to detect the ailment.



"It would be nice to have more time to prepare [for the possibility of H1N1 spreading in Saudi Arabia] ahead of the hajj, but I am very satisfied with all the measures taken and have great confidence," he said before the meeting.



Al-Marghalani said the "safe weapon" for the kinds of H1N1 cases that resulted in the deaths is Tamiflu, the drug used to fight influenza.



"If we lose Tamiflu, we will lose the war. But Tamiflu is only effective in the first 48 hours of when the symptoms appear," he said.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN)  -- The U.S. Army intentionally denied benefits to soldiers suffering from a widespread stress disorder after they returned from service in Iraq and Afghanistan, a veterans advocacy group charges in a suit filed Wednesday.

A soldier is welcomed home from Iraq by his son at Fort Stewart, Georgia, earlier this month.

The lawsuit, filed by the National Veterans Legal Services Program, accuses the Army of illegally cutting off benefits to thousands of veterans and their families by refusing to assign a proper disability rating to those veterans after they had been discharged with a diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).

As a result, the veterans have been denied benefits, including, among other things, lifetime monthly disability payments and free medical care for  themselves and their families.

"I experience firsthand the horrors of war" said Juan Perez, an Iraq veteran and one of five plaintiffs in the lawsuit. "My expectation was that the military would be there for me, and my country would be there for me. Instead, the way I was treated felt more like a slap to the face."

All disabled veterans are assigned a disability rating from zero to 100 percent. According to the Legal Services Program, a rating of at least 30 percent is required to qualify for benefits such as monthly disability payments and free health care.

Soldiers receiving less than a 30 percent rating are  entitled only to a one-time lump sum severance payment after being discharged.

On October 14, the Defense Department ordered the Army to assign at least a 50 percent rating to all soldiers discharged with PTSD in the future.

The lawsuit seeks to provide full benefits to all veterans discharged with PTSD in the past six years.

A Rand Corp. study released in April indicated that nearly 20 percent of all military service members returning from Iraq and Afghanistan have reported symptoms of PTSD or major depression.

***

ORLANDO, Florida (CNN) -- Prosecutors will not seek the death penalty for a Florida woman charged with killing her missing 3-year-old daughter, according to court documents filed Friday.

Casey Anthony has been charged in an indictment with the premediated murder of daughter Caylee.

"It is not in the best interest of the people of the state of Florida to pursue the death penalty as a potential sentence," prosecutors concluded, according to the document.

"Therefore, the state of Florida will not be seeking the death penalty as to Casey Marie Anthony."

Anthony, 22, is charged with killing her daughter, Caylee Anthony, in a case that has received national attention. She was arrested last month and faces charges including first-degree murder in the disappearance of Caylee, who has been missing since June.  Watch newly released jailhouse tapes Â»

She could face a sentence of up to life in prison.

Anthony waited about a month before telling her family that Caylee was gone. Cindy Anthony -- Caylee's grandmother and Casey Anthony's mother -- called the Orange County, Florida, sheriff July 15, saying her daughter would not tell her where Caylee was.

When questioned, Anthony gave conflicting statements to police, including some that were later disproved, according to hundreds of documents and investigative reports released in the case.

She claimed she dropped Caylee off with a baby sitter, but when police checked out her story, they learned that the address Anthony supplied belonged to an apartment that had been vacant for weeks. The woman Anthony named as her baby sitter told police she did not know her.

Investigators previously have said cadaver dogs picked up the scent of death in Anthony's car, as well as in her parents' backyard. They also said air quality tests conducted by the FBI found evidence consistent with human decomposition and chloroform in the trunk of Anthony's car.

A neighbor told police that Anthony had asked to borrow a shovel. Also, analysis of Anthony's computer found she had visited Web sites discussing chloroform, as well as Internet searches of missing children, according to information released in the case.

Last month, Florida 9th Circuit Judge Stan Strickland denied prosecutors' request to impose a gag order in Anthony's case, saying he could not state that continued publicity would pose a threat to her trial, or even that a gag order would stem the flood of media attention.

CNN's Rich Phillips contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Liverpool are waiting to learn the extent of the injury which prevented captain Steven Gerrard playing in the club's 2-0 win at West Bromwich Albion on Saturday, manager Kenny Dalglish has said.





England international Gerrard, 31, missed the match after picking up an infection in his right ankle, having only recently recovered from a groin injury which has restricted the midfielder to just four English Premier League appearances this season.





Dalglish also faced questions on the fitness of former England defender Jamie Carragher, who was ruled out of the match at the Hawthorns with a calf strain.





"Carragher has a calf strain. Steven Gerrard has an infection in his ankle," Dalglish, 60, told a press conference. "Steven was in my mind for the game today but it just flared up.





"We are off tomorrow, so we'll have a more accurate idea on Monday or Tuesday when we return to training. We will be more accurate next week than what we can be now."





Dalglish, who also managed the Anfield club between 1985 and 1991, praised the injured duo, while also expressing his delight at seeing his charges pick up three points without two of the team's most influential players.





"We are certainly much better with them in the squad than out of it," he said. "They have done magnificently for this football club and they will continue to do magnificently for us too.





"They will continue to make a contribution, even now. I suppose it is a reflection on the strength of the squad when the two talisman figures are not playing and you still come and put on such a top performance."





Gerrard and Carragher are products of the Liverpool youth academy, with both players part of the team which earned a penalty shoot-out victory over Italian side AC Milan in the 2005 European Champions League final.





Dalglish will hope to have the duo available for the home match against Swansea City on Saturday.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- You don't want to monkey around on a blind date, especially if your friends are also taking an interest in the same dark, handsome stranger.



Jookie, as she is known, studies a poster of French gorilla Yeboah, who is heading for London Zoo.



So when three female gorillas at London Zoo heard that they would soon be visited by a brooding French hunk -- well, they went a bit bananas.



The latest development in Anglo-French relations sees Yeboah, a 20-stone 12-year-old, leave his current home at La Boissiere Du Dore Zoo, Pays de la Loire, northwest France and head for the British capital by the end of the year.



There he will be greeted by gorilla trio Zaire, Effie and Mjukuu, who were given posters of their prospective boyfriend for the first time Thursday.



One female gorilla shrieked in delight, while another wedged the poster in a tree to stare at it.



A third, clearly overcome by emotion, held the photo close to her chest -- then ate it.



Their reception was somewhat unsurprising. The zoo has been without a male gorilla since the demise of Bobby, a silverback, in December.  Tracey Lee, team leader at London Zoo, put in a good word for the hirsute lothario on the London Zoo Web site, saying Yeboah is "a very charming, fun loving and intelligent gorilla."



But whom will Yeboah choose to charm first?



Zaire, at 34, is the oldest female gorilla and has been at London Zoo since 1984. The zoo says she's "happiest when she's taking down and rebuilding her nest in various spots around the island. She loves to play with fabric and often drags it around with her all day. "



Then there's Effie, 16, who "enjoys seeing toddlers and often makes her way over to the glass when they come to see her," according to the zoo Web site.   Finally there's 10-year-old Mjukuu, or "Jookie." Dan Simmonds, a keeper at the zoo's Gorilla Kingdom, says she "has this 'butter wouldn't melt look' to her, and she gets away with murder."  "The other two females get along with her very well; she seems to have them all wrapped around her little finger."



Bridget Fallon contributed to this story.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- With the election of the next president a year away, Sen. Hillary Clinton remains the person to beat, a CNN/Opinion Research Corporation poll released Monday suggests.

As the countdown begins to November 4, 2008, the New York Democrat continues to dominate the race for the Democratic presidential nomination, and comes out ahead when voters are asked whether they prefer her or the GOP front-runner, former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani.

But Clinton's path to the White House is in no way certain. Clinton was criticized for her performance during a debate last week, and her rivals for the Democratic nomination have stepped up attacks that she has equivocated on her position on Iraq, Iran and other major issues.

The Republican presidential candidates have also stepped up their attacks on the Democratic front-runner, with each suggesting that he has the best chance of stopping Clinton.

The attacks may be working. The CNN/Opinion Research polls suggests that Clinton's support has slipped from its height one month ago.  Watch CNN's Bill Schneider on the latest poll numbers »

"Clinton's strength is about where it was throughout the summer, indicating that she has lost the support she gained last month but that Obama has not yet cut into her core constituency," CNN political director Keating Holland said.

Clinton is the top choice of 44 percent of the likely Democratic voters interviewed for the poll. Her closest rival, Sen. Barack Obama of Illinois, was the top choice of 25 percent, and former Sen. John Edwards of North Carolina has 14 percent.

All other Democratic candidates were in single digits. New Mexico Gov. Bill Richardson was backed by 4 percent, Sen. Joe Biden of Delaware by 3 percent, Sen. Christopher Dodd by 2 percent, Ohio Rep. Dennis Kucinich by 2 percent and former Alaska Sen. Mike Gravel was at 1 percent.

The poll involved 467 interviews conducted on November 2-4 with Democrats or independents who lean Democratic. The poll's margin of error was plus or minus 4.5 percentage points.  View the poll results »

In an October CNN/Opinion Research poll, Clinton was supported by 51 percent of Democratic voters and had a 30 point lead over Obama.

During last week's Democratic debate, Clinton received heavy criticism from her fellow Democratic presidential rivals, who are desperate to shake up the presidential race just months before the first voting occurs in the Iowa Caucus in early January.

Edwards was particularly aggressive during the debate, criticizing Clinton for her stance on Iraq, Iran and Social Security.

"The American people ... deserve a president of the United States that they know will tell them the truth and won't say one thing one time and something different at a different time," Edwards said.

Edwards has also accused Clinton of being a "corporate Democrat" too willing to defend a "corrupt" Washington establishement.

"We desperately need in the next president someone that recognizes we have a system in Washington that's become broken, corruption has crept into it, and we have to tell the truth about that," Edwards said Monday. "If you defend that system, I don't believe you can bring about the change that America needs."

In the Republican presidential race, Giuliani continues to be the leading candidate, with the backing of 28 percent of the Republican primary voters polled. Former Sen. Fred Thompson of Tennessee was backed by 19 percent. Sen. John McCain of Arizona was the top pick of 16 percent, and former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney had 11 percent.

Of the remaining Republican candidates, former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee received 10 percent, Texas Rep. Ron Paul 5 percent, California Rep. Duncan Hunter 4 percent and Colorado Rep. Tom Tancredo 3 percent.

The poll involved telephone interviews with 397 Republicans or independents who lean Republican. The poll's margin of error was 5 percentage points.

In a head-to-head matchup of the two front-runners, Clinton leads Giuliani 51 percent to 45 percent. That lead has increased since October, when Clinton led Giuliani 49 percent to 47 percent.

"The overall political environment seems

***

DENVER, Colorado -- A Colorado man terrorized by threats after testifying against his daughter's abusive boyfriend says he has spent $10,000 on a security system, hired a bodyguard for his son's wedding and never leaves home without a .45-caliber handgun strapped to his chest.

Keith Reynolds was convicted for witness intimidation after threatening witnesses in his domestic assault case.

The man, who asked not to be identified because of the sensitivity of the case, says the state did nothing to protect him after the 1999 conviction of Keith Reynolds for domestic abuse -- even after prosecutors told him a hit had been put on his family.

A report in the Denver Post pointed out major problems protecting witnesses in the state of Colorado. Paul Logli, chairman of National District Attorneys Association, told Congress this year that witness intimidation has become "almost epidemic," according to the Denver Post.

When asked if prosecutors had made the family aware of Colorado's witness protection program, the witness in the Reynolds case said, "All they told us was maybe we should move."

"I'm pretty sure I told one of them -- either him or his wife -- about the program. I can't remember if I gave them all the details." the prosecutor assigned to the case, who didn't want to be named, told CNN.

After Reynolds' conviction, the witness and his wife saw strange cars parked outside their home. They received phone calls during which the only sound on the other end of the line was a gun being cocked. The couple received a death threat from Reynolds himself through the mail. Watch witness describe fear of being targeted »

Reynolds was then sentenced to ten years in a maximum security prison for witness intimidation. However, it is likely he'll be released within five years.

No national statistics on crimes against witnesses exist, and minimal research has been conducted on the subject. The latest National Institute of Justice survey on record -- conducted more than a decade ago -- shows that more than half of big city prosecutors consider witness intimidation a major problem.

Colorado has $50,000 allocated to its witness protection budget. In contrast, the city of Denver spent almost $100,000 on landscaping last year.

The state, on average, spends about $1,000 per witness. That figure supposedly includes moving expenses, rent, and furniture. The federal program spends in excess of $40 million per year on witness protection.

One possible reason for the disparity is that witnesses in state cases do not get new identities, as do federal witnesses. "It's not designed to be a long-term relocation at the public's expense; it's a way to ensure the immediate safety of the witnesses," according to Peter Weir, executive director of the Colorado Department of Public Safety.

Colorado's witness protection program is a "joke," according to The Rev. Leon Kelly, founder and executive director of the Open Door Youth Gang Alternatives.

Kelly says the state doesn't provide enough incentive for witnesses to come forward. More than a decade ago, a young man named Darryl Givens asked Kelly for advice while deciding whether to testify in a murder case or face prison. Givens chose to testify. A few months later, he was shot twice in the head by men he considered friends. That day continues to haunt Kelly.

Rhonda Fields says failures in the witness protection program may have contributed to her son's murder. Javad Fields was a college graduate who was engaged to be married. He had plans to move east when a Fourth of July barbecue in 2004 in changed all that. He witnessed the murder of his best friend and subsequently testified against three men suspected in the killing.

Javad Fields and his fiancee were gunned down while driving along a suburban street in Aurora, Colorado. The couple, both 22, died instantly.

Rhonda Fields says her son was never told about a witness protection program. She confronted prosecutors after his murder. Fields told CNN, "I asked them what happened. Why weren't any measures taken to safeguard his life? And I was told he never asked for

***

(CNN) -- Next time a friend of yours calls up asking for their spare key, they may be looking for a Facebook password.





On Thursday, Facebook began testing a tool called Trusted Friends. It lets a user specify between three and five pals on the social network (no more, no less) who can be counted on to pass along a special code if the user somehow gets locked out of his or her account.





It's essentially another way to regain access to your Facebook page if you forget your password. The option will show up on the "account settings" page for some of Facebook's 800 million users during the next few weeks, the company said in a statement.





When someone who has enabled the feature is unable to login using the normal means, they can click "forgot my password" and request that keys be sent to their specified friends via Facebook message. The user must then retrieve all the codes, or keys, and enter them into fields on Facebook's password-recovery page to log back in, a Facebook spokeswoman said in an e-mail.





This makes the process sort of like a scavenger hunt, although one with a less-than-exciting reward.





The Trusted Friends feature will not be mandatory. It joins other account-recovery features such as the ubiquitous "forgot my password" and security questions, as well as less conventional methods, like identifying friends' faces in pictures or recovering passwords via text message.





Facebook also began testing another security feature on Thursday for setting different passwords on each site that takes Facebook credentials.

***

(CNN)  -- Hours after a security breach forced the closure of a terminal at the Newark, New Jersey, airport Sunday, authorities were still searching for a man who went the wrong way through a checkpoint exit.





The incident happened at about 5:20 p.m. at Terminal C, when an individual walked from the public side to the secure "sterile" side for passengers who had cleared screening, according to the Transportation Security Administration.





No flights were allowed to leave from Terminal C Sunday evening and thousands of other travelers who had reached the sterile area after going through checkpoints were moved back to the public area to be re-screened, the TSA said.





Authorities are reviewing video from airport cameras. They are not sure whether the man was once on the sterile side and went back, or if he never went through screening, TSA spokeswoman Anne Davis said.





Watch more about the situation in Newark





The incident caused arrival delays and mainly affected  Continental Airlines, which is the airport's largest tenant.





CNN's Alina Cho, who arrived at the airport Saturday night on a flight from Fort Lauderdale, Florida, described the hectic scene: "For the people who are hoping to fly out of Newark this evening, there is not a lot of movement."





She said many passengers who had already boarded outgoing flights had to get off planes to be re-screened.





"I just saw one woman pleading with a gate agent, saying that she had two small children and a heart condition -- that she simply could not take this," Cho said. "But of course, there will be no exceptions."





Flying Continental? Important company notice





Newark Liberty International Airport, which is about 15 miles from Manhattan, is the second-largest hub for Continental.





The airport handles about 35 million passengers a year.





CNN's Susan Candiotti and Ross Levitt contributed to this report.

***

London, England (CNN) -- The fashion brand created by Alexander McQueen is to survive despite the designer's suicide last week, the label's majority stakeholder Gucci Group has confirmed.





"I believe strongly in the Alexander McQueen brand and its future," Gucci Group CEO Robert Polet said in a statement carried on the Web site of Gucci parent PPR.





The future of McQueen's 11-store, 180 employee fashion house had been uncertain following the 40-year-old's death, with industry experts speculating it was not successful enough to endure without its figurehead.





PPR on Thursday revealed a company-wide net profit rise of 6.9 percent to €984.6 million ($1,328 million) but a 4 percent revenue fall to €16.52 billion. It did not break down figures to reveal McQueen's turnover, but reports speculate the brand is running at a loss despite heavy celebrity endorsements.





The Times of London reported on Thursday that the label had struggled to make a profit and analysis of recent accounts showed it had liabilities of more than £32 million ($49 million).





PPR boss Francois-Henri Pinault said in a statement: "Lee Alexander [McQueen] was a pure genius and a poet who was imaginative and original. His art went beyond the fashion world. The Alexander McQueen trademark will live on. This is the best tribute that we could offer to Lee."





McQueen's death last week shocked the world of fashion, with many in the industry paying tribute to a man they described as a unique talent capable of becoming a major name.





A coroner on Wednesday said McQueen hanged himself in his wardrobe and left a suicide note





McQueen, who had dressed stars from Sarah Jessica Parker and Nicole Kidman to Rihanna and Sandra Bullock, killed himself nine days after the death of his mother. He expressed his devastation at her death on his Twitter account days before he died.





McQueen was born in 1970 in London's East End, the son of a taxi driver and trained in London's Savile Row, going on to study fashion at college before making his name with his own extravagant designs.





French luxury brand Gucci Group acquired a 51 percent stake in McQueen in 2001.

***

(CNN) -- The America's Cup is the oldest sporting trophy in the world, first held in 1851, forty-five years before the incarnation of the modern Olympic Games.



The "Auld Mug" as it is known in the sport of sailing has attracted some of the world's most powerful men to create teams and invest millions to try and get their hands on the trophy.



This month on MainSail, Shirley Robertson takes the viewer inside the world of the America's Cup, looking back to when it all started and meeting some of the major names associated with the Cup. This includes the two most successful skippers ever to compete, America's Dennis Connor and New Zealand's Russell Coutts.



She also has an exclusive one to one with U.S. billionaire Larry Ellison, the man in charge of the American team, BMW Oracle Racing, who is plotting and planning how to bring the Cup back to the U.S., the nation that won every edition of the Cup from 1851 to 1983.



The next America's Cup final is scheduled to be held in 2010, with Ellison and his team taking on the Defenders of the Cup, European team Alinghi. But this Cup has been a battle in the New York courts and all teams who want to compete have been locked out of the game until the head-to-head between the U.S. and Europe has been settled -- a compelling story even before the first match between the two teams has been held.



When the first match takes place, it will be in the two fastest, most extreme boats ever to have competed in the America's Cup. Having already sailed the European Alinghi entry, Shirley Robertson becomes the first person in the world to have sailed both boats, as she joins the BMW Oracle Racing team in San Diego on board their spectacular multihull, and heads out for a Pacific Ocean training session.

***

NEW DELHI, India (CNN) --   Lorna Irungu sits on a hospital bed looking extremely frail. She has lupus and her kidneys continue to fail.



Lorna Irungu, 35, had to travel from Kenya to India to receive her third kidney transplant.



"At some point I just wanted it to be over," said Irungu, 35. "I was just tired. I was really, really tired of the fighting, of the struggling, of being sick."



But Irungu did decide to fight, with the help of a very giving family. Three times she has needed a kidney transplant, and three times her family members insisted on donating. First her father donated, then her sister, and then her brother.



Irungu says what she couldn't find was a doctor who would do the tricky third transplant in her own country of Kenya. When she checked in neighboring countries, the cost was impossibly high. Irungu, who's single and has no children, has no insurance. So the former television host was paying for the surgery and medicines out of her own pocket.



"When we looked at the price of getting things done in South Africa. I'm like, 'We're never gonna get there.' It's $45,000. Where do I even begin?"



The cost of a kidney transplant in the United States can be $25,000 to $150,000, also out of Irungu's price range.  Watch more on Lorna Irungu's odyssey »



So she began looking elsewhere, sending out e-mails and making phone calls to hospitals in other countries. Doctors at Fortis Hospital in New Delhi, India, were the only ones who responded to her somewhat complicated case.



Dr. Vijay Kher, the hospital's director of nephrology, first talked to Irungu by phone.



"When she called me from Kenya, she was very sick," Kher said. "She had uncontrolled blood pressures, and she was having fever. She had been in ICU for about three weeks."



But Irungu made it to India. Once her condition was stabilized, doctors performed the third transplant, which is a rare operation in India.



Of the 1,500 kidney transplants performed at Fortis Hospital, doctors remember having done only two in which the patient was having a third transplant.



Doctors had to remove one of the previously transplanted kidneys to make room for the new kidney, Kher said. Doctors said it was unnecessary to remove the three other kidneys because they were not causing harm and they didn't want to subject her to more surgery than was necessary.



Even with the complications that can arise during a third transplant, the cost of it and the weeklong hospital stay in India came to about $8,000. It's a fraction of the price she was quoted elsewhere, as is the cost of the post-transplant medication.



"This last surgery, I keep saying, has been remarkable." Irungu said. "I haven't felt as good post transplant as I did this time around."



After three months in India, Irungu is leaving with four kidneys inside her. Irungu says for now the newly transplanted kidney seems to be working great.



"From my experience, the cost here and the quality of care is worth it," Irungu said. "It's worth it because instead of you sitting wherever you are, thinking, 'This is the end for me,' or just getting depressed or getting into this struggle,  (you can) just pack up and go."

***

(CNN) -- The U.S. Navy has captured seven suspected pirates in the Gulf of Aden, the first arrests by a U.S.-led task force set up to curb rampant piracy off the Horn of Africa, a Navy spokesman said Wednesday.



Seven men suspected of trying to pirate a tanker raise their hands before their arrest in the Gulf of Aden.



Sailors from the cruiser USS Vella Gulf arrested the men Wednesday in the western Gulf of Aden -- a waterway between Africa and the Middle East -- after a distress call from the 420-foot (128-meter) tanker Polaris.



The tanker reported that men aboard a small skiff were attempting to board the ship using ladders, but its crew removed them before the would-be hijackers could get aboard, the Navy said.



The Vella Gulf found and boarded the skiff, and the tanker's crew identified the men aboard the skiff as their would-be hijackers.



The skiff's men were taken aboard the Vella Gulf, the flagship of the task force now patrolling the western Gulf of Aden, and eventually will be transferred to Kenya for trial, said Lt. Nate Christensen, a spokesman for the U.S. 5th Fleet.



Piracy has become a chronic problem off the Horn of Africa in recent years, with some pirates operating from largely lawless Somalia. Pirates attacked nearly 100 vessels and hijacked as many as 40 in the waters off the coast of Somalia in 2008, according to the International Maritime Bureau.



The task force led by the Vella Gulf was set up in January in an effort to clamp down on the attacks in the region, the southern approach to the Red Sea and the Suez Canal.

***

Paris (CNN) -- A judge placed France's richest woman, L'Oreal heiress Liliane Bettencourt, under the guardianship of her grandson on Monday, her lawyer said.





Bertrand Favreau, one of Bettencourt's lawyers, said Jean-Victor Meyers, the eldest grandson of the 88 year-old woman, has been designated her guardian.





"It is a very disappointing decision that's for sure. It will be hard for me to tell her this decision because it will be unbearable for her," Favreau said.





Last year, Bettencourt's daughter, Francoise Bettencourt-Meyers, declared in court that her mother was not mentally competent to handle her own affairs.





Bettencourt-Meyers accused a photographer of bilking her mother out of a billion euros. Bettencourt was friends with the photographer, Francois-Marie Banier, and allegedly gave him the money. The daughter took the case to court in an effort to recover the funds. She later dropped the suit.





In a statement Monday, Bettencourt-Meyers and her two sons, Jean-Victor and Nicolas, acknowledged the ruling.





"Their action has always been guided by the sole wish to see their mother and grandmother truly protected," the statement said of the three. "It is a great relief for them today that (the judge) has recognized their position."





In an interview published Sunday in France's Journal du Dimanche, Bettencourt said she was worried about the judge's decision on Monday.





"I'm trembling, all I can do is pray. Do you think the judge will agree with my daughter?" said Bettencourt in the interview. "I'm not going to sleep well tonight. I have a feeling I'm going to be squashed."





Favreau plans to consult with Bettencourt on appealing the ruling and ask that its enforcement be suspended.





CNN's James Partington contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Michael Jackson's sudden death has thrown the peculiar path of his later life back into the spotlight.



Michael Jackson spent 11 months living in Bahrain after his acquittal on child abuse charges in the U.S.



He spent much of the past four years flitting from one part of the globe to another, failing to put down permanent roots.



However, one of his longest spells in one place was spent in Bahrain.



When his life was falling apart at the seams in 2005 he was offered sanctuary in the Persian Gulf kingdom.



He had been just been acquitted of 10 child abuse charges at the end of a 14-week trial in the U.S., but there appeared to be no respite from the bad publicity and his spiraling debts which had forced the sale of his Neverland ranch.



He suffered health problems during the trial and appeared increasingly frail. Jackson, who died owing an estimated $500 million, had been living beyond his means for years and wanted to flee the spotlight.



He had not been seen in the two weeks after the trial before reports emerged from Bahrain that he and his children had landed there on a private jet as the guests of Sheikh Abdulla Bin Hamad Bin Isa Al-Khalifa, the king's son, and a friend of Jackson's brother, Jermaine.



It was claimed at the time that Jackson had a large fan base in the kingdom and wider Gulf region.  Watch why Jackson is "as big as it gets" »



Indeed Bahrain, a chain of around 30 islands with a population of 766,000 and relaxed social social environment, appeared the perfect escape -- for 11 months anyway.



It was made even more enticing by Sheikh Abdulla's generosity.



In 2008 he sued Jackson in a Britain's High Court for £4.7 million ($7.7 million), claiming the pop star had reneged on a music contract.



Sheikh Abdulla said he had paid all of Jackson's living, travel and other expenses until his departure from Bahrain in May 2006, and advanced funds to retain legal and financial advisers.  Watch Jesse Jackson share memories »



Sheikh Abdulla also built a recording studio, which he believed would be used to record albums using material he had helped to write.



However, he claimed the singer pulled out of the deal in May 2006 after 11 months. iReport.com: Your Michael Jackson tributes



Jackson claimed the payments were gifts.



In November last year the High Court in London was told the dispute had ended with an "amicable settlement," the details of which remain confidential.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- President Obama and Iraqi Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki voiced cautious optimism regarding the situation in Iraq Wednesday, noting greater stability and decreased violence as U.S. troops continue to cede control to their Iraqi counterparts.



President Obama and Iraqi Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki talk Wednesday at the White House.



"I have no doubt that there will be some tough days ahead," Obama said during a joint appearance of the leaders at the White House.



"There are still those who want to foment sectarian conflict. ... But make no mistake, those efforts will fail," he added.



The president said he is committed to moving forward with a pledge to remove all American combat brigades from Iraq by the end of August 2010, as well as all U.S. troops by the end of 2011.



Al-Maliki promised the Iraqi government would step up its efforts to prevent a return of widespread sectarian violence.



"Those who thought that the Iraqi forces [would] be incapable of imposing peace and security [have been] proved to be wrong," he said.  Watch al-Maliki speak about "strategic friendship" with U.S. »



In addition to meeting with Obama, al-Maliki is scheduled to sit down with Vice President Joe Biden. He will also meet with the secretaries of State, Defense and Treasury, and with House Speaker Nancy Pelosi.



Some foreign policy experts have expressed concern that as the United States pivots from Iraq to Afghanistan, Iraq and its problems will be ignored.



Responding to that criticism, one senior administration official said this week, "Our goal is, in fact as we formalize the relationship, to concentrate on other areas," but he suggested that Iraq would remain a U.S. priority.



Hours before the two leaders met, at least five Iranian pilgrims were killed and dozens more wounded earlier Wednesday in an attack northeast of Baghdad.



The violence came a day after a spate of bombings left at least 22 Iraqis dead and about 150 wounded.



CNN's Jomana Karadsheh and Dan Lothian contributed to this report.

***

KABUL, Afghanistan (CNN) -- A Taliban leader has instructed fighters in Afghanistan to target U.S. and other coalition troops in response to the United States sending more troops into the war.



U.S. Army soldiers, right, watch two Afghan soldiers at ISAF's Camp Bostick in the eastern Kunar province.



A two-page statement sent to CNN instructs fighters to start new attacks against coalition troops and Afghan parliament members, and urges suicide bombers to strike.



The statement was written by Mula Birather, a Taliban chief of at least 12 military groups in Afghanistan.



Taliban spokesman Zabihullah Mujahid confirmed to CNN that the statement came from Birather.



The statement also warned Afghans to not get "near U.S. troops anywhere because we will target them any where they are and if anybody is killed in a attack on them we will not be responsible for their death."



The statement comes as U.S. troops begin increased deployments in Afghanistan. President Barack Obama approved sending 4,000 additional troops to Afghanistan in March and pledged to send 17,000 more.



Col. Greg Julian, a spokesman for U.S. Forces-Afghanistan, responded to the statement.



"The Taliban extremists are promising to bring more death and destruction to Afghanistan and limit the freedom of movement of all Afghans," Julian said.



"They offer no hope for the future, and only seek to kill... We will continue working side-by-side with our Afghan partners to improve security and demonstrate to these ruthless murders and criminals that they will not stop progress in Afghanistan."



Meanwhile across the border in Pakistan, the country's military intensified its drive against the Taliban in the country's restive tribal regions, reclaiming a key town in the northwest district of Buner.



CNN's Nic Robertson and Atia Abawi contributed to this report.

***

(CNN)  -- Canada announced Wednesday that it will dispatch a warship to Somalia's coast to protect U.N. aid ships from pirate attacks.



The Canadian frigate HMCS Ville de Quebec will escort ships carrying food aid to Somalia.



"Canada is stepping up to the plate by tasking Ville de Quebec with the role of escorting World Food Programme ships to ensure their safe arrival at designated ports," Canadian Defense Minister Peter MacKay said in a government news release.



The United Nations hunger program praised Canada for answering its call for help, and said it hoped other governments would step forward to take over from Canada once it completes its mission in a few weeks.



The HMCS Ville de Quebec is a 440-foot frigate armed with torpedoes, surface-to-air missiles and other weapons, and carries a twin-engine Sea King anti-submarine helicopter.



Ville de Quebec, which can travel at speeds greater than 27 knots, will be dispatched after Somalia's transitional government formally authorizes the mission, the government's news release said.



WFP asked the world's naval powers in mid-June to help its ships reach the more than 2 million people in need of aid. It put out the request weeks before French, Danish and Dutch warships ended their escort missions, which began in November.



Pirate attacks on unescorted ships have been a growing problem in Somalia. Three European freighters were hijacked off the Horn of Africa in June, adding to the 27 other reported attacks this year, according to the International Maritime Bureau, which tracks piracy.



WFP delivers 80 percent of its aid to Somalia by sea, and WFP spokesman Peter Smerdon said that if there are no warships to escort the food supply, the program will have to rely on ground or air travel to deliver the food. But both are dangerous and expensive.



The agency said that if there is no assistance from naval powers, piracy will increase, and so will death and malnutrition.



Smerdon said that although Somalia's food crisis hasn't yet reached the devastation of the early 1990s, "We're worried it will be."

***

Marjah, Afghanistan (CNN) -- U.S. Marines fighting the Taliban in southern Afghanistan achieved a main objective Tuesday -- taking over the police headquarters in the center of the Taliban stronghold of Marjah.





CNN correspondent Atia Abawi, embedded with the Marines, said troops didn't receive any resistance when they took the station, but gun battles broke out in the area a few hours later.





There was an engagement for 15 to 20 minutes, with constant gunfire coming from different directions, and there have been "sporadic battles," Abawi said.





Unlike previous days, there was fighting in the evening, with Taliban militants trying to attack Marine locations with small arms and rocket-propelled grenades. One of the grenades hit close to one of the U.S. positions and a fire broke out.





About 15,000 Afghan and NATO forces are taking part in Operation Moshtarak, which focuses on the town of Marjah and surrounding areas in Helmand province. Set in a region known as the country's heroin capital, Marjah is where the Taliban established a shadow government.





The military says the goal of Operation Moshtarak is to provide security, governance and development, and authorities hope fighters choose to reject the insurgency and join the government's reintegration process.





Clearing out poppy fields is a key part of the push, the biggest since the Afghanistan War started in 2001. The Taliban finances its activities in part through the illegal opium trade.





One of the biggest challenges facing the NATO mission in Afghanistan is attacking the Taliban while limiting civilian casualties. On Sunday, 12 civilians died in a rocket attack by coalition troops. Three other Afghan civilians were killed by NATO in separate incidents on Sunday and Monday.





On Tuesday, Abawi spoke to one civilian whose property had been destroyed in the initial push by Marines. Despite that, he said he was happy to see Americans arrive and noted that Marines promised to pay for the damages to his home.





He said Afghans have suffered under the Taliban, who he said had beheaded some people and forced their way into people's homes for food.

***

BUENOS AIRES, Argentina (CNN) -- More than 10,000 charred bone fragments were found buried at the site of a former Argentine government detention center, the first find of its kind at one of the secret centers, Argentine officials said.

Bones were unearthed during a seven-month search at an ex-detention post in La Plata, Argentina, officials said.

Searchers said they also found a wall with more than 200 bullet holes and an "important quantity" of spent ammunition shells on the ground nearby. In some cases, bullets were still lodged in the wall.

The announcement was made Tuesday at a news conference by government officials and representatives of the Argentine Forensic Anthropology Team, better known as EAAF, the initials of its name in Spanish.

A team of six professional anthropologists and support crew said it believed the remains were human, but it was unable to determine how many bodies the fragments represented.

"I ask the forgiveness of family members, because I can imagine what the mothers and all who are gathered here will feel, but what we are about to show is not to detail the genocide but so that we have proof for the trials that are to come," said Sara Derotier de Cobacho, secretary of human rights for Buenos Aires province.

"But let us not forget," she said in a statement, "that behind every clandestine center there were the names of the repressors. ... So it is very important for all citizens to know those names."

The detention center was among those used in Argentina during the country's "Dirty War," which started in 1976 when a group of generals staged a coup and started a vicious crackdown against anyone considered a subversive.

By the time civilian control of the government resumed in 1983, up to 30,000 Argentines had been abducted and taken to the secret government detention centers, where they were tortured and killed. They are widely called "los desaparecidos," or "the disappeared."

Thousands more people were abducted and killed by right-wing dictatorships in other South American countries during the 1970s and 1980s, particularly in Chile and Uruguay.

The bone fragments in Argentina were unearthed during a seven-month search at the former detention post in the city of La Plata, near Buenos Aires.

In 25 years of searching, this was the first time that human remains were found at a former detention center, said Luis Fondebrider, president of the EAAF.

"We've worked throughout the country and have always found remains in cemeteries, never outside," Fondebrider said in the release.

The conference was called, he said, because of the extraordinary nature of the find.

"We usually don't hold press conferences about our work or what we find," Fondebrider said. "But we understand that the magnitude of what we have found where the Clandestine Center of Arana was located merits that sometimes we show partial results."

The searchers determined that bodies had been burned inside graves along with tires, combustibles and other material, Fondebrider said.

"The possibilities of identifying some of these remains is low because of the state they are in," Fondebrider said.

The searchers will start analyzing the remains next year and are working with two prominent forensic genetic laboratories that specialize in working with remains that are in poor condition, he said.

Lending an official air to Tuesday's proceedings, Carlos Stornelli, minister of security for the province of Buenos Aires, and Pablo Buruera, mayor of La Plata, also attended the news conference.

"We are looking for the truth so we can attain justice and construct, from there, the memory of our 30,000 'desaparecidos,' " Derotier said.

***

Tehran, Iran (CNN) -- The office of a reformist Iranian member of parliament burned Tuesday night, and a reformist Web site said the act was the work of extremists.



Mir Hossein Moussavi, an opposition candidate in the disputed June 12 presidential election, blamed the fire at the office of Nasrollah Torabi on plainclothes militia on Moussavi's Facebook Web site, where he also posted photos.



The photos showed heavy damage, with charred furniture, peeling wallpaper and floors strewn with broken glass, debris and ashes.



Parleman News, a newsgathering organization for the Path of the Imam Khomeini faction of parliament, said the office was vandalized before it was torched. Khomeini was the leader of the 1979 Islamic Revolution in Iran.



Torabi, who represents the southwestern province of Cahar-Mahal Bakhtiari in parliament, told Parleman News that he was awaiting the outcome of an investigation. The office is in the city of Shahr-e Kurd.



Torabi urged people not to react to the incident, according to Parleman News. He said intelligence agencies and the Interior Ministry must investigate the fire and punish those responsible.



The lawmaker said that after he gave a speech in parliament criticizing the government, he came under heavy criticism from government supporters, Parleman News said. No date was given for the speech.



"After that speech in the meeting of the Planning Council for Cahar-Mahal Bakhtiari [Province], we witnessed the anger of the province's governor-general," Torabi said.



Investigators "must not allow some people to use force, scare tactics and oppression to bring the three principles of independence, freedom and Islamic Republic under question," he added, according to Parleman News.



Torabi said that after he gave the speech, banners condemning him were distributed throughout Shahr-e Kurd, with the backing of the governor's office.



According to Moussavi, Torabi told the news organization: "In the middle of the night some made their last pathetic attempt and set the office of a representative of the people on fire with the aim of silencing the members of the parliament."



Moussavi called the fire an attempt at intimidation.



Opponents of President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad have held sometimes-violent protests after he was swept into office for a second term despite accusations of election fraud.



The latest protest occurred Sunday on the Shiite Muslim holy day of Ashura, which marks the death of Imam Hussein, grandson of Prophet Mohammed, as a martyr. A prosecutor said seven people died, including Moussavi's nephew, in the demonstrations.

***

(CNN) -- Billy Powell, keyboardist with the rock band Lynyrd Skynyrd, died of a heart ailment at his condo in the Jacksonville, Florida, suburb of Orange Park, police said Thursday. He was 56.



Billy Powell, center, poses with other members of Lynyrd Skynyrd at Rock and Roll Hall of Fame induction in 2006.



Powell, who died early Wednesday, had survived the band's October 1977 plane crash in Mississippi that killed lead singer Ronnie Van Zant; guitarist Steve Gaines; Gaines's sister, vocalist Cassie Gaines; an assistant road manager; and the pilot and copilot. Powell was seriously injured in the crash.



More than 40 fans left messages on a fan Web site.



"Billy, you are truely free now. Rock on with Ronnie and the gang. You also will be forever missed," read a note signed by traceyspruill.



"I cannot believe the hurt that I have felt from being a Skynyrd fan, but I realize that it only hurts so much because I love the members of this band like my own family. We will always miss you, Billy. I can hear your fingertips rolling off those ivory keys right now. Thanks for being you. Rest in peace and may God bless you," another fan wrote.



According to Orange Park Police Lt. Mark Cornett, Powell called 911 around midnight Tuesday from his condo at the Club Continental, complaining about chest pains.



"When paramedics and police arrived, they found him unresponsive on the bed," Cornett said. Powell was pronounced dead at the scene, and his cardiologist signed the death certificate at 1:52 a.m. ET Wednesday.



According to the officer, Powell missed an appointment with the same doctor on Tuesday.



Powell joined the original Skynyrd band in 1972, but he worked for the Jacksonville, Florida-based band for several years before that as a crew member.



Among the Southern rock band's acclaimed songs are "What's Your Name," "Freebird" and "Sweet Home Alabama," all released in the 1970s. "Sweet Home Alabama" reached the top 10 in 1974.



The band was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2006. Two years after the plane crash, Powell, Allen Collins, Gary Rossington and Leon Wilkeson formed the Rossington-Collins Band. It broke up in 1982.



A new Lynyrd Skynyrd band formed in 1987 and included Johnny Van Zant, Ronnie's brother. It began a tour in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, where the plane was headed when it crashed. The band's last album, "Vicious Cycle," came out in 2003.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Queen Elizabeth helped launch Heathrow's $8.6 billion new Terminal 5 on Friday as part of the British airport's rejuvenation plan to maintain its status as one of the world's most important transport hubs.



A general view of the new Terminal 5 at Heathrow Airport prior to its official opening on Friday.



The British monarch, who also opened Heathrow's first passenger terminal in 1955, was present under strict security a day after a man carrying a backpack was arrested for running onto a runway at the airport.



The first flights from the new terminal are scheduled for March 27.



Its opening has come after 15 years of planning and construction by its owners BAA -- and protests by local residents and environmental groups.



It is part of a strategy which could lead to passenger numbers almost doubling to 122 million a year, with a sixth terminal and a third runway in the pipeline despite some vociferous opposition.



Spanish-owned BAA, which also runs Gatwick and Stansted in Britain, also plans to eventually demolish Terminals 1 and 2 and replace them in a project called Heathrow East.  Watch Queen Elizabeth meet airport staff. »



Residents were once told by BAA that there would be no fifth terminal, but the company is planning to forge further ahead despite the concerns of environmental groups.



"Terminal 5 stands as a monument to the binge-flying culture this Government has done so much to encourage," Greenpeace transport campaigner Anita Goldsmith told the UK Press Association.



"It's part of an obsession with expansion which can only mean more flights, more emissions and more climate change."



Richard Dyer of Friends of the Earth added: "If the Government is serious about tackling climate change, the opening of Terminal 5 must mark the end of airport expansion in Britain.



"Further expansion of Heathrow would be environmentally irresponsible and isn't necessary for the economy of London."



However, business groups welcomed the expansion at Heathrow.



"Thriving, growing airports are vital to help maintain Britain's economic competitiveness," Neil Pakey, chairman of the Airport Operators' Association, told PA.



"Domestic air links to Heathrow are particularly valuable for the regional economies, and this new terminal will undoubtedly provide them with a much-needed boost. The passage of the current Planning Bill must ensure that this is the last airport which has to endure such an absurdly protracted planning process."  See British Airways chief executive Willie Walsh's views on the terminal. »



Visit London chief executive James Bidwell said: "T5 will provide visitors to London and the UK with a spectacular first impression and alleviate the pressure experienced at Heathrow, the world's busiest airport.



"The terminal's smoother check-in process and state-of-the-art baggage management system will certainly better the tourist experience and should help improve the airport's international reputation."  E-mail to a friend

***

ALGIERS, Algeria (CNN) -- Rescuers are sifting through the rubble of the United Nations headquarters in Algiers hoping to find survivors after a powerful bomb ripped off the building's facade and leveled nearby U.N. offices.

Rescuers and bomb experts search for survivors in the rubble of a destroyed building.

It was one of two suspected car bombs that struck Algiers within 10 minutes of each other.

The death toll is unclear: the official government count is at least 26, but hospital sources in Algiers told CNN affiliate BFM-TV that 76 people were killed in the two blasts. A statement from the United Nations said 45 people were reported killed.

Algerian Interior Minister Noureddine Yazid Zerhouni blamed a militant Islamic group with ties to al Qaeda for the attacks, which also targeted a building housing Algeria's Constitutional Council and Supreme Court.

In a posting on an Islamist Web site, the group al Qaeda Islamic Maghreb claimed responsibility.

CNN could not immediately corroborate that claim, but the Web site is known to carry messages, claims and videos from al Qaeda and other militant groups.

In the posting, the bombers were identified as Sheikh Ibrahim Abu Othman and Abdel Rahman Abu Abdel Nasser al-Asimi. It said two trucks were filled with "no less than 800 kg (1,763 pounds) of explosives."

The group called the operation "another successful conquest and a second epic that the knights of faith have dictated with their blood, defending the wounded Islamic nation and in defiance to the Crusaders and their agents, the slaves of America and the sons of France."

At least 10 U.N. staffers were among those killed, according to U.N. spokeswoman Marie Okabe.

The offices of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees -- located across the street from the U.N. headquarters -- were leveled by a blast that struck about 9:30 a.m. (3:30 a.m. ET) Tuesday.

"Our offices are basically destroyed now, nothing works," UNHCR spokesman Ron Redmond said from its Geneva headquarters. Watch his full interview

He said rescuers are working into the night trying to get to the trapped U.N. workers. "It's a very serious situation still with the U.N. in Algiers," he said.

In a strongly worded statement, U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon condemned what he called "an abjectly cowardly strike against civilian officials serving humanity's highest ideals under the U.N. banner."

"The perpetrators of these crimes will not escape the strongest possible condemnation -- and ultimate punishment -- by Algerian authorities and the international community," Ban said in the written statement.

He said he has sent senior advisers and other top U.N. officials to head to Algiers to assist in the investigation and rescue effort.

Most of those killed in the coordinated attacks were victims of the first suspected car bombing near the Constitutional Council -- which oversees elections -- and Supreme Court in the Algiers neighborhood of Ben Aknoun, according to the state-run Algeria Press Agency.

That blast struck a bus outside the targeted building, killing many of those on board, the news agency reported.

One man said he heard the first blast then the second exploded in front of him. "I saw the trees falling and the glass shattering in front of me. I had to run away from the car," he said.

Zerhouni said the attack was the work of the Salafist Group for Preaching and Combat (GSPC), the same group that took responsibility for an attack in April in downtown Algiers that killed 33 people.

That group also uses the name al Qaeda Islamic Maghreb after merging with al Qaeda earlier this year. It abandoned small-scale attacks in favor of headline-grabbing blasts after it joined with al Qaeda.

CNN International Security Correspondent Paula Newton said the merger combined the expertise of Algerian guerrillas with the operational ability of al Qaeda in North Africa, enabling the group to penetrate the usually extensive security in high-profile areas of Algiers.

She said the group's goal is to destabilize countries like Algeria, Morocco and Tunisia, which it sees as enemies of the Islamic state.

Zerhouni said police interrogations of GSPC members arrested in the

***

WASHAKIE COUNTY, Wyoming (CNN) -- Federal agents have apprehended accused child molester Edward Eugene Harper, who was on the FBI's 10 Most Wanted Fugitives list, an FBI official said Thursday.



Edward Eugene Harper is believed to have lived a nomadic lifestyle since fleeing Mississippi.



Harper, 63, is accused of molesting two girls, ages 3 and 8, in his neighborhood in Hernando, Mississippi, more than a decade ago, the FBI said.



The FBI said it received a telephone tip in June at the Denver office regarding Harper, and brought a SWAT team and a hostage negotiation team to apprehend him in rural Wyoming on Thursday.



He surrendered without incident, the FBI said, and later admitted his identity to agents.



Harper was living in a 1979 truck with a camper top in the southern portion of Washakie County's Big Horn Mountains, the FBI said.



He is believed to have lived a nomadic lifestyle, moving from place to place and earning a living by doing odd jobs and herding sheep, the FBI said in a statement.



He was indicted in April 1994 with conspiracy to commit sexual battery, fondling a child and sexual battery.



He failed to appear for a scheduled court hearing and a state warrant was issued for his arrest in October 1994. He was later charged with unlawful flight to avoid prosecution, a federal offense. The FBI added him to its 10 Most Wanted Fugitives list last year.



Before living in Mississippi, Harper had been a ranch hand, working with cattle and sheep in Montana and Wyoming, the FBI said in its release on Harper last year. He has also worked as a truck driver, the agency said.



According to the FBI, Harper subscribed to "sovereign citizen" ideology and claimed to be a member of the Montana Freemen, a group that rejected the authority of the U.S. government. The group became famous for an 81-day standoff with federal agents in Montana in 1996.



But after the arrest and conviction of many of its members, the group essentially disintegrated, according to Mark Potok of the Southern Poverty Law Center.



"As far as I know," they don't exist, he said. "Most of them went to prison and there was nothing left."

***

(CNN) -- A British-owned cargo ship on Monday became the latest vessel to be seized by Somali pirates in the Gulf of Aden.

International naval patrols have been stepped up in the Gulf of Aden following increased pirate attacks.

The 32,000-tonne Malaspina Castle was taken early on Monday and was believed to be heading towards Somalia's pirate-infested coast, the European Union's Horn of Africa maritime security center said.

"Few details are known at this stage, but the mixed-nationality crew is believed to be safe," a statement on the London-based organization's Web site said.

The vessel, which is operated by an Italian company, carried a crew of 24, from Bulgaria, Ukraine, Russia and the Philippines, Britain's Telegraph newspaper reported.

"There have not yet been communications from the Malaspina Castle that we are aware of, so information is limited," said Andrew Mwangura of the Seafarers' Assistance Program in quotes carried by the Telegraph.

He added: "It is likely to be taken towards the Somali coast and negotiations will begin soon."

Meanwhile, the BBC reported that a Taiwanese fishing boat, with a crew of 29, was also hijacked Monday approximately 260km (160 miles) from the Seychelles.

The latest attacks follow a string of incidents in the pirate-plagued waterway off Somalia at the weekend, with a French yacht, a Yemeni tugboat and a German ship also reported to have been seized.

Last year, pirates attacked nearly 100 vessels and hijacked as many as 40 off Somalia, according to the International Maritime Bureau.

In response, a number of countries have deployed warships from their navies to the region, including the United States, China and Japan.

Monday's seizure of the Malaspina Castle was immediately condemned by the UK ship masters' union Nautilus, which has long urged governments to take stronger action to deter piracy.

Nautilus assistant general secretary Mark Dickinson told the British Press Association: "Over the last 10 years, most governments have not really done very much about this.

"More recently they have been motivated to act and there is an EU naval coordination force patrolling off the Gulf of Aden."

He added: "I'm not sure that this is going to be a long-term thing and I'm also worried that the pirates will start seizing ships well away from the areas being patrolled.

"In Somalia, piracy is like a big, successful industry and the authorities there need to act. The pirates are treated like local heroes. People look up to them and girls want to marry them. They are seen by some locals as good people but they are ruthless."

***

(CNN) -- A Seattle man has been charged with insurance fraud for allegedly sinking his own yacht because of "financial pressure and frustration with the maintenance" of the vessel, authorities said.

The Jubilee sank in Puget Sound Bay last year.

On March 22, 2008, Brian Lewis, 50, scuttled the Jubilee in the Puget Sound Bay, then rowed a borrowed dinghy back to shore, according to court documents filed in February by prosecutors in King County, Washington.

Later that day, Lewis boarded a flight to take him to his job in Kodiak, Alaska, as a petty officer with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, according to court documents.

Three days later, Lewis filed an insurance claim with USAA Insurance reporting the Jubilee sank accidentally "due to unknown causes."

However, due to environmental concerns, the Washington State Department of Natural Resources salvaged the vessel at a cost to the state of $2,866.

An inspection found a hole was drilled into the bottom of the Jubilee, and that two main engine sea strainers appeared to have been broken with a hammer.

"The vessel appeared to have been deliberately sunk," authorities said in their probable cause affidavit.

Confronted by investigators, Lewis admitted he intentionally sank his vessel, saying the financial strain "caused him extreme anxiety and frustration."

Lewis told investigators "the engine trouble he experienced caused him to lose his temper. In his rage, he smashed the sea strainers with a hammer and drilled the hole to sink the vessel," the affidavit said.

"[He] wanted to clarify that his motive for sinking the vessel was anger and frustration, not greed," it added.

Prior to its sinking, the Jubilee had been listed for sale with Mahina Yachts for $28,500.

Jack Bateman, a broker with Mahina, remembers the Jubilee as a "beautiful" 1967 Chris Craft Cavalier. He said the Mahina has only seen this type of case one other time in its 30 years of operation.

"This is a very rare, not common occurrence" he says. Bateman added that Mahina has yet to see any real distress sales due to the bad economy.

The King County Prosecutor's Office has charged Lewis with making a fraudulent insurance claim.

Lewis filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2004. Messages left for him were not returned.

***

(CNN) -- Serbian police are conducting another search for war crimes suspect Ratko Mladic and another fugitive, the office of the war crimes prosecutor in Belgrade said Friday.



Ratko Mladic, pictured in 1993, is the highest-ranking war crimes suspect still at large.



The search, launched at the request of Serbian war crimes prosecutor Vladimir Vukcevic, is being conducted around the town of Arandjelovac, 45 miles (75 kilometers) south of Belgrade, the prosecutor's office said.



Serbia is offering a reward of 1 million euros for information leading to the capture of Ratko Mladic, the Bosnian Serb general wanted by the United Nations' International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, ICTY, in the Hague. A reward of €250,000 is offered for information leading to the arrest of Serbia's other fugitive, Goran Hadzic.



Mladic is the highest-ranking figure from the conflict to remain at large following the July arrest of former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic. Mladic commanded the Bosnian Serb military during the 1992-95 war in Bosnia-Herzegovina.



The U.N. tribunal indicted Mladic in 1995, along with 51 others, on charges involving war crimes and atrocities committed during four years of civil war.



In July 1996, an international arrest warrant was issued for Mladic after investigators collected evidence at the site of the Srebrenica massacre. Mladic stepped down as military commander in November 1996 and returned to Belgrade. But he disappeared after former Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic was arrested in 2001.



The 66-year-old faces charges of genocide and crimes against humanity over the killing of some 7,000 Muslim men and boys at Srebrenica in 1995. He's also wanted for his role in the 1992 shelling of Sarajevo.



In 1992, as hostilities broke out in Sarajevo, Mladic led the "shelling and sniping to target civilian areas of the city and its civilian population and institutions, killing and wounding civilians, and thereby also inflicting terror upon the civilian population," the war crimes tribunal contends.



The status of Mladic is one of the major stumbling block's to Serbia's admission to the European Union. In April Serbia's government signed a preliminary agreement setting the country on the path to full EU membership. But ratification of the agreement was made conditional on Serbia sending Mladic to the Hague.



CNN's Ben Blake in London, England, contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- "Saturday Night Live" was formed in the crucible of the mid-1970s, when Watergate brought respect for politicians to all-time lows, the counterculture was taking over comedy, and many television viewers were seeking out something fresh and bold.



Fred Armisen played Barack Obama in a talked-about sketch Saturday night on "Saturday Night Live."



It was a powerful combination -- and after 34 years, the combination of "SNL" and politics can still strike sparks among political observers.



The most recent example came this past weekend when Fred Armisen, as President Obama, chided "those on the right" for saying that he was "turning this great country into something that resembles the Soviet Union or Nazi Germany."



Not true, said Armisen as Obama.



"When you look at my record," he said, "it's very clear what I've done so far -- and that is nothing."   Watch the sketch -- and the reaction »



The sketch has caused a rumble among the inside-the-Beltway chattering classes and New York news nabobs. Wrote Washington Post blogger Jonathan Capehart, "When your 'friends' start talking about you like this -- and friends with a huge megaphone and a feel for the national mood -- the White House should listen."



"Humor with some truth in it is always dangerous. Make no mistake, a drumbeat of belittlement can damage a president," added CNN political contributor Ed Rollins in a column.



The White House had no comment when asked about the sketch by CNN.



"SNL" cast members weren't available for interviews, an NBC representative said. "SNL" creator Lorne Michaels also turned down an interview request but has said the show doesn't take sides.



"I think 'SNL's' role is, the moment they're in power, we're the opposition," he told CNN's Alina Cho last year. "We're not partisan. We're not, you know, we're not putting on anything that we don't believe is funny."  Video gallery: "SNL" takes on presidents through the years »



The recent sketch is indicative of the end of Obama's honeymoon, Syracuse University pop culture professor Robert Thompson says, but he doesn't want to read more into it than that.



"Comedy is about going after the people in power," he said.



The president has also taken recent shots from "The Daily Show" and "Real Time with Bill Maher." "What this says is that the comedy-industrial complex has turned its sights on the reigning president of the United States," he said.



But, he added, "I wouldn't put this into the meme category," referring to concepts that travel so quickly they take on a life of their own, such as Tina Fey's Sarah Palin sketches from last year. "The [Obama] sketch wasn't that funny."



Indeed, the show's overall impact is often mixed, observes Slate columnist and Rutgers media studies professor David Greenberg. It can "capture or intensify" a storyline that's being passed through the news media, but the show is more a barometer that can change with events.



"It's not incapable of influencing things," he said, noting the show's slash-and-burn '70s satire and Fey's Palin parody. "But since the early '80s, those moments are pretty rare. ... You'll see good impersonations but not the underlying critique you had with, say, Dan Aykroyd as [Richard] Nixon."



Besides, he added, the Obama sketch may have titillated the politico-media crowd, but he wonders whether its impact went any wider.



"I'm a political junkie," he said, "and this is the first I've heard of it."



Indeed, the ratings for the episode were a far cry from last year's Palin-fest -- from a 7.3 rating for the same week in 2008, to 4.7 -- and the Armisen sketch did

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN) -- Michael Crichton, who helped create the TV show "ER" and wrote the best-sellers "Jurassic Park," "The Andromeda Strain," "Sphere" and "Rising Sun," has died in Los Angeles, his public relations firm said in a news release.

Michael Crichton, here in 2005, was a director and best-selling author. He co-created the TV series "ER."

Crichton died unexpectedly Tuesday "after a courageous and private battle against cancer," the release said.

He was 66.

Crichton, a medical doctor, was attracted to cautionary science tales.  Watch more about the life of Crichton Â»

"Jurassic Park" -- perhaps his best-known work -- concerned capturing the DNA of dinosaurs and bringing them to life on a modern island, where they soon run amok; "The Andromeda Strain," his first major fiction success, involves an alien microorganism that's studied in a special military compound after causing death in a nearby community.

Crichton also invited controversy with some of his scientific views. He was an avowed skeptic of global climate change, giving lectures warning against "consensus science." He later took on global warming and the theories surrounding it in his 2004 novel, "State of Fear," which attracted attacks in its own right from scientists, including NASA climatologist James Hansen. iReport.com: Were you a fan? Share your tributes.

Crichton was a distinctive figure in the entertainment business, a trained physician whose interests included writing, filmmaking and television. (He was physically distinctive as well, standing 6 feet 9 inches.)

He published "The Andromeda Strain" while he was still a medical student at Harvard Medical School. He wrote a story about a 19th-century train robbery, called "The Great Train Robbery," and then directed the 1979 film version.

He also directed several other films, including "Westworld" (1973), "Coma" (1978), "Looker" (1981) and "Runaway" (1984).

In 1993, while working on the film version of "Jurassic Park" with Steven Spielberg, he teamed with the director to create "ER." The NBC series set in a Chicago emergency room debuted in 1994 and became a huge hit, making a star of George Clooney. Crichton originally wrote the script for the pilot in 1974.

"Michael's talent out-scaled even his own dinosaurs of 'Jurassic Park,' " said Spielberg, a friend of Crichton's for 40 years, according to The Associated Press. "He was the greatest at blending science with big theatrical concepts, which is what gave credibility to dinosaurs again walking the Earth. ... Michael was a gentle soul who reserved his flamboyant side for his novels. There is no one in the wings that will ever take his place."

Crichton was "an extraordinary man. Brilliant, funny, erudite, gracious, exceptionally inquisitive and always thoughtful," "ER" executive producer John Wells told the AP. "No lunch with Michael lasted less than three hours and no subject was too prosaic or obscure to attract his interest. Sexual politics, medical and scientific ethics, anthropology, archaeology, economics, astronomy, astrology, quantum physics, and molecular biology were all regular topics of conversation."

Michael Crichton was born in Chicago in 1942 and grew up in New York's suburbs. His father was a journalist and Michael loved the writing profession. He went to medical school partly out of a concern he wouldn't be able to make writing a career, but the success of "The Andromeda Strain" in 1969 -- the book was chosen by the Book-of-the-Month Club and optioned by Hollywood -- made him change his mind, though he still had an M.D.

Though most of Crichton's books were major best-sellers involving science, he could ruffle feathers when he took on social issues. "Rising Sun" (1992) came out during a time when Americans feared Japanese ascendance, particularly when it came to technology

***

(CNN) -- The investigation of the E. coli outbreak linked to Nestle Toll House cookie dough is nearly over, according to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. The cause of the contamination has not been identified.



Nestle recalled all its Toll House refrigerated cookie dough products made at a Danville, Virginia, plant.



David Acheson, the FDA's associate commissioner for foods, says the samples of cookie dough his agency has tested do not contain the E. coli strain that sickened 74 people in 32 states.



On June 19, Nestle recalled all its Toll House refrigerated cookie dough products made at a Danville, Virginia, plant. Thirty-four people have been hospitalized; no deaths have been reported. The CDC reports that the majority of the patients were teenage girls who reported eating the cookie dough raw.



Last month, the FDA found E. coli in a production sample of Toll House cookie dough, but after testing, investigators found that the strain in the sample did not match the outbreak strain.



"We are still in speculation mode," Acheson said, but the E. coli "most likely came from raw ingredients" such as flour.



The E.coli strain that caused the outbreak, 0157:H7, is typically found in fecal contamination from animals such as cows, sheep or goats. Acheson points out that it's not unusual for those animals to be carrying more than one strain of the bacteria. But he believes that the root cause of the contamination may never be known.



"We have to conclude we're unlikely to have a definitive determination," he said.



Most people with E. coli 0157:H7 experience diarrhea and abdominal cramps within eight days of infection.



The FDA notified Nestle USA on Thursday that its investigation at the Danville plant was over.



Nestle says FDA inspectors were at the plant for more than a week and found no E. coli on equipment. More than 1,000 tests have been conducted at the facility after the outbreak.



"We've dismantled the production line and done extensive testing on all equipment and not found any E. coli," Nestle USA spokeswoman Laurie MacDonald said.



MacDonald announced that Nestle is easing back into production at the plant. The company has purchased new lots of eggs, flour and margarine and says it is thoroughly testing the new products and all raw ingredients.



Consumers will have to wait to see cookie dough back in grocery stores.



"You're not going to see anything on the shelves for quite some time," MacDonald said. But when it does appear, the company will mark the cookie dough with a new label that clearly designates it as a new batch.



It will also continue to carry a reminder to not eat the dough raw.

***

(CNN) -- Former U.S. Defense Secretary Robert McNamara, a key architect of the U.S. war in Vietnam under presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson, has died at age 93, according to his family.



Robert McNamara took a lead role in managing the U.S. military commitment in Vietnam.



McNamara was a member of Kennedy's inner circle during the Cuban Missile Crisis in 1962, when the United States and the Soviet Union stood on the brink of nuclear war.



But he became a public lightning rod for his management of the war in Vietnam, overseeing the U.S. military commitment there as it grew from fewer than 1,000 advisers to more than half a million troops.



Though the increasingly unpopular conflict was sometimes dubbed "McNamara's War," he later said both administrations were "terribly wrong" to have pursued military action beyond 1963.



"External military force cannot reconstruct a failed state, and Vietnam, during much of that period, was a failed state politically," he told CNN in a 1996 interview for the "Cold War" documentary series. "We didn't recognize it as such."



A native of San Francisco, McNamara studied economics at the University of California and earned a master's degree in business from Harvard. He was a staff officer in the Army Air Corps during World War II, when he studied the results of American bombing raids on Germany and Japan in search of ways to improve their accuracy and efficiency.



After the war, he joined the Ford Motor Company and became its president in November 1960 -- the first person to lead the company from outside its founding family. A month later, the newly elected Kennedy asked him to become secretary of defense, making him one of the "whiz kids" who joined the young president's administration.



In October 1962, after the discovery of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba, McNamara was one of Kennedy's top advisers in the standoff that followed. The United States imposed a naval "quarantine" on Cuba, a Soviet ally, and prepared for possible airstrikes or an invasion. The Soviets withdrew the missiles in exchange for a U.S. guarantee not to invade Cuba, a step that allowed Soviet premier Nikita Kruschev to present the pullback as a success to his own people.



In the 2003 documentary "The Fog of War," McNamara told filmmaker Errol Morris that the experience taught American policymakers to "put ourselves inside their skin and look at us through their eyes." But he added, "In the end, we lucked out. It was luck that prevented nuclear war."



McNamara is credited with using the management techniques he mastered as a corporate executive to streamline the Pentagon, computerizing and smoothing out much of the U.S. military's vast purchasing and personnel system. And in Vietnam, he attempted to use those techniques to measure the progress of the war.



Metrics such as use of "body counts" and scientific solutions such as using the herbicide Agent Orange to defoliate jungles in which communist guerrillas hid became trademarks of the conflict. McNamara made several trips to South Vietnam to study the situation firsthand.



He, Johnson and other U.S. officials portrayed the war as a necessary battle in the Cold War, a proxy struggle to prevent communism from taking control of all of Southeast Asia. But while they saw the conflict as another front in the standoff between the United States and the Soviet Union, which backed communist North Vietnam, McNamara acknowledged later that they underestimated Vietnamese nationalism and opposition to the U.S.-backed government in Saigon.



"The conflict within South Vietnam itself had all of the characteristics of a civil war, and we didn't look upon it as largely a civil war, and we weren't measuring our progress as one would have in what was largely a civil war," he told CNN.



Casualties mounted, as did domestic opposition to the war. In 1965, a Quaker anti-war protester, Norman Morrison, set himself on fire outside McNamara's office window. In 1967, tens of thousands of demonstrators marched on the Pentagon, which was ringed with troops.



By November 1967, McNamara told Johnson that there was "no reasonable

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- Reigning hot dog-guzzling champ Joey Chestnut and nemesis Takeru Kobayashi of Japan attempted to psych each other out Thursday at the weigh-in for the 94th annual Nathan's Famous Fourth of July International Hot Dog-Eating Contest.



Competitive eaters Joey Chestnut and Takeru Kobayashi take part in an official "staredown."



Chestnut and Kobayashi glared long and menacingly into each other's eyes in an official "staredown."



At last year's contest, 25-year-old Chestnut, a civil engineering student at San Jose State University, eked out a win over Kobayashi, 31, in a tiebreaker after both initially consumed 59 dogs apiece. It was Chestnut's second slim victory over Kobayashi in as many years.



Kobayashi vowed he will avenge those two defeats on Saturday. He also said he no longer suffers from the "jawthritis" that some cited as the culprit for his 2007 defeat, which snapped his six-year winning streak at Coney Island.



Chestnut, for his part, said he had no intention of ceding the coveted mustard yellow belt -- competitive eating's answer to golf's green jacket. He is setting his sights this year on 68 hot dogs in 10 minutes.



Saturday's competition will be partially about redemption for Chestnut, too. In May, he suffered a stinging defeat to Kobayashi in a loss he said "really set a fire underneath me" and "made me hungry for this contest."



Chestnut revealed the extreme dietary regimen he is following in the days leading up to the contest. He said he is sticking to water to make sure he is "empty" when the mountain of hot dogs is placed in front of him.



In addition to Chestnut, Kobayashi admitted to keeping a watchful eye on 32-year-old Tim "Eater X" Janus, whose signature painted face was described by Major League Eating impresario Richard Shea as an attempt to mask his "inner torment." In a recent trial round, Janus downed a personal-best 55 hot dogs -- a weiner's throw from the 59 that Chestnut and Kobayashi wolfed down last year.



As a lead-in to the main event, Major League Eating on Friday will hold a first-of-its-kind "cross-species" eating contest between three competitive eaters and three Asian elephants. MLE's Shea described it as the realization of one of his two lifelong dreams, the other being a scenario in which a dozen competitive eaters eat the entire contents of a convenience store.



Twenty finalists will compete in the championship on Saturday. They were culled from 18 preliminary contests and comprise a Who's Who of the world of competitive eating.



For people who stuff their faces with record-breaking quantities of food, many of the contestants at the weigh-in boasted surprisingly svelte physiques. Juliet Lee, a 44-year-old Maryland salon owner fresh off the feat of downing 13.23 pounds of cranberry sauce in 8 minutes, clocked in at a mere 105 pounds. Kobayashi, at 123 pounds, lifted his T-shirt to reveal the sort of chiseled abdomen one would expect at a bodybuilding competition.



Others contestants were not quite as disconcertingly trim. Fearsome world matzo ball-eating champion Eric "Badlands" Booker tips the scales at 400 pounds.

***

(CNN) -- Floyd Mayweather will not be fighting Shane Mosley for a world title on May 1 after the "Money Man" refused to pay the World Boxing Association's sanctioning fee.





The five-time world champion takes on Mosley in Las Vegas on May 1 but insists his legacy is more important to him than fighting for "Sugar Shane's" welterweight title.





"I did not want to fight for the WBA title," Mayweather told Sky Sports. "At this point, it's all about enhancing my legacy.





"I've done a lot of things in this sport, things that a lot of fighters weren't able to do in the sport and didn't do in the sport. This fight with Shane Mosley will enhance my legacy."





Mayweather, 33, has won all 40 of his professional bouts and is a six-time world champion at five different weights.





His proposed "super fight" with WBO welterweight champ Manny Pacquiao broke down after a disagreement over drug testing procedures, and he opted to fight Mosely instead.





Mayweather referred to his opponent as "a solid welterweight with great accomplishments," but dismissed his chances of a victory at the MGM Grand.





"We are totally different," he added. "He's a fighter that always worries about landing one big shot, he worries about who is extremely strong.





"And I worry about being smart and winning. We approach fights in two totally different ways. When I shoot my shots, I am looking at my opponent. When Shane punches, a lot of times he closes his eyes.





"I am pretty sure Shane is going to be in good condition. We are going to put on one hell of a show on May 1 come the fight. Like I have always said before - there is no remedy on how to beat Floyd Mayweather. Everyone is trying to solve the problem.





"It's like a difficult maths problem that no one can solve. No one can solve it. The ultimate goal is try to solve the problem. How to beat Floyd Mayweather? I know what I have to go out there and do."

***

WASHINGTON (CNN)  -- Humza Ismail hasn't spent much time in Raleigh, North Carolina, since he started graduate school two years ago. But when he heard two former acquaintances were arrested on terrorism charges this week, he says, "Honestly, I wasn't surprised."



Omar Aly Hassan, left, and Ziyad Yaghi were clear on where they stood on terrorism, an acquaintance said.



Omar Aly Hassan, Ziyad Yaghi and five others are charged with conspiring to commit violent jihad overseas. An eighth suspect is still being sought, authorities have said.



When he lived in Raleigh, Ismail worshipped at the same mosque as Hassan and Yaghi. When groups of young men talked there, Ismail says, the conversation often turned to religion and politics, and Hassan and Yaghi made it clear where they stood.



"When it came to something like suicide bombing, they would say, 'If it's a benefit for the Muslims then something like that can be permissible,' " Ismail says.



"I could tell it was something they wanted to do." But, he adds, "They never indicated or said 'we are going to make jihad overseas.'"



Ismail says the duo spoke in glowing terms about Osama bin Laden, calling him a scholar and a mujahedeen.



"You could tell they were being influenced by somebody," Ismail says. He does not know by whom.



He feels they were susceptible to a message of violence "because it sounded cool and exciting."



Ismail says he strenuously disagreed with Yaghi and Hassan's views on terrorism even, he says, getting into a public shouting match with them at a restaurant. He says he told them, "You can't do this, man. You can't say it is OK.



"That is corruption and terrorism and that is not permissible in Islam."



Ismail says he and others raised concerns about Hassan and Yaghi to officials at the Islamic Center of Raleigh, but were "overlooked."



"I did my part," Ismail says.



Imran Aukhil, a spokesman for the Islamic Center of Raleigh, told CNN on Thursday that he had no information about complaints concerning Hassan and Yaghi.



On Saturday, however, he informed CNN that he had researched the matter and learned there was a complaint several years ago against an individual at the mosque.



Aukhil said he did not have the name of that person.



"It was reported to the FBI," said Aukhil. "The FBI did take note of it in their investigation."



Efforts to reach attorneys representing Hassan and Yaghi were unsuccessful.

***

(CNN) -- What do President Barack Obama, New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie and Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad have in common?





They all have been the subject of a snide "prayer" circulating that seemingly calls for their deaths. A recently created Facebook page reads, "Dear Lord, this year you took my favorite actor, Patrick Swayzie (sic). You took my favorite actress, Farah (sic) Fawcett. You took my favorite singer, Michael Jackson. I just wanted to let you know, my favorite president is Barack Obama. Amen."





The page has received more than 600,000 "thumbs-up" messages of approval since it was posted April 10. But its owner, who does not disclose his or her identity on the popular social media site, wrote, "We are not really praying for the death of Obama. It is just some humor to show our disapproval of our current president."





Similar imprecations were circulating online last year. But Facebook spokesman Andrew Noyes said that "while it may be considered distasteful and objectionable to some," the page doesn't violate the company's content policies.





"We're sensitive to content that includes pornography, bullying, hate speech, and actionable threats of violence, and we react quickly to remove content that violates our policies when it is reported to us," Noyes said in a written statement.





"Facebook is highly self-regulating and leverages its more than 400 million users to keep an eye out for offensive content," he added. "We encourage users to report such content, and we have a large team of professional reviewers who evaluate these reports and take action per our policies."





Variations on the jab have circulated in New Jersey, where teacher's union officials apologized for a nearly identical memo that substituted Gov. Chris Christie for Obama earlier this month. Christie is locked in a bitter struggle with the New Jersey Education Association over funding for state schools, but union President Barbara Keshishian said, "Language such as that has no place in civil discourse."





And in January, hackers posted a similar message on Ahmadinejad's Web site.





"Dear God, In 2009 you took my favorite singer -- Michael Jackson, my favorite actress -- Farrah Fawcett, my favorite actor -- Patrick Swayze, my favorite voice -- Neda," the hackers wrote, the last entry a reference to a young Iranian woman shot and killed during protests over last June's disputed presidential election. "Please, please, don't forget my favorite politician -- Ahmadinejad -- and my favorite dictator -- Khamenei -- in the year 2010."

***

(CNN) -- In keeping with President Obama's pledge of an administration that is "transparent and accountable," the White House has launched a site that promises to show taxpayers where their stimulus-package dollars are being spent.



Visitors to Recovery.gov are greeted with a video message from President Obama.



The site, Recovery.gov, allows visitors to track efforts to jump-start a teetering economy in the midst of a slumping housing market and massive job losses.



It breaks down the $787 billion package by category: $288 billion for tax relief, $59 billion for health care, and so on. The site promises that more detailed spending information will be posted once federal agencies decide how they are going to allocate the money.  Learn more about where the money is going »



Using graphs, charts and layman's terminology, the online portal is an example of how the tech-savvy Obama administration is taking its message to the American people.



While running for president, Obama harnessed the Web's fundraising and social-networking capabilities to energize his grass-roots campaign. And the moment he was sworn in as the 44th president of the United States, administration officials unveiled a sleek interactive version of Whitehouse.gov, the official White House Web site.



Recovery.gov, launched within hours of Obama's signing of the stimulus bill Tuesday, continues the theme of offering information in a user-friendly format.



Visitors are greeted by a brief video address from Obama.



"The American Recovery and Reinvestment Plan represents a strategic and significant investment in our country's future," the president explains. "The size and scale of this plan demand unprecedented efforts to root out waste, inefficiency and unnecessary spending. Recovery.gov will be the online portal for these efforts."



The site will publish information on how the stimulus funds will be spent in a "timely, targeted and transparent manner," Obama said.



Edward Glaeser, a professor of economics at Harvard University, said transparency has "been a watch word for good government types for years."



"There is sense that taxpayers will feel a lot better about this if they actually know where their money is going," Glaeser said. "Better transparency makes evaluation much easier."



Glaeser pointed out that the idea behind Recovery.gov is not entirely new. He noted that the Office of Management and Budget has for years had a site where citizens can learn the available cost-benefit information of several government programs.



Clicking on "Where is Your Money Going" on the new site brings up a chart displaying key areas where the $787 billion will be distributed, including tax relief, energy, health care and infrastructure and science.



Under "Accountability and Transparency," there is a statement that reads, "This is your money. You have a right to know where it's going and how it's being spent. Learn what steps we're taking to ensure you can track our progress every step of the way."



Like other Obama online portals, the site encourages user interaction. The public is invited to share stories on how the Recovery Act is affecting them. Scrolling over a map of the United States reveals data on the number of jobs created and saved in each state.



Those with some time on their hands can also read, in its entirety, the full text of the legislation.

***

(CNN) -- Comedian George Carlin, known for pushing the envelope with his use of profanity and for pointing out the silliness and hypocrisy of human life, died of heart failure Sunday. He was 71.



iReporter Kevin Eckhoff met George Carlin at a show in St. Louis, Missouri, in 2004.



iReporter Chris Sargent says, "He could play with words and phrases in ways that would put the most highly regarded English professors and linguists to shame."



CNN.com invited readers to share tales of meeting Carlin, and the impact he had on their lives. Below is a selection of their responses, some of which have been edited for length and clarity.



Melanie Phillips of Salem, Oregon: I met George Carlin in the early '70s at a performance he gave at Los Angeles Valley College. The large auditorium was filled to capacity so they closed the doors leaving about 40 people outside. When Carlin came up on stage he asked, "Who are all those people staring in the windows?" The host told him the fire marshal had locked them out.



Carlin thought for a moment then asked, "How many people are allowed to be on stage?" The legal limit was 50. The comedian turned to the audience and said, "Forty of you people in the first few rows come up on stage and give those people outside your seats." My friend and I ran up on stage and we all gathered in a circle around him, like at a campfire. For the next 90 minutes, Carlin did his entire act by taking our requests, "Hippy Dippy Weatherman," "Seven Words ..."



After the show was over, he passed through our little circle, shaking hands (including mine) as he quickly made his way off stage to avoid being swamped by fans. It was one of my most memorable experiences and a grand gesture for the 40 fans who had been locked out.



Alexis Karlin of Boston, Massachusetts: When I was little my dad had this box car and one day he put a George Carlin tape in it and it got stuck. So for a year until the car died we listened to this George Carlin tape over and over and over again. ...



I won't miss that car but I will miss George Carlin.



Chris Sargent of Laurel, Maryland: Last night, the world's greatest comedian and champion of the First Amendment, George Carlin, died at the age of 71 from heart failure. He was one of the few things my father and I had in common, as I have fond memories of sitting in the living room with him, watching George on HBO, and laughing our a***s off.



His gift was to make us think about everything. He could play with words and phrases in ways that would put the most highly regarded English professors and linguists to shame.



Kevin Eckhoff of Jacksonville, Illinois: George was in classic form as he arrived for a show in late 2004 at the Touhill Performing Arts Center in St. Louis. This was my second time meeting George. He signed the photo from our first meeting, took this new photo, and then proceeded to begin signing my friend's albums. Before he started, he paused, fanned out the records, looked at each, and in his own special way said, "You know, I go from city to city and you guys (autograph collectors) always have my records in such great shape. Just where the **** do you get these records in such pristine condition?" We all busted out laughing.



We'll miss you George! Thanks for a great memory.

***

Baghdad, Iraq (CNN)  -- Saddam Hussein's cousin Ali Hassan al-Majeed -- also known as Chemical Ali -- was executed Monday, an Iraqi government spokesman said.





He was hanged after having been convicted on 13 counts of killings and genocide, Ali al-Dabagh said.





Al-Majeed had been sentenced to death in four separate trials, including one that focused on his involvement in a poison gas attack against Iraqi Kurds that killed about 5,000 people.





His execution had been delayed for political rather than legal reasons. It is not clear what change, if any, led to the reported execution.





Al-Majeed had been held in United States custody since his capture in 2003. But he was handed over to the Iraqi authorities in the 24 hours before his execution, U.S. Ambassador Christopher Hill told CNN's Diana Magnay on Monday.





The 1988 poison gas attack on the village of Halabja, which earned al-Majeed his nickname, was part of the Anfal campaign, in which the Hussein regime killed at least 100,000 Iraqi Kurds. The campaign is believed to be worst poison gas attack on civilians ever.





Al-Majeed was sentenced to death separately for his role in putting down a Shiite uprising against Hussein in 1991, and for his part in putting down a Baghdad revolt in 1999.





Estimates of the Shiite death toll in the 1991 rebellion range from 20,000 to 100,000. Al-Majeed was convicted of playing a key part in the slaughter during the revolt in southern Iraq that followed the 1991 Persian Gulf War.





One of his co-defendants in the Anfal case, Sultan Hashem, is a prominent Sunni leader who is considered a key player in efforts to reconcile the country's once-dominant Sunni community with the Shiite majority that now wields political power.





Hashem was also sentenced to death, but Iraq's Sunni Arab Vice-President Tariq al-Hashimi has long refused to sign his execution order.  That delayed the execution of al-Majeed and another defendant as well.





Iraqi law requires all three members of the Iraqi presidency council -- the president and two vice-presidents -- to sign execution orders. It does not say what happens if they do not sign.





CNN's Yousif Bassil contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- An animal rescue group on Sunday picked up a U.S. soldier's adopted dog from Iraq, ending the soldier's weeks-long struggle to send the animal to her Minnesota home.



Sgt. Gwen Beberg adopted Ratchet after soldiers rescued him from a burning pile of trash in May.



Operation Baghdad Pups, which said the U.S. military prevented its first attempt to take Ratchet the dog on October 1, picked up the animal in Baghdad with military clearance and flew it to Kuwait on Sunday.



The dog is expected to be flown to Washington on Monday, and if a veterinarian determines it is healthy, sent to Sgt. Gwen Beberg's home state on Wednesday, Baghdad Pups publicist Larry Garrison said.



Beberg, who adopted the dog after soldiers rescued it from a burning trash pile in May, tried to have the group fly Ratchet to the United States on October 1 as her deployment neared an end.



But the military, which prohibits soldiers from adopting pets abroad and bringing them to the United States, confiscated the animal after Beberg put it on a convoy bound for Baghdad Airport, according to the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, which runs OBP.



Ratchet and Beberg, 28, drew the attention of thousands of people who signed two online petitions -- linked through the SPCA's Web site -- urging the military to let Ratchet go to the United States.



The military cleared OBP to take Ratchet on Wednesday, but not in time for the group's flight from Baghdad that day, the SPCA said.



On Sunday, private security contractors took Ratchet from a base to the airport, where OBP -- which works with soldiers to help them bring adopted animals home -- put Ratchet on the charter flight to Kuwait, Garrison said.



Northwest Airlines will donate the flights from Kuwait to Minnesota, Garrison said.



The SPCA said Ratchet helped Beberg deal with her Iraq deployment, which started in September 2007 and is scheduled to end in November.



"She was absolutely miserable in the war and was really struggling to keep going every day. Ratchet turned it around for her," SPCA spokeswoman Stephanie Scroggs said last week.



Beberg's mother, Patricia Beberg, in a statement released by the SPCA, said Ratchet "was the savior of her [daughter's] sanity" in Iraq.



SPCA representatives said the military euthanizes some animals that it confiscates, and that Gwen Beberg worried that Ratchet would be killed.



Beberg was thrilled to hear last week that the military would let OBP take Ratchet, the SPCA said.



"Your persistence and amazing work has astonished me throughout this whole thing," Gwen Beberg said in an e-mail to the SPCA, according to the society.



Scroggs said one of Beberg's friends helped spread the news about Ratchet through blogs. One of the petitions, which had more than 65,000 signatures as of Sunday night, was started by a blogger, Scroggs said.



The SPCA says although active-duty soldiers aren't allowed to adopt animals in the Middle East, many soldiers befriend animals in the course of their service there.



Garrison said the program relies on donations, saying it generally costs $3,000 to $4,000 to bring a servicemember's animal to the United States.



"This isn't a one-time story This is a program making a difference for our soldiers," Garrison said.

***

NEW DELHI, India (CNN) -- The father of a baby born with his heart protruding from his chest has told CNN about the 1100 km train journey he made to save his son's life.



Chander Majhi's son was born with his heart outside his chest  and faces complex surgery.



Chander Majhi, 24, became a father last week but he had to leave his wife behind in hospital and make a train journey from a remote region along India's border with Nepal to the capital New Delhi.



His son was born with his heart protruding from his chest, an extremely rare condition called ectopia cordis, which only affects five to eight cases in one million live births.



The parents did not know about the defect until the child was born on August 25 at a government facility in Majhi's home state of Bihar in eastern India.



"We didn't go for any (pre-natal) tests," Majhi told CNN.



Doctors at the government facility referred him and the baby to New Delhi's All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS).



Professor of cardiothoracic surgery at AIIMS, A.K. Bisoi, told CNN the baby was admitted to the hospital with dehydration and a severe infection which he probably suffered because of the arduous train journey.



Doctors were surprised that the child had been able to survive despite so many complexities, he said.



Doctors at the state-run AIIMS are now planning a complex surgery on Thursday for the boy, referred in their records as "baby of Vibha," his mother.



His heart has been covered with a synthetic membrane and infected blood fully replaced from his body, said A.K. Bisoi, professor of cardiothoracic surgery at AIIMS.



Surgeons may now plan a total circulatory arrest procedure that will also involve creating a home for the heart in the chest, said Bisoi.



The baby, who suffers from immunodeficiency, will be put in a state where his blood will be cooled down to 18 degrees (64 Fahrenheit) for a half-an-hour stage of the operation, he explained.



"We could carry it out in one go, if the child is able to tolerate. If not, we will do it in stages," he said.



"We are working with hope," Bisoi remarked when asked about chances of success.



And it was the same hope that drove Majhi to Delhi.



"That is why I am here. There's hope. My child is a fighter," he said.



In 2006, doctors in the U.S. state of Florida carried out a similar operation on Naseem Hasni who was born with his heart outside his chest.



The operation was carried out immediately after Naseem was born by caesarean section at a Florida hospital.



Doctors wrapped his heart in Gore-Tex, a waterproof, breathable fabric used in outdoor clothing and medical applications. His heart was then wrapped in a layer of his own skin, to substitute for his missing pericardium, the sac that encloses the heart.



The heart was then slowly eased inside.

***

LONGYEARBYEN, Norway (CNN)  -- A vast underground vault storing millions of seeds from around the world took delivery of its first shipment Tuesday.



The inside of one of the vaults at the Svalbard Global Seed Vault, on a remote island near the Arctic Ocean.



Dubbed the "Doomsday Vault," the seed bank on a remote island near the Arctic Ocean is considered the ultimate safety net for the world's seed collections, protecting them from a wide range of threats including war, natural disasters, lack of funding or simply poor agricultural management.



Norwegian musicians performed Tuesday as part of an elaborate opening ceremony marking the opening of the vault, located 130 meters (427 feet) inside a frozen mountain. Wangari Maathai, a Kenyan environmental and political activist who won the 2004 Nobel Peace Prize, placed the first seeds inside the vault, followed by other dignitaries.



The inaugural shipment represent 268,000 distinct samples of seeds, with each sample containing a hundred-plus seeds and originating from a different farm or field around the world. In all, the shipment of seeds secured in the vault Tuesday weighed approximately 10 tons, filling 676 boxes.



The shipment amounts to a 100 million seeds in total, ranging from major African and Asian food staples like maize, rice, and wheat to European and South American varieties of eggplant, lettuce, barley, and potato, according to the Global Crop Diversity Trust, which is paying to collect and maintain the seeds.  Watch as "Doomsday" seed vault opens »  Eventually the Svalbard Global Seed Vault, as it is officially known, will hold as many as 4.5 million distinct samples of seeds -- or some 2 billion seeds in total -- encompassing almost every variety of most important food crops in the world, the Global Crop Diversity Trust said.



The Norwegian government paid to build the vault in a mountainside near Longyearbyen, in the remote Svalbard islands between Norway and the North Pole. Building began last year.



The United Nations founded the trust in 2004 to support the long-term conservation of crop diversity, and countries and foundations provide the funding.



"The seed vault is the perfect place for keeping seeds safe for centuries," said Cary Fowler, executive director of the trust. "At these temperatures, seeds for important crops like wheat, barley and peas can last for up to 10,000 years."



The vault's location deep inside a mountain in the frozen north ensures the seeds can be stored safely no matter what happens outside.



"We believe the design of the facility will ensure that the seeds will stay well-preserved even if such forces as global warming raise temperatures outside the facility," said Magnus Bredeli Tveiten, project manager for the Norwegian government.



The vault sits at the end of a 120-meter (131-yard) tunnel blasted inside the mountain. Workers used a refrigeration system to bring the vault to -18 degrees Celsius (just below 0 degrees Fahrenheit), and a smaller refrigeration system plus the area's natural permafrost and the mountain's thick rock will keep the vault at at least -4 C (25 F).



The vault at Svalbard is similar to an existing seed bank in Sussex, England, about an hour outside London. The British vault, called the Millennium Seed Bank, is part of an scientific project that works with wild plants, as opposed to the seeds of crops.



Paul Smith, the leader of the Millennium Seed Bank project, said preserving the seeds of wild plants is just as important as preserving the seeds of vital crops.



"We must give ourselves every option in the future to use the whole array of plant diversity that is available to us," Smith told CNN.



The idea for the Arctic seed bank dates to the 1980s but only became a possibility after the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources came into force in 2004, the Norwegian government said. The treaty provided an international framework for conserving and accessing crop diversity.



Svalbard is designed to store duplicates of seeds from seed collections around the world.



The Norwegian government says it has paid 50 million Norwegian Kroner ($9.4 million) to build the seed

***

(CNN) -- At least 12 airplanes shared the trans-Atlantic sky with doomed Air France Flight 447, but none reported any problems, deepening the mystery surrounding the cause of the plane's disappearance.



Image released by the Brazilian Air Force shows oil slicks in the water near a debris site.



Airlines confirmed that at least a dozen aircraft departed roughly at the same time and traversed approximately the same route, but did not report problematic weather conditions. This has led some aviation experts to suggest that technical problems on the airplane might be the main cause of the crash, though they may have combined with weather conditions to create serious problems.



The new information raises more questions than answers about Air France 447, believed to have plunged into the Atlantic Ocean somewhere between the coasts of Brazil and West Africa on May 31, presumably killing all 228 aboard. The plane's computer system reported a series of technical problems about four hours after takeoff and immediately after entering a large storm system a few hundred miles from the far eastern coast of Brazil.



Severe winds, updrafts and even lightning have been mentioned as possible causes of the crash, potentially triggering a failure of the plane's technical systems.



But aviation experts cautioned that weather alone would not normally cause a crash. Planes routinely fly through large storms, using the sensitive radar on board to navigate through specific storm cells. When conditions are severe enough, planes can easily deviate around or above storms, experts say.



In addition to Flight 447, Air France had four other Paris-bound flights that left in the same broad time frame from that part of the world, according to an airline spokesman. One flight left Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, at 4:20 p.m. At that same moment, another Air France flight left nearby Sao Paulo. A third Air France flight left Buenos Aires, Argentina, at 5:50 p.m., also heading for Paris. A final Air France flight left Sao Paulo at 7:10 p.m., almost exactly when the doomed flight took off from Rio.



All of these flights took a similar route toward Paris, heading first toward Recife on the east coast of Brazil and then continuing northeast over the Atlantic. None of the other flights experienced anything unusual, the spokesman said. All arrived in Paris the next day, with no significant delays of any kind.



That same evening two Air Iberia flights bound for Madrid, Spain, left Brazil at about the same time as Flight 447; one departed from Rio de Janeiro and another from Sao Paulo, according to officials at Iberia. Those flights also reported no problems.



It was the same story for one British Airways flight and three Air TAM Brazil flights, all of which flew routes similar to the missing plane.



Although none of the other flights are known to have reported weather problems en route, aviation experts said weather can change suddenly and vary over short distances, so one plane might experience conditions far worse than another.

***

LONDON, England -- Extra-time goals from Frank Lampard and Didier Drogba gave Chelsea a 3-2  victory over Liverpool to send the London side into a Champions League final showdown against English Premier League rivals Manchester United, 4-3 on aggregate.

Didier Drogba (right) and Frank Lampard both found the net as Chelsea secured their final place in Moscow.

Lampard, playing his first game since the death of his mother last week, coolly slotted home a 98th-minute penalty and Drogba, who had opened the scoring in the first-half, sent Chelsea to the final in Moscow on May 21 with a timely second goal.

Fernando Torres had given Liverpool hope with a second-half equaliser but they failed to finish the job and Chelsea made them pay in a pulsating extra period which also saw Ryan Babel grab a late consolation goal for the visitors.

Drogba, who Liverpool manager Rafael Benitez had accused of being a 'diver' prior to the match, looked like a man on a mission to ram the Spaniards words down his throat.

The Ivory Coast striker forced Jose Reina to turn his skidding 15-meter effort around the post in the fifth minute.

Four minutes later, Liverpool put together their only meaningful move of the opening half when a quick Steven Gerrard pass put Fernando Torres in behind the Chelsea defense.

However, the Spanish striker's first touch was not deft enough and although he bore down on Petr Cech, the Chelsea goalkeeper did well to close down his space and options.

The wet conditions hampered both sides but it was Chelsea who mastered them quicker. In the 18th minute, Lampard despatched a delightful pass into the path of Drogba but the striker was a meter wide with his shot.

Chelsea were in the ascendancy and their supremacy was underlined by Michael Essien's 20-meter effort which had to be collected by Reina at the foot of his right-hand post.

Liverpool were struggling to keep pace with the home side and their worries increased when central defender Martin Skrtel was forced off with a knee injury in the 21st minute to be replaced by Sami Hyypia.

Reina was forced to punch clear a long-range effort from Ballack but the goal Chelsea had threatened for most of the half arrived in style in the 33rd minute.

The architect was England midfielder Lampard. He cleverly split the Liverpool defense to give Salomon Kalou the chance to run on and fire a shot that Reina could only palm into the path of the onrushing Drogba.

The Ivorian does not miss such gifts and he sent a low drive fizzing into the net at the near post to give London side a 2-1 aggregate lead.

Drogba, clearly hurt by Benitez's criticism of his 'diving', then ran the length of the half to celebrate his goal in front of the Liverpool manager.

Chelsea's domination almost brought them a second four minutes before the interval but Michael Ballack's measured free-kick veered just the wrong side of the post.

Dirk Kuyt almost hauled Liverpool back into the tie three minutes after the restart but his shot met the outstretched leg of Cech before Ashley Cole cleared.

After Lampard's 53rd-minute volley was well held by Reina, Liverpool finally broke their goalscoring hoodoo when Yossi Benayoun carved out a chance for Torres.

The Spaniard collected the ball in his stride just inside the penalty area before sliding it beyond the exposed Cech to make it 2-2 on aggregate -- the 64th-minute effort was Liverpool's first at Stamford Bridge in nine games under Benitez.

Both sides sought a winner -- but the 90 minutes ended all-square and the contest went into extra-time.

Liverpool almost snatched the lead within minutes of the restart but Hyypia's header fell wide of the post with Cech beaten.

Chelsea then thought they had done enough when Essien sent a 15-meter effort into the net -- but it was rightly disallowed for offside.

However, in the 98th minute, Ballack was brought down by Hyypia inside the box and referee Roberto Rosetti pointed to the spot.

Lampard kept his composure to send Reina the wrong way and was in tears

***

Tehran, Iran (CNN) -- United Nations-backed nuclear inspectors on Sunday visited a newly disclosed Iranian nuclear facility near the city of Qom, Iranian media has reported.



"IAEA inspectors today visited the... nuclear installation," the semi-official Mehr news agency said, referring to International Atomic Energy Agency staff. "The IAEA inspectors arrived Saturday night and are scheduled to inspect the... site several times. The inspectors will leave Tehran Tuesday."



Tehran sent shock waves through the international community in September by revealing the existence of the previously secret nuclear enrichment facility near Qom.



The IAEA announced Saturday its inspectors were leaving for the much-anticipated inspection. The agency declined to give more details on Sunday.



"It is our policy not to comment on the itinerary of our inspectors," a spokesman for the U.N. nuclear watchdog told CNN.



The inspectors will visit the installation to make sure it is being used for peaceful purposes, said Ali Akbar Salehi, the head of Atomic Energy Organization of Iran, according to the Islamic Republic News Agency.



The inspection comes after Iran said Friday that it needs more time to decide whether to sign onto a deal that could help end the international showdown over its nuclear activities.



That proposal calls for low-enriched uranium produced in Iran to be sent abroad for further enrichment and then returned for use in medical research and treatment.



Tehran is studying the draft proposal and will have an answer next week, Iranian diplomat Ali Asghar Soltanieh said on state-run Press TV.



Iran informed IAEA Director General Mohamed ElBaradei that it is "considering the proposal in depth and in a favorable light, but it needs until the middle of next week to provide a response," according to an IAEA statement.



Delegations from Iran, France, Russia, the United States and the IAEA met in Vienna this week to work out details of the tentative deal reached in early October. France, Russia and the United States have indicated their approval of the arrangement.



"The Director General hopes that Iran's response will equally be positive, since approval of this agreement will signal a new era of cooperation," the IAEA statement said.



After the current inspection, but before the end of the month, Iranian officials are expected to meet with the five permanent members of the U.N. Security Council -- Britain, China, France, Russia and the United States -- plus Germany to further discuss Tehran's nuclear program.



Iran's leaders maintain that their nation's nuclear program is intended solely for peaceful purposes, but many in the West believe Iran is pursuing nuclear weapons capabilities.



Low-enriched nuclear fuel can be further enriched into weapons-grade material.



CNN's Per Nyberg contributed to this report.

***

Atlanta (CNN) -- Ryan Brunn, the man who this week was sentenced to life in prison after pleading guilty to murdering a Georgia girl, apparently killed himself in his prison cell Thursday, a corrections spokeswoman said.





Georgia Department of Corrections spokeswoman Kristen Stancil said that Brunn was found unresponsive at 4:15 p.m. in his cell at Georgia Diagnostic and Classification Prison in Jackson. Brunn was pronounced dead at a hospital at 5:37 p.m. due to an apparent suicide, she said.





The case since has been referred to the Georgia Bureau of Investigation, according to Stancil.





Brunn had entered a guilty plea Tuesday at a hearing in a Cherokee County courthouse, during which he described in detail how he enticed, molested and killed 7-year-old Jorelys Rivera. He was subsequently sentenced to life in prison without the chance of parole, avoiding a potential death sentence by lethal injection.





The girl's father, Ricardo Galarza, told CNN en Espanol that news of Brunn's death partly made him "feel good but, on the other hand, it doesn't because my daughter will never be with me again."





Galarza said that he felt that a lifetime of Brunn being watched after, "eating three times a day (and) sleeping with air conditioning" while in prison was not enough.





"What I wanted was for them to put him in the electric chair and burn him," the father said. "I would have taken him there myself and prepared it, so he would burn."





Jorelys' mangled body was found in a trash compactor three days after she went missing on December 2 from an apartment complex in Canton, about 40 miles north of Atlanta.





According to the indictment, Jorelys was severely beaten and stabbed repeatedly in the face, neck and chest.





Brunn, 20, who worked as a maintenance man at the same apartment complex, was arrested on December 7 and charged with the crime.





Last week, Brunn was indicted on 13 counts including murder, aggravated assault, cruelty to children, aggravated child molestation, enticing a child for indecent purposes, false imprisonment, abandonment of a dead body, making a false statement and sexual exploitation of children.





He told the court Tuesday that he had never talked to Jorelys before the day of her murder. He said he devised a plan after he found one of her skates.





Brunn took a picture of the skate and approached her with it, asking if the skate was hers. She said yes, and Brunn promised to take her to it.





Instead, he took her to an empty apartment and instructed Jorelys to pull down her pants. He then put tape over her face and cut her throat with a razor. At this point, she was still alive, he told the court.





He said that he then took Jorelys to the bathroom and beat her to death with the skate. He said he did not have sex with the girl.





Increasingly, Brunn told the court, he grew concerned about what he had done. So he took a receipt, wrote on the back of it, "She is in the trash can," and taped it to the compactor.





He admitted lying to investigators who had questioned him about the case. Brunn said he knew right from wrong, adding he "never had an idea of killing a child in my life."





"I'd like to apologize for everything I've done, and I do deserve everything that you're about to give me," he said in court.

***

Spin bowlers Harbhajan Singh and Murali Kartik are back in India's squad for the test series against Pakistan.





Harbhajan has been out of test cricket since July 2006.





They are included in a 14-man party for the first two games, in Delhi, starting on November 22 and Calcutta (Kolkata) eight days later.





Harbhajan has not played a test since July 2006, while Kartik has been absent for three years.





They will be expected to support leg-spinner Anil Kumble, who was named as India's new captain last week.





Dinesh Karthik and Wasim Jaffer, who both played in the 1-0 series victory in England during the summer, are in the party and former captain Rahul Dravid is retained after missing the current one-day series against Pakistan.





The squad for the third and final Test against Pakistan, in Bangalore from December 8, will be named later.





India squad:





A Kumble (captain), W Jaffer, D Karthik, R Dravid, S Tendulkar, S Ganguly, V Laxman, Y Singh, MS Dhoni (wkt), H Singh, Z Khan, RP Singh, S Santh, M Kartik.





Pakistan all rounder Shahid Afridi and Indian batsman Gautam Gambhir have been given fines for their on-pitch clash during the third one-day international in Kanpur.





Afridi was fined 95 percent of his match fee and Gambhir 65 percent after appearing before the International Cricket Council (ICC) match referee Roshan Mahanama, the ICC announced.





They were charged under two counts of the ICC Code of Conduct relating to conduct unbecoming of their status, which could bring them or the game into disrepute, and the rule relating to "inappropriate and deliberate physical contact between players in the course of play."





Gambhir and Afridi were involved in a heated altercation after they collided, forcing umpire Ian Gould to intervene and separate them.





India won the third game by 46 runs to lead the five-match series 2-1. The fourth game will be played in Gwalior on Thursday. E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- Three law enforcement officers patrolling a remote stretch of northern California woods shot dead a double-murder suspect whom authorities had been hunting for 36 days, a sheriff said.





Aaron Bassler was wearing black clothing and carrying a large backpack, a fanny-pack and assault rifle when three Sacramento sheriffs spotted him early Saturday, Mendocino County Sheriff Tom Allman said.





From about 40 yards away and at an elevation 25 feet higher, they fired about seven rounds into his upper torso.





Allman said Bassler didn't fire a shot, and there was no verbal exchange between the parties. The suspect raised his weapon -- which was loaded and not on safety -- from the ground toward law enforcement officers.





It is believed to be the same weapon used to kill one of his victims, officials said.





The suspect was considered "armed and dangerous," and was believed to have engaged in a gunfight with three other law enforcement officers from Alameda County two days earlier.





There was no "shoot-to-kill" order in effect, Allman said.





"I fully support the manner in which this happened," the sheriff said, responding to inquiries that the suspect was killed without any warning or having fired a shot. "There will be no more lives endangered by Aaron Bassler."





Authorities wanted Bassler for the killing of Jere Melo on August 27 just east of Fort Bragg on the northern California coast 10 miles north of Mendocino.





Melo, 69, was an Army veteran as well as a former mayor and then-councilman in Fort Bragg at the time of his death.





A witness saw a gunman open fire and later identified the suspect, according to Allman.





He has also been identified as the suspect in the August 11 slaying of Matthew Coleman in Westport, just north of Fort Bragg. Allman said Saturday that DNA evidence linked him to Coleman's death.





For over a month, more than 40 local, state and federal law enforcement agencies have teamed up to look for him.





In the process, he has been a suspect in several burglaries in which he kicked in locked doors and made off with food and guns, said Allman.





One such incident occurred between Thursday and Friday in a garage-shop about two miles from where Bassler was eventually found. A police bloodhound tracked his scent, helping steer authorities in the direction that they believed the suspect might be -- and leading to the operation Saturday.





The officers who gunned down Bassler were among about 15 three-person teams brought in from around the state for the search.





Bassler's family was "not happy" when a law enforcement official contacted them Saturday about the death because the press had already put out the news, according to the sheriff.





"I do have some feelings for the Bassler family, they suffered a loss today," Allman said. "(But) I assure you, that the other two losses that we felt in this county were something that law enforcement remembered every day."





A $30,000 reward for information leading to Bassler had been offered. There was no indication Saturday that anyone will receive it.





CNN's Greg Botelho contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- The late Chris Benoit idolized the Dynamite Kid, who was half of a professional wrestling team famous in the 1980s for spectacular high-flying, acrobatic moves.

Chris Benoit strangled his wife and suffocated his son before hanging himself in June.

The Dynamite Kid and his partner, Davey Boy Smith, were known as the British Bulldogs. They were quick, agile and muscular, and in 1986 they won the World Wrestling Federation tag team championship.

Young Benoit dreamed of wrestling like the Dynamite Kid, whose real name is Tom Billington. At the beginning of his career, Benoit adopted the Dynamite nickname and copied his idol's signature moves.

In June, Benoit murdered his wife and young son before hanging himself. Investigators found testosterone, painkillers and anti-anxiety drugs in Chris Benoit's body, Georgia's chief medical examiner said a month later.

When asked about Benoit's double murder-suicide, Billington told CNN, "It can make you aggressive, the steroids. But personally I wouldn't, you know, kill no bleeding kid, or wife either."

Billington now lives in a public housing apartment outside Manchester, England. He has lost the use of his legs. A pin sticks out from one of his toes.

Billington blames his wrestling life for doing this to him -- wrestling and the fact that he ignored doctors who told him to stop the punishment to his body.

And from the steroids, he said.

Billington told CNN that the steroids came from doctors, from friends, even from steroids meant for horses. He took them all, took a terrible pounding in the ring, and like his partner (who died at age 39 in 2002), began taking extensive amounts of painkillers.

Benoit's death has refocused a media spotlight on the organization for which he wrestled, now known as World Wrestling Entertainment, and the man who has ruled wrestling for years, Chairman of the Board Vince McMahon.

McMahon, appearing with Linda McMahon, his wife and WWE CEO, told CNN: "Nothing from the WWE, under any set of circumstances had anything to do with Chris Benoit murdering his family. How did we know Chris Benoit would turn into a monster." Read a full transcript of the McMahons interview

Vince McMahon defended the organization, saying its drug-testing policy was not just for show.

"Our policy stacks up just as well as anyone else's in sport, although again emphasizing we are entertainment, and no one in entertainment, no one has this kind of wellness policy," McMahon said.

Critics say McMahon pushes his stars and non-stars, works them too many nights per year and has encouraged the large physiques prevalent in modern wrestling. They say McMahon only looks at his employees as commodities, pawns in a huge business.

His businesses are quite successful. About 16 million people a week tune into WWE TV shows. Two of their cable programs -- "Raw" and "Friday Night Smackdown" -- are weekly ratings giants. Pay-per-view specials generate an average of $100 million per year.

When asked about the high number of former wrestlers who had died before they turned 50 years old, Vince McMahon said each person in the WWE bore responsibility for their own lives -- especially outside the arena.

"If someone passes through our organization, it is not our responsibility for someone's personal activities," he said.

He also said there isn't "any organization in the world, be it entertainment or be it sport, that can tell you that they are totally drug-free."  Watch as a WWE wrestler says the perception of steroid use is wrong »

The McMahons said the WWE is taking steps toward improving its oversight of its athletes. Since the newest WWE drug screening program began in February 2006, more than 30 of the organization's wrestlers have been suspended, including two since CNN's interview with the McMahons.

David Black -- who helped the NFL develop its drug program and now runs tests for the WWE -- says twice that number have tested positive and been

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- At London Fashion Week, all eyes are usually on the clothes.





Egyptian Azza Fahmy is one of the Arab world's preeminent jewelry designers





But the Arab and Islamic-influenced brooches, bracelets, necklaces and rings adorning the models heading down Julien Macdonald's catwalk are also getting attention.





They are part of a collaboration between the fashion powerhouse and former British Designer of the Year and Egyptian jewelry designer, Azza Fahmy.





"I really love the craft and the skill and the romance that goes into the pieces. So, that teamed with my sense of high octane glamour and my London high living twist is a great mix and a contrast. And that's what I like," Macdonald enthused to CNN.





In return, "Azza Fahmy Jewellery" gets international exposure, to the likes of Vanity Fair, The Wall Street Journal and OK!.





But don't -- as one London paper did -- call the catwalk collection "designer bling."





"It's quite a deep and nice collection -- not bling bling. I hate bling bling collections," Fahmy exclaims.





Starting at $250 to 'the sky's-the-limit', Fahmy's pioneering blends of gold, silver and precious stones, makes her one of the Arab world's preeminent jewelry designers.





The only problem is, a mere 30 percent of these 'jewels of the Nile' are sold outside Egypt -- Fahmy was missing out on the lucrative Gulf Arab market.





One of the challenges of marketing designer jewelry in the Middle East is getting past the traditional mentality that measures an item's worth not by exceptional finishes but by its weight in grams and karats.





To do well in the East, Fahmy and her daughters Fatma and Amina steered the family business to the West.





It started with the Julien Macdonald collaboration, and now exclusive Western stores like Kabiri, Harrods and Harvey Nichols are selling their jewelry.





Arabs tend to imitate Western spending habits, paying big money for luxury foreign items like Bulgari or Cartier -- but they don't give the same attention to their own Arab brands.





Fahmy believes that as her jewelry becomes popular in the West -- more Middle Eastern buyers will follow suit.





The marketing strategy seems to be working. Her team says the collections now sell in the U.A.E., Qatar and Bahrain. Next stop -- Saudi Arabia.





"To have a product which stands beside Cartier, etcetera -- it's a challenge. But we are sure of the ourselves because we are presenting something special, something which is different from all these brands," Fahmy said.





At her workshop on the outskirts of Cairo, Fahmy's craftsmen work in the belief they're turning precious metal into something different -- art.





Fahmy's daughter, Amina Ghaly, works for the family business as a designer and says there's value in the design, the marketing and workmanship poured into each item.





"At least 20 to 25 people will have touched that piece just to have one perfect piece at the end," Ghaly explained.





In the 60's, Fahmy was the first woman to apprentice in Egypt's jewelry district. The one-time government employee used to run a one-woman shop in her spare time.





Today, more than 180 employees drill, solder, hammer and file under her watchful eye, crafting two to three thousand pieces every year.





The luxury goods market is a crowded one, as Fahmy well knows: "Like any business, it's not a joke," says the designer.





Going to the West to find a better footing in the East is seriously savvy move.





A move that could lead to future success on the catwalk -- and with more consumers worldwide.

***

(CNN) -- Michael Jackson was the pride of Gary, Indiana, growing up, and on Friday, his hometown paid tribute to the late entertainer with a memorial and celebration in his honor.



A group pays tribute to Michael Jackson by performing some of his signature moves.



They remembered him as not just the King of Pop or the musician who took Hollywood by storm, but as someone with an unmatched enthusiasm and talent for entertaining even as a little boy growing up in this city of about 100,000 in northwestern Indiana, 30 miles from downtown Chicago, Illinois.



Jackson's first music teacher, Anita Hill, spoke of teaching Jackson to sing "Climb Every Mountain," and remembered him as a "very energetic and wonderful student."



The principal of his middle school remembered how, at Christmastime how Jackson, always jumped up and offered to sing to his class.



Later, when he joined with family members to create the Jackson 5, he performed for kids at his school, the principal said, joking about the bargain that at the time it only cost them 10 cents to see the future pop icon.



Gary Mayor Rudy Clay noted Jackson put the city on the world's map and bid farewell to the star.



"He's going to put on those golden slippers and he's going to dance all over God's heaven," he said.



The tribute at The Steel Yard baseball park in Gary was full of children dancing and singing to Jackson's music, including a performance of "Thriller" complete with the cemetery scene that became so iconic.



Some of the biggest applause of the night came after a video was played of Jackson in Gary talking about his love for his hometown.



"Gary, you will always have a special place in my heart," Jackson said in the video played on the stadium's jumbo screen. "And Gary, you are more than good friend -- you are my family and you always will be."



As a finale, about 700 people holding candles sang "We Are the World," the 1985 song Jackson co-wrote with Lionel Richie to benefit USA for Africa.



Jackson lived in Gary for 11 years before moving to the West Coast after the Jackson 5 recorded their first album in 1969.



His father, Joe Jackson, made a brief appearance after being introduced by the Rev. Jesse Jackson.



After being surrounded by TV crews and photographers, Joe Jackson made his way to the stage, thanked everyone for attending and said it was good to be home.



"This is a pleasure to be back to see so many people here," Joe Jackson said. "It's always good to come back home, you know that."



Fans have flocked to Jackson's boyhood home in the days following his death in Los Angeles, California, on June 25. Autopsy results are pending.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- A warning of more attacks on UK bankers was made on Wednesday after the home of former Royal Bank of Scotland boss Fred Goodwin was vandalized.





A recovery vehicle removes a Mercedes from the Edinburgh home of Fred Goodwin.





Windows were smashed in Goodwin's house in the Scottish capital Edinburgh and those of a Mercedes-Benz limousine parked outside.





It is not known if anyone was at home at the time. Goodwin -- dubbed "Fred the Shred" by the media for his ruthless cost-cutting -- and his family have not been living in the house since it was revealed that the 50-year-old Goodwin was receiving an annual pension of $1 million (£700,000) for life.





A statement issued to media organizations including the Press Association after the attack said: "We are angry that rich people, like him, are paying themselves a huge amount of money and living in luxury, while ordinary people are made unemployed, destitute and homeless.





"Bank bosses should be jailed. This is just the beginning."





No group was named in the message and it did not explicitly claim responsibility for the attack.





Goodwin took early retirement after RBS nearly collapsed amid the economic crisis and was later part-nationalized.  Watch more on the attack »





On the same day as the size of his pension was revealed RBS announced a UK record loss of $34.6 billion (£24.1 billion) for 2008.





Politicians and commentators have expressed fury about the deal and excessive bonuses being given by bailed-out banks.





Britain's Chancellor of the Exchequer Alistair Darling, head of the Treasury, urged Goodwin to give up his pension. He refused, saying he had already given up a number of contractual rights which had cost him a lot of money.  Watch consternation at Goodwin's £16 million pension fund »





The statement warning of more attacks on bankers came days after AIG sent a memo to employees giving them security advice as fury grows in the U.S. over millions paid out in bonuses by the bailed-out U.S. insurance giant.





Employees were warned not to wear the company logo, to travel in pairs and park in well-lit places, and to phone security if they notice anyone "spending an inordinate amount of time near an AIG facility."





AIG employees have received death threats since the company handed out $165 million (£115 million) in bonuses and security at AIG offices has been increased.





And last month British police warned that officers were preparing for a "summer of rage" as protests mount across Europe against the economic crisis.





David Hartshorn, who heads the Metropolitan Police's public order branch, said growing unemployment, failing companies and the recession could spark a "mass protest."





Hartshorn said the G-20 economic summit starting next week could lead to unrest as leaders of the world's richest nations head to London.

***

(CNN) -- Woody Harrelson defended his clash with a photographer at a New York airport Wednesday night as a case of mistaken identity -- he says he mistook the cameraman for a zombie.



Woody Harrelson says he got into a clash with a photographer because he mistook him for a zombie.



The TMZ photographer filed a complaint with police claiming the actor damaged his camera and pushed him in the face at La Guardia Airport, according to an airport spokesman.



"We're looking into this allegation and if it's warranted, we'll turn it over to the proper authorities," said Port Authority of New York and New Jersey spokesman Ron Marsico.



The photographer, who was not identified, captured the encounter on a small camera after his larger one was broken.



Harrelson, who is being sued by another TMZ photographer for an alleged assault in 2006, did not deny his involvement.



"I wrapped a movie called 'Zombieland,' in which I was constantly under assault by zombies, then flew to New York, still very much in character," Harrelson said in a statement issued Friday by his publicist.



"With my daughter at the airport I was startled by a paparazzo, who I quite understandably mistook for a zombie," he said.



TMZ.com posted two videos of the incident, including one recorded by the larger camera before it was damaged.



The first video shows the photographer following Harrelson and his daughter down an escalator and out of the terminal. It ends with Harrelson apparently reaching for the lens.



The second video begins with the photographer accusing Harrelson of breaking his camera.



After Harrelson returns the camera to him, a scuffle appears to ensue.



"Woody, this is assault. Woody, this is assault," the photographer is heard saying. "Woody, chill out. Would you please chill out?"



The photographer continues to follow Harrelson for another four minutes as the actor and his daughter walk to the airport parking lot. At one point, Harrelson again turns toward the cameraman.



"I'm being chased by Woody Harrelson while I'm talking to you," the photographer says as he talks to an unidentified person on a cell phone.



"He hit me in my face, he broke my friggin' camera, he broke the camera in pieces," he said.



Harrelson, his daughter and a driver get inside an SUV and the encounter ends.



In the movie "Zombieland," Harrelson plays "the most frightened person on Earth" looking for refuge from zombies, according to the Internet Movie Database



Filming on the movie wrapped in Atlanta, Georgia, on Wednesday, according to director Ruben Fleischer's Web site.



TMZ photographer Josh Levine filed a lawsuit against Harrelson last year for an alleged attack outside a Hollywood nightclub in 2006.



Video of that incident, which is also posted on TMZ.com, also appeared to show Harrelson grabbing a camera and clashing with the photographer.



Los Angeles prosecutors declined to press charges against the actor, but Levine filed a suit last summer asking for $2.5 million in damages.



"Woody Harrelson has a history of anger management issues with people and we intend to put a stop to this," Cyrus Nownejad, Levine's lawyer, said Friday.



TMZ is partly owned by AOL, part of CNN's parent company, Time Warner.



CNN's Marc Balinsky contributed to this report.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Move over Susan Boyle. A week after the Scottish woman became a global sensation following a barnstorming audition on "Britain's Got Talent," a 12-year-old Welsh boy with a Motown voice has been hailed for his "life-changing" performance on the TV show after earning a standing ovation from Simon Cowell.



Jafargholi impressed the "Britain's Got Talent" judges with a rendition of "Who's Loving You."



Shaheen Jafargholi's prospects looked bleak when the infamously hard to impress Cowell brought the audition to an abrupt halt just one verse into his rendition of "Valerie," the Zutons' song covered by Amy Winehouse.



"You've got this really wrong," Cowell told him. "What do you sing apart from that?"



Jafargholi instead offered to perform "Who's Loving You," written by Smokey Robinson and performed by a young Michael Jackson with the Jackson Five, bringing screams of delight from the audience as he launched into a note-perfect rendition that brought a beaming Cowell and fellow judges Piers Morgan and Amanda Holden to their feet.



"This is how one song can change your life," Cowell told him. "This may be the start of something special for you young man."  Watch Shaheen Jafargholi perform on "Britain's Got Talent" »



Writing in his blog for the show, Morgan said Jafargholi had been the stand-out act of the show and tipped him as a possible challenger to Boyle for the TV talent show's £100,000 ($146,000) prize.



"Once Simon got him to sing the right kind of song for his voice, he was sensational. Like a young Stevie Wonder," Morgan said.



In an interview for the show, Jafargholi said he had been singing since he was two years old. "When I was a bit older my mum got me some singing lessons and my voice just got bigger and bigger," he said. "Hopefully this is going to be my big break."



Last week's performance by Boyle, the 47-year-old with a Broadway voice who claimed to have never been kissed, brought the show global attention, with her version of the Les Miserables' tune "I Dreamed a Dream" gaining more than 32 million hits on YouTube as well as earning her a string of U.S. media appearances, including on CNN's Larry King Live.



Jafargholi has some way to go to match Boyle's success. By Monday morning a YouTube link to his performance had been watched just 330,000 times. Who do you prefer? Susan Boyle or Shaheen Jafargholi? Sound Off below

***

(CNN) -- Manor GP are to be rebranded Virgin Racing ahead of their Formula One debut next season.



Manor team chief John Booth and Virgin supremo Richard Branson are due to announce the long-awaited sponsorship tie-up on Tuesday.



The news has effectively been confirmed by motor sport's world governing body, the FIA, as they have announced the 2010 entry list for the F1 world championship.



Currently there are 12 teams, with the name Virgin Racing amongst the newcomers for 2010, joining Lotus F1 Racing, Campos Meta 1 and US F1 Team.



The issue of the 13th entry remains unresolved, although Sauber are widely expected to be granted a place on next year's grid following a meeting of the World Motor Sport Council in Monaco on December 11.



Peter Sauber last week regained control of the team he sold to BMW four years ago after the German manufacturing giant's withdrawal from the sport.



"I am very relieved about that development," the 66-year-old Swiss, who is hopeful the FIA will now look favorably on the team's entry, told reporters.



"It would have been a crying shame had one of the best Formula One factories closed down. Regarding the slot on the grid, I am very confident we will be given a final confirmation very shortly."



The Formula One Commission are due to discuss Toyota's fate next week, again in Monaco on Wednesday.



The Japanese manufacturer pulled out of F1 at the end of last season, despite during the summer signing the new Concorde Agreement that bound them to the sport for the next three years.



Speculation has surfaced of late regarding a potential takeover, yet it is unclear whether a buyer would automatically be granted an entry on the basis of Toyota's signature on the Concorde.



In a statement, the FIA said: "Toyota Motorsport GmbH remains formally bound by the Concorde Agreement to put forward a team for participation, though it has indicated that it will not be in a position to do so.



"An announcement will be made regarding this entry in due course."

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- The Bush administration has launched a "significant escalation" of covert operations in Iran, sending U.S. commandos to spy on the country's nuclear facilities and undermine the Islamic republic's government, journalist Seymour Hersh said Sunday.



An Iranian flag flies outside the building containing the reactor of Bushehr nuclear power plant, south of Tehran.



White House, CIA and State Department officials declined comment on Hersh's report, which appears in this week's issue of The New Yorker.



Hersh told CNN's "Late Edition with Wolf Blitzer" that Congress has authorized up to $400 million to fund the secret campaign, which involves U.S. special operations troops and Iranian dissidents.



President Bush and Vice President Dick Cheney have rejected findings from U.S. intelligence agencies that Iran has halted a clandestine effort to build a nuclear bomb and "do not want to leave Iran in place with a nuclear program," Hersh said.



"They believe that their mission is to make sure that before they get out of office next year, either Iran is attacked or it stops its weapons program," Hersh said.



The new article, "Preparing the Battlefield," is the latest in a series of articles accusing the Bush administration of preparing for war with Iran.



He based the report on accounts from current and former military, intelligence, and congressional sources.  Watch Hersh discuss what he says are the administration's plans for Iran »



"As usual with his quarterly pieces, we'll decline to comment," White House spokesman Gordon Johndroe told CNN.



"The CIA, as a rule, does not comment on allegations regarding covert operations," CIA spokesman Paul Gimigliano said.



Ryan Crocker, the U.S. ambassador in Baghdad, denied U.S. raids were being launched from Iraq, where American commanders believe Iran is stoking sectarian warfare and fomenting attacks on U.S. troops.



"I can tell you flatly that U.S. forces are not operating across the Iraqi border into Iran, in the south or anywhere else," Crocker said.



Hersh said U.S. efforts were staged from Afghanistan, which also shares a border with Iran.



He said the program resulted in "a dramatic increase in kinetic events and chaos" inside Iran, including attacks by Kurdish separatists in the country's north and a May attack on a mosque in Shiraz that killed 13 people.



The United States has said it is trying to isolate Iran diplomatically in order to get it to come clean about its nuclear ambitions. But Bush has said "all options" are open in dealing with the issue.



Iran insists its nuclear program is aimed at providing civilian electric power, and refuses to comply with U.N. Security Council demands that it halt uranium enrichment work.



U.N. nuclear inspectors say Tehran held back critical information that could determine whether it is trying to make nuclear weapons.



Israel, which is believed to have its own nuclear arsenal, conducted a military exercise in the eastern Mediterranean in early June involving dozens of warplanes and aerial tankers.



The distance involved in the exercise was roughly the same as would be involved in a possible strike on the Iranian nuclear fuel plant at Natanz, Iran, a U.S. military official said.



In 1981, Israeli warplanes destroyed an Iraqi nuclear reactor.



Iran's parliament speaker, Ali Larijani, warned other countries against moves that would "cost them heavily." In comments that appeared in the semi-official Mehr news agency Sunday, an Iranian general said his troops were digging more than 320,000 graves to bury troops from any invading force with "the respect they deserve."



"Under the law of war and armed conflict, necessary preparations must be made for the burial of soldiers of aggressor nations," said Maj. Gen. Mirfaisal Baqerzadeh, an Iranian officer in charge of identifying soldiers missing in action.



Journalist Shirzad Bozorghmehr in Tehran, Iran, contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Don't tell Brad Pitt who or how to love.



Brad Pitt talks about "soul mate" Angelina Jolie, life, and fatherhood in Parade magazine.



The actor and star of the new film "Inglourious Basterds" opened up to Parade magazine about his thoughts on love, marriage and fatherhood.



During the candid interview, Pitt showed off a secret area in one of his homes which he said "is a great place for sex" and reflected on his early days in Hollywood, which included superstardom and some marijuana.



"I liked to smoke a bit of grass at the time, and I became very sheltered," Pitt told Parade. "Then I got bored. I was turning into a damn doughnut, really."



These days, Pitt said he's happy with his decision to become a parent with partner Angelina Jolie. The two have six children, all younger than 10: Maddox, Pax, Zahara, Shiloh and twins Vivienne Marcheline and Knox, the latter born last year.



"This family is full of life," Pitt said. "There are laughs, aggravations, irritations, but at the end of the day, it's fun. When life is really good, it's messy."



Pitt said his life is very different now that he is a dad.



"When I go down a path, I take it to the end," he said. "Then I take another one. I took the path of not having kids, now it's time for family. Children are a dominant value in my life now, and they weren't before."



He's found a "soul mate" in Jolie, Pitt said, but he insisted he meant what he has said in the past about not marrying her.



"When someone asked me why Angie and I don't get married, I replied, 'Maybe we'll get married when it's legal for everyone else,' " he said. "I stand by that, although I took a lot of flak for saying it, hate mail from religious groups. I believe everyone should have the same rights."



Pitt told Parade he takes exception to anyone trying to dictate how someone should live and who they should love.



"Just the other night, I heard this TV reverend say that Angie and I were setting a bad example because we were living out of wedlock, and people should not be duped by us," Pitt told the magazine. "It made me laugh.



"What damn right does anyone have to tell someone else how to live if they're not hurting anyone? How many times do you think real love comes to someone in a lifetime? If you're lucky, maybe two or three."



People should be able to be happy, Pitt said, and that includes his children.



"Would it bother me if a child of mine turns out to be gay? No, not one bit," he said. "Listen, I want my kids to live the lives they want to live. I want them to be fulfilled. I hope I teach my kids to be who they really are."

***

(CNN) -- The man identified as the double agent who killed eight people at a U.S. base in Afghanistan was a Jordanian doctor recruited as a counterterrorism intelligence source, a senior Jordanian official said Tuesday.



A former U.S. intelligence official identified the suicide bomber Monday as Humam Khalil Abu-Mulal al-Balawi.



The Jordanian official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said authorities in Jordan arrested al-Balawi more than a year ago "for some suspicious information related to him" but released him because of a lack of evidence.



"After few months, he got in touch with us through the Internet and sent us several e-mails that include very important and rather dangerous information that might affect the security and stability of the country," the official said.



"We kept in touch with him through e-mails in order to get more information and also trying to bring him over to be able to get more information. We shared and exchanged the information he gave us with some other friendly countries that are involved in countering terrorism."



The official said Jordan could not confirm that al-Balawi was the bomber, "because we are not on the ground."



"But we are not denying that if he is the one, then he is the Jordanian doctor," the official said.



The December 30 blast at a U.S. base in Khost, in southeastern Afghanistan, killed seven CIA operatives including two from private security firm Xe, formerly known as Blackwater. The eighth victim was Jordanian Army Capt. Sharif Ali bin Zeid, a cousin of Jordan's King Abdullah II.



U.S. sources said bin Zeid was the Jordanian operative working closely with al-Balawi, who was from the same hometown as the onetime leader of al Qaeda in Iraq, Abu Musab al-Zarqawi.



Jordanian and U.S. intelligence agencies apparently believed that al-Balawi had been rehabilitated from his extremist views and were using him to hunt Ayman al-Zawahiri, al Qaeda's No. 2 figure, the former intelligence official said.



In a posting on its Web site last week, the Taliban in Afghanistan claimed that the bomber was an Afghan National Army soldier.



On Sunday, however, Pakistani Taliban chief Hakimullah Mehsud said in an e-mail that his arm of the Islamic movement carried out the attack, using a Jordanian national. Mehsud's message predicted, "This will be admitted by the CIA and the Jordanian government."



The attack was "a huge blow, symbolically and tactically," because it eliminated such a large number of CIA officers, who can require years to become ingrained in the region, said Reva Bhalla, director of analysis for the international intelligence firm STRATFOR. In addition, the attack showed the ability of the Taliban to penetrate perhaps the most difficult of targets: a CIA base, she said.



Former CIA official Robert Richer called it the greatest loss of life for the agency since the 1983 bombing of the U.S. Embassy in Beirut, Lebanon, which killed eight agents. An American intelligence official vowed last week that the United States would avenge the attack.

***

INDIO, California (CNN) -- For some concertgoers, the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival really kicked into action on Day Two.



Festival attendees enjoy the music Saturday, Day Two of the Coachella music festival in Indio, California.



Day One was leisurely and pleasant -- the weather was mild, the acts were fairly mellow and the big headliner was Paul McCartney. On Day Two, someone took the dial and turned it up a notch, as the desert sun beat down a little harder, the music pumped a little louder and the crowds who packed the VIP tent threw a little more attitude.



There were the usual celebrity sightings. Jake Gyllenhaal and Reese Witherspoon snuck in the back just as rapper M.I.A. hit the stage, Paris Hilton took in Travis Barker and DJ AM's set in the Sahara tent and David Hasselhoff was spotted making out with a mystery lady near the restrooms.



Forty-six acts performed on five stages scattered about the grassy field of the Empire Polo Club near Palm Springs, California. Massive eco-friendly art installations fashioned from scrap metal and reclaimed wood doubled as shelter from the heat, as well as mini-stages for dancers and performance artists.



There was good buzz for thenewno2, an indie-pop band fronted by Oli Hecks and Dhani Harrison, whose vocals are reminiscent of his late father, George, but warmer, and less haunting.



"It's the first festival we've ever played, and our 12th gig overall," said Harrison. "Normally with festivals, people come to check you out, stand in the back, and then move on pretty quickly, even if they like you -- but people stayed! It's the best performance we've ever had."



Unfortunately Fleet Foxes was not so lucky. The Seattle,Washington, group's delicate baroque harmonies were drowned out by the world music beats of Thievery Corporation's percussion section bleeding over from the neighboring main stage, as one of their female vocalists crowd-surfed. As usual, the day's line-up was a mix of up-and-coming indie artists sprinkled with tried-and-true veteran acts.



The Killers have played Coachella in both capacities. The Las Vegas, Nevada, quartet received their first invitation from festival organizers in 2004, the same year their debut album, "Hot Fuss," was released. "We played at 11:30 a.m. in a tent. It was 150 degrees out, and backstage, it smelled like horse droppings," said drummer Ronnie Vannucci, referencing the fact that there are certain consequences to holding an event on a polo field in the desert.



This time, as the marquee act, The Killers enjoyed their own backstage compound decked out with a white picket fence, tablecloths and festive party lights in the shape of daisies. Palm trees gently swayed in the distance, silhouetted against the desert backdrop. You could hear the crowd going crazy for a feisty M.I.A. slotted on the main stage before The Killers.



Vannucci and his three bandmates had just rolled in on their tour bus from Vegas. He spoke with CNN while warming up his hands and wrists with drumming exercises. "With festivals, you have to realize the audience is not necessarily there to see YOU. So we'll play some stuff off our new album, 'Day and Age,' and work in some songs that everybody knows, like 'Mr. Brightside' from our first album."



Half an hour later, The Killers took the stage, opening their set with their latest hit, "Human." Frontman Brandon Flowers soon had the crowd singing the along to the perplexing lyrics, "Are we human, or are we dancer?"



At Coachella, it doesn't matter if you're human or if you're dancer. But if you're dancer, you'll probably be relegated to one of the mini-stages inside an art installation. "The first time I heard about Coachella 10 years ago, I thought, 'That could be the cool festival here in America," said Vannucci.



"It's since become a successful festival with good bands, swarms

***

(CNN) -- Somalia's hard-line Islamic group Al-Shabab seized control of Jowhar, the president's hometown, after a battle with pro-government forces Sunday.



An Islamist fighter mans a position in the streets of Mogadishu, Somalia, on Saturday.



Jowhar is a major town 55 miles (88 kilometers) southeast of Mogadishu, the capital.



"All businesses are closed and residents are already fleeing while Al-Shabab are roaming the streets," a local journalist said.



The town had been under the control of forces backing the transitional government, which is scrambling to cope with deadly advances from Al-Shabab in Mogadishu.



Al-Shabab was once the armed wing of the Islamic Courts Union, which took over most of southern Somalia in the second half of 2006. The United States says the group is affiliated with the al Qaeda terrorist network, and the U.S. backed an Ethiopian invasion that drove the ICU from power in 2006.



After seizing control of Jowhar on Sunday, the rebels started conducting "search operations in the police station and the provincial headquarters of the town," the journalist added.



The clashes extended into the suburbs of the town, where sporadic fighting was going on between the rebels and government forces, said the journalist, who requested anonymity for safety reasons.



The town's seizure comes amid escalating tension between Somalia's transitional government and the Al-Shabab militia, which has waged days-long attacks in the capital. In the latest round of violence, one person was killed and 15 others wounded when mortars slammed into a police academy in Mogadishu on Sunday.



Clashes between the rebels and the government in Mogadishu have left at least 103 people dead and 420 wounded, Somali officials said Friday.



The east African nation has not had an effective government since 1991.



Last week, a spokesman for the rebel group said that it had successfully recruited more fighters.



"It is not only Somali jihadists that are fighting in Mogadishu against the government," said Sheikh Hassan Ya'qub, a spokesman for Al-Shabab. "There are also foreign Muslim jihadist brothers who are fighting side by side with us."



The new round of fighting stems from an interpretation of sharia, or Islamic law, the spokesman said.



Somalia's new president, Sheikh Sharif Ahmed, recently approved implementing sharia, but the rebel group wants the country to institute a stricter form.



Meanwhile, a powerful Islamist warlord defected to the government Saturday after he disagreed with rebel Islamist groups on the war against the transitional government.



The warlord, Sheikh Yusuf Mohamud Siad Indha Ade, was the military commander of Hassan Dahir Aweys, who is suspected by the United States of being a terrorist.

***

(CNN)  -- South Africa's embattled police commissioner resigned Sunday as president of Interpol, a day after he took an extended leave of absence from his police duties, the international crime-fighting agency said in a statement.



South Africa police commissioner Jackie Selebi, facing charges of corruption, has stepped down as boss of Interpol.



Interpol's Secretary-General Ronald Noble received a resignation letter on Sunday from Jackie Selebi, who is facing charges of corruption related to his role as police commissioner, the agency said.



The charges are not related to his leadership role in Interpol.



In the letter, Selebi said he was resigning because he did not wish the allegations against him "to bring the good work of this august body into disrepute."



"Based on my experience of working with Mr. Selebi in his capacity as delegate, vice president and ultimately president of the organization, he has always conducted himself and acted in a way to enhance global security and police co-operation worldwide," Noble said in a statement.



As to the charges Selebi faces, Noble said: "Any such allegations should be prosecuted thoroughly, and the proper manner is for charges to be brought promptly before a court of law and not through media leaks and speculation."



On Saturday, South African President Thabo Mbeki told a news conference in Pretoria, South Africa, that Selebi had been given an "extended leave of absence" from his police duties, but that he was not being sacked.



Mbeki said Selebi supported the decision -- taken midnight Friday and effective immediately -- to temporarily step down and that an acting commissioner had already been appointed to take his place.



The National Prosecuting Authority said it will charge the police chief with "corruption and defeating the administration of justice," Tladi Tladi, a spokesman for the agency told CNN.



According to widespread media reports, the upcoming charges hinge on Selebi's dealings with Glen Agliotti, a convicted drug smuggler.



The suspended police chief is alleged to have accepted at least 1.2 million Rand ($177,000) from Agliotti over a 5-year period, the South African daily Cape Argus reported.



In return Selebi allegedly handed over confidential intelligence reports from the British authorities relating to Agliotti's suspected drug-trafficking activities, according to the newspaper.



Tladi said the corruption charges were linked to Agliotti "to a certain extent."



Agliotti recently received a 10-year suspended prison sentence in a drug case after entering into a plea bargain. He is also accused of involvement in the 2005 killing of mining magnate Brett Kebble, according to South African media reports.



A court on Friday rejected an application to halt the prosecution by Selebi, who has been under investigation for around two years.



Mbeki denied that he had been too slow in dealing with the fallout from the charges.



"I have said many times that if there was anyone who came to me with information indicating that the national commissioner had behaved improperly then I would act on such information. No one has come to me with such information," Mbeki said. E-mail to a friend

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- It carries the nickname "America's Finest City," and right now it appears San Diego is living up to the hype.



Growing on the water: San Diego is becoming an increasingly popular super-yacht destination.



Though the international financial crisis has precipitated economic woe across the United States, developments in San Diego's super-yacht industry don't appear to be slowing.



Fifth Avenue Landing, a stylish new facility promising the ultimate docking experience for super-yachts up to 300 feet long, has just opened in city's downtown area. The marina, which is close to local attractions and top hotels, boasts 12 high-quality berths, each offering a concierge service.



This impressive project is just the latest step in a significant development program for the west coast city, which is which is now beginning to compete with its northern neighbor, Los Angeles, as a destination for super-yacht owners.



In 2005, Forbes rated San Diego as the fifth wealthiest city in the U.S. and in the years since, for the super-yacht industry particularly, the region has continued to develop rapidly.



Today, the city is buzzing with super-yacht designers, builders, and brokers, and it now has plenty of facilities to accommodate the industry. There's also the annual "YachtFest" show, which will be going ahead in September this year and is expected to attract interest from super-yacht makers and owners around the world.



Numerous marinas have sprung up amid the increasing interest in the city, with Kona Kai Marina, Shelter Island Marina, and The Wharf, among some of the most notable developments.



Outside of the private super-yacht industry, San Diego is also home to the largest shipyard on the west coast of the U.S. -- General Dynamics' National Steel and Shipbuilding Company. Many cruise lines pass through the port and there are plans for a new cruise ship terminal to open in 2010.



Much of the success in attracting super-yachts has been credited to the San Diego Super-yacht Association (SDSA) -- a collective of local super-yacht designers, builders, brokers and other interested parties that was formed in 2006.



Super-yacht director of Marine Group Boat Works and founding member of the SDSA, Fred Larsson, told CNN that the key to San Diego's recent profile boost was realizing the economic needs of the industry.



"San Diego had the basic requirements of super-yachts covered already with the natural deep water harbor, year round superb weather, geographic location as the gateway to the Pacific and a wonderful youthful city. Then when you add the super-yacht facility upgrades it's a no brainer. San Diego has it all," he said.



Larsson said the SDSA had been instrumental in developments as the combination of shipyards, marinas and suppliers working together means they have a good all-round knowledge of what super-yacht owners want when they come to port.



The combination of major refit facility improvements, new marinas, marina expansions and an effective marketing campaign are behind the success, he added.



Despite the international financial crisis, which threatens to hurt the super-yacht industry around the world, Larsson said that San Diego should not suffer too much as interest from owners is still growing.



"Due to the sheer size of the city and nearby cities there is so much for owners and crew to do here on their time off, the beaches are fabulous, Vegas is an hour away, there are 100 golf courses in and around San Diego.



"It's a metropolitan feel with small town charm. That's what makes us different," he said.

***

(CNN)  -- Polish goalkeeper Lukasz Fabianski made two sorry blunders as Arsenal crashed to a 2-1 defeat in their Champions League last 16 clash against Porto at Estadio do Dragao.





Fabianski, standing in for the injured Manuel Almunia saw a soft shot go past him for Porto's opener.





Comeback defender Sol Campbell quickly leveled for Arsenal but it was his back-pass which was picked up by Fabianski to concede a free kick which led to Porto's winner in the second half.





Porto were ahead after just 11 minutes as he was horribly caught out of position by a low right wing cross cum shot from Silvestre Varela which deflected off his diving body and over the line.





In an open game, Arsenal were quickly level as Thomas Vermaelen and then Tomas Rosicky worked a Samir Nasri corner to Campbell who headed home from close range on 16 minutes.





It was Campbell's first goal for Arsenal since the 2006 Champions League final.





Fabianski mixed brilliance with his mistakes as he did well to keep out a fine shot from Micael on 29 minutes.





Arsenal thought they should have had a penalty when Tomas Rosicky was pulled down, but soon afterwards they found themselves behind again.





Hesitancy between Campbell and Fabianski led to the keeper picking up the ball just inside the penalty area.





With Campbell still debating the decision, claiming it was not a deliberate back-pass, Porto took the free-kick immediately - which Micael quickly tapped to Falcao for the Colombian to roll the ball into an empty net.





Porto pressed hard for a third ahead of the second leg in London but Arsenal held out to limit their losses.





Arsenal manager Arsene Wenger accused referee Martin Hansson of a "massive mistake" after his side's defeat.





"I believe it (the back-pass) was accidental, Sol touched it accidentally," Wenger told ITV1. "And the referee should give us time to build the wall."





In the other last 16 clash on Wednesday, Bayern Munich clinched a 2-1 win over 10-man Fiorentina in the Allianz Arena.





Arjen Robben put the Bundesliga side ahead with a penalty just before halftime, but Per Kroldrup gave the Italian visitors a deserved equalizer five minutes into the second half.





Referee Tom Henning Ovrebro, who took charge of the controversial semifinal between champions Barcelona and Chelsea last season, was in the spotlight again as he controversially sent off Fiorentina's Massimo Gobbi for an apparently innocuous tackle.





Miroslav Klose, who many deemed fortunate to stay on the field for a more robust challenge, then headed home a late Bayern winner with Fiorentina claiming he was offside.

***

In our Behind the Scenes series, CNN correspondents share their experiences in covering news and analyze the stories behind the events. CNN's Jay Kernis reports on what it was like inside the Kodak Theatre at the Academy Awards.



Hugh Jackman, the host of the 81st Academy Awards, speaks to the audience at the Kodak Theatre on Sunday.



LOS ANGELES, California (CNN) -- When you're at home, you can sit back and be critical. When you're inside the theater, the whole show seems to work, especially the big production numbers.



Maybe it was a particularly well-produced show this year, but when you're in the audience, you feel part of it -- even way up in the second mezzanine.



I've been at the Oscars to cover them, but this is the first time I've ever been inside the ceremonies. I was there with my 17-year-old son, Noah.



When you arrive on the red carpet, you enter a security tent and show your ticket and driver's license.



You notice that the tent is bisected by red velvet ropes and, with a friendly and practiced technique, celebrities are moved to the left of the rope and others to the right.



This way, celebs leave the tent closer to the cameras and the fantasy that you might have that everybody in a gown or tux are somehow equals on one night sort of disappears.  View scenes from the Oscars »



If you ever were curious about what happens during the commercial breaks: Stagehands with really powerful flashlights guide the changing of the sets and curtains; they make sure empty orchestra seats are filled; host Hugh Jackman introduces his parents; they show a short film about the power of the movies that got cut from the show in progress; Jackman hands his wife a plate of cookies, thinking she probably was hungry; and he later points out that the guy playing the cello on stage in the Academy Award Orchestra was actor Dermot Mulroney. Who knew?  Watch a report on the night's big winners »



The show was best when it demonstrated that Hollywood can still do what it has always done well: getting your attention and holding it -- seeing five Best Actors presenting Oscars on the same stage was pretty amazing. So is Best Actor Sean Penn's self-awareness.



The Oscars can still astonish: They still know how to put on the big musical number, with a hundred dancing performers in top hats, moving with Busby Berkeley precision.



They still know how to break your heart: Heath Ledger's parents and sister received his Academy Award and said that they did so in celebration. But I bet they'd rather have had him accept it.



And for all of the breathtaking special effects that Hollywood can muster, for all the star power in the theater last night, there was something remarkable about seeing Philippe Petit in person -- the wire walker who, in 1974, hovered between the World Trade Center towers for 45 minutes.



There was something joyous about watching him balance an Oscar statue on his chin.

***

(CNN) -- An Austrian man who participated in a Nazi massacre of Jews during World War II and later gained U.S. citizenship has been deported to Austria, U.S. officials said.



The Sachsenhausen concentration camp just north of Berlin where the U.S. says Krumpf worked as an SS guard.



Josias Krumpf, 83, lived for years after the war in Racine, Wisconsin. The United States revoked his citizenship in 2005 after the Criminal Division of the U.S. Department of Justice sought to denaturalize him.



Acting Assistant Attorney General Rita Glavin announced Krumpf's deportation Thursday. It was not clear when he arrived in Austria, and representatives of the Austrian Justice Ministry were not immediately available for comment.



"His court-ordered removal from the United States to Austria is another milestone in the government's long-running effort to ensure that individuals who participated in crimes against humanity do not find sanctuary in this country," Glavin said.



The United States removed Krumpf because of his participation in that and other Nazi-sponsored acts of persecution during the war, Glavin said.



Krumpf admits standing watch on November 3, 1943, as SS guards at the Trawniki Labor Camp in Poland shot and killed 8,000 Jews, including women and 400 children, in pits. Glavin said Krumpf said he had orders to shoot any prisoners who survived.



Krumpf also served as an SS guard at the Nazi-run Sachsenhausen Concentration Camp in Germany and at slave labor sites in Nazi-occupied France, where prisoners under his watch built launching platforms for German missile attacks on England, Glavin said.



The November 1943 shooting was part of a larger Nazi operation called "Aktion Erntefest," or "Operation Harvest Festival," that led to the deaths of 42,000 Jews at three camps in eastern Poland in two days, the Justice Department said.



At Trawniki, Krumpf said, he was assigned to watch for victims who were still "halfway alive" or "convulsing" and prevent their escape by shooting them to death, the Justice Department said.



Krumpf, who was born in Serbia, immigrated to the United States in 1956 and became a U.S. citizen in 1964.



His removal to Austria is part of an effort by several U.S. government departments and law enforcement agencies to identify and prosecute participants in Nazi crimes of persecution who live in the United States, the Justice Department said.



The Criminal Division's Office of Special Investigations (OSI) started the operation in 1979 and has since won cases against 107 alleged Nazi criminals, the Justice Department said.



The OSI also has a watch list for World War II war criminals that has prevented the entry of more than 180 people into the United States, the Justice Department said.

***

(CNN) -- A federal judge has stayed what would be the nation's first military execution since 1961, saying the U.S. soldier -- who was convicted of rape and murder two decades ago -- should have more time to pursue a federal appeal.



Pvt. Ronald Gray has been on the military's death row at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, since 1988. A court-martial panel sitting at Fort Bragg, North Carolina, unanimously convicted him of committing two murders and other crimes in the Fayetteville, North Carolina, area and sentenced him to death.



Last month, the Army said Gray was scheduled to be executed by lethal injection December 10 at the Federal Correctional Complex in Terre Haute, Indiana.



But in an order issued November 26, U.S. District Judge Richard Rogers of Kansas said that a stay is necessary so Gray can pursue his federal appeal. Rogers ruled on a motion filed by Gray's attorneys, who asked for time to challenge the legality of his convictions and sentence.



Government attorneys have asked Rogers to reconsider his decision, saying that Gray seeks a stay "apparently based on the premise that at some point he will identify a new legal issue or discover new evidence" upon which to appeal and that Gray "continues to delay unnecessarily."



Gray has had ample time to appeal, the Justice Department attorneys said.



In a response filed Tuesday, Gray's defense attorneys point out that the U.S. Supreme Court declined to hear his appeal in March 2001, and "since then, it has taken the Department of the Army, the Department of Defense, the Department of Justice and the Office of the President over seven years to approve as final Private Gray's sentence of death. The significant constitutional issues presented on the face of Private Gray's case ... have obviously troubled the decision-makers, as evidenced by the years they had his case under advisement."



President Bush approved Gray's death sentence in July, making it final, defense attorneys write in the filing.



Inmates sentenced to death in state and federal courts are given a year to file federal appeals after their death sentence becomes final, they claim, and members of the military under death sentences should receive the same consideration.



"Private Gray is seeking federal habeas court review for the first time and he has not delayed commencing this action," defense attorney Thomas Bath wrote. "In fact, until the president approved his death sentence, there was no action available."



Gray was convicted of raping and killing a female Army private and a civilian near his post at Fort Bragg. He also was convicted of the rape and attempted murder of another fellow soldier in her barracks at the post.



Military and civilian courts both found Gray responsible for the crimes, which were committed between April 1986 and January 1987. Gray pleaded guilty to two murders and five rapes in a civilian court and was sentenced to three consecutive and five concurrent life terms.



The general court-martial at Fort Bragg then tried him and in April 1988 convicted him of two murders, an attempted murder and three rapes.



Bush's July action, the Army said in a statement at the time, followed "completion of a full appellate process, which upheld the conviction and sentence to death."



Members of the U.S. military have been executed throughout history, but just 10 have been executed with presidential approval since 1951 under the Uniform Code of Military justice, the military's modern-day legal system. The Army has also sought Bush's authorization to execute another condemned soldier, Pvt. Dwight Loving, who was convicted of killing and robbing two cab drivers in 1988.



The last U.S. military execution was in 1961, when Army Pvt. John Bennett was hanged for raping and attempting to kill an 11-year-old Austrian girl. Bennett was sentenced in 1955.



The U.S. military hasn't actively pursued an execution for a military prisoner since President Kennedy commuted a death sentence in 1962. Nine men are currently on military death row.



CNN's Mike Mount contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Actor Edward Norton already wanted to be in better shape for his 40th birthday than he was on his 30th when the idea hit -- why not join members of an African tribe famous for its runners and run the New York marathon?



"Incredible Hulk" star Edward Norton, second from left, has trained for a marathon with Maasai tribesmen in Kenya



Before he knew it, the star of "The Incredible Hulk" and "Fight Club" had signed on to the effort, despite never having run a marathon before.



"The idea picked up traction pretty quickly," said Norton, who turned 39 in August. "Then, I was like, 'Wait a minute. What have I just done?'"



The run is a benefit for the Maasai Wilderness Conservation Trust, an organization working to promote sustainable development while protecting the east African grasslands that the Maasai tribe calls home. Both the traditional tribe's way of life and its environment have been threatened by rapid industrial development.



Norton discovered, and became a supporter of, the trust about 10 years ago during his first visit to Kenya, where he met founder Luca Belpietro.



"I was impressed at the way he was really genuinely working with the community to create value out of being good stewards of the land," Norton said.



Belpietro will be one of nearly 30 runners joining Norton on the Nov. 1 marathon. Also running will be magician David Blaine and three Maasai tribesmen.



The Maasai are at the heart of Kenya's long tradition of distance running. Norton said one of the runners, safari guide Parashi Ntanin, is so fast he could probably leave the rest of the group behind and run the race in less than 2½ hours.



Norton said he's run as much as 15 miles twice during his training for the 26.2-mile marathon and that despite some leg and knee pains, he's confident he'll finish the endurance race.



"I'm really enjoying it," he said after a workout Wednesday in New York. "I'm enjoying having a goal."



A competitive rower at Yale, Norton said he's experienced the so-called "runner's high" during his training, which fans can follow on his Twitter account, @EdwardNorton.



"Running in the park, I got a taste of what people say about the New York marathon. There were people of every shape and size out there," he said. "I really got a lift out of it."



Norton's latest film, the independently produced "Leaves of Grass," is set to premiere this week at the Toronto International Film Festival and his company's "By The People: The Election Of Barack Obama," a documentary about President Obama's historic campaign for the White House, debuts on HBO on November 3.

***

MANCHESTER, Tennessee (CNN) -- When Bela Fleck told us he had been missing something in his life musically, he caught us off guard.



Bela Fleck traveled to Africa to immerse himself in banjo-related culture.



Keep in mind: Fleck is considered by many to be the premier banjo player in the world. He's won Grammy awards. He's collaborated with bluegrass musicians, jazz players, classical performers and any number of other talented artists.



But Fleck said he wanted to make himself uncomfortable.



Earlier this year, he released the documentary "Throw Down Your Heart," for which he traveled to Uganda, Tanzania, Mali, and Gambia to explore the African roots of the banjo.



CNN caught up with him backstage at the Bonnaroo music festival last month, where he played with African kora player Toumani Diabate, to discuss his film and experience in Africa and what prompted him to go. The following is an edited version of the interview.  Watch Fleck at Bonnaroo »



CNN: What gave you the inspiration to go to Africa to trace the roots of the banjo and make "Throw Down Your Heart?"



Bela Fleck: Well, I have loved the banjo since I first heard it when I was a little kid, and after I started to learn to play it I discovered that it came from Africa originally, and that doesn't seem to be common knowledge. There are a lot of people who have forgotten over the years where the banjo comes from.



I've always wanted to go back to Africa and hear what's going on there and find the instruments that still exist that are the roots of the banjo and play music with them. So that's what this trip and the film and the record were all about --going to Uganda, Tanzania, Mali and Gambia and finding musicians and filming interactions with them and recording it all.



CNN: What did you learn?



Fleck: That's a common question. Everybody wants some kind of epiphany out of a trip like this, and I got it, but it's hard to put it into words. Except that just the experience of playing with these musicians made my life a lot richer, made my worldview a lot bigger, and in a lot of cases I learned music that was so new to me that it's affected the way I play music ever since.



CNN: It's clear that learning this music and a new technique on the banjo was a challenge for you.



Fleck: Sure. Another important part of the trip for me was putting myself into uncomfortable situations and seeing how I would do, because over the years, as I've gotten more and more successful, I get in control of things, and less and less I was finding myself in situations that were truly risky musically.



I liked being unprepared and being forced to come up with it on the spot. It just wasn't happening in my life at the time.



So that was another part of going to Africa, throwing myself into completely uncharted waters and trying to do something good and survive. [There was also] the brotherhood of acoustic musicians, 'cause we feel something when we play our instruments and the sounds mingle in the air. I think it's different than playing pop music or electric instruments.



CNN: Tell us about your collaboration with Toumani Diabate.  Watch the masters play »



Fleck: I am so lucky to be performing with Toumani. He's the greatest kora player. The kora is a 21-string harp, and he comes from 71 generations from it being taught from father to son, father to son. We improvise together with just the kora and the banjo.



CNN: Did you learn how to play the kora?



Fleck: No, I haven't sat and tried to play the kora, but he's taught me the notes that he plays, the scales and the patterns that he does, and I taught him some banjo stuff. He's a great collaborator. Playing with musicians who didn't speak English was not a problem, when we started to play together,

***

ST. POELTEN, Austria (CNN)  -- A verdict in the case of Josef Fritzl, the Austrian man accused of keeping his daughter in a cellar for decades and fathering her seven children, could come as early as Thursday, a court official told reporters Monday.



Josef Fritzl expects to spend the rest of his life in prison, his attorney has said.



As his trial began behind closed doors Monday Fritzl pleaded guilty to incest and other charges, but denied charges of murder and enslavement -- the most serious charges against him.



He pleaded "Partly guilty" to multiple charges of rape, but did not elaborate. "Partly guilty" is a plea option in Austrian courts.



Franz Cutka, a spokesman for the Landesgericht St. Poelten court, said the "partly guilty" plea might mean that Fritzl contends he is not guilty of all the individual rape charges or that the violence used was not as severe as rape.



Cutka was not in court for the plea and does not speak for the defendant. Fritzl's attorney was not immediately available to explain what he meant.



Fritzl arrived at the courthouse in St. Poelten covering his face with a blue binder to shield himself from reporters, television cameras and photographers and escorted by a phalanx of police officers.  Watch Fritzl arrive in court »



Fritzl faces six charges at a closed-door trial in St. Poelten, 45 miles (70 km) east of Amstetten, where Fritzl lived. Cameras were removed from the court



The trial is scheduled to last five days, but his attorney Rudolph Mayer said it could be shorter.



Fritzl was charged in November with incest and the repeated rape of his daughter, Elisabeth, over a 24-year period.



But he was also charged with the murder of one of the children he fathered with her, an infant who died soon after birth. State Prosecutor Gerhard Sedlacek said Michael Fritzl died from lack of medical care.



In an opening statement, prosecuting attorney Christiane Burkheiser handed damp-smelling items from the cellar where Elisabeth and her children had lived to jurors to give them an idea of the conditions in which they were allegedly locked up.



In all, Fritzl is charged with: murder, involvement in slave trade (slavery), rape, incest, assault and deprivation of liberty, Sedlacek's office said. He could face a maximum sentence of life in prison if convicted of murder. Mayer said Sunday that Fritzl expected to spend the rest of his life in prison.



"This man obviously led a double life for 24 years. He had a wife and had seven kids with her. And then he had another family with his daughter, fathered another seven children with her," said Franz Polzer, a police officer in Amstetten, the town where Fritzl lived, at the time of his arrest.



The case first came to light in April 2008 when Elisabeth's daughter, Kerstin, became seriously ill with convulsions.



Elisabeth persuaded her father to allow Kerstin, then 19, to be taken to a hospital for treatment.



Hospital staff became suspicious of the case and alerted police, who discovered the family members in the cellar.



Fritzl confessed to police that he raped his daughter, kept her and their children in captivity and burned the body of the dead infant in an oven in the house. Elisabeth told police the infant was one of twins who died a few days after birth.



When Elisabeth gained her freedom, she told police her father began sexually abusing her at age 11. On August 8, 1984, she told police, her father enticed her into the basement, where he drugged her, put her in handcuffs and locked her in a room.



Fritzl explained Elisabeth's disappearance in 1984 by saying the girl, who was then 18, had run away from home. He backed up the story with letters he forced Elisabeth to write.



Elisabeth Fritzl and all but three of her children lived in the specially designed cellar beneath her father's home in Amstetten, Austria, west of Vienna. The other three children lived upstairs with Fritzl and his wife; Fritzl had left them on his

***

(CNN) -- The South African Football Association (SAFA) have appealed to the Confederation of African Football (CAF) after the country failed to qualify for the 2012 Africa Cup of Nations due to misinterpreting the tournament's rules.





South Africa celebrated on Saturday believing a 0-0 draw at home to Sierra Leone in Nelspruit had secured them top spot in qualification Group G due to their superior goal difference over their opponents and rivals Niger.





But it emerged Niger would advance to next year's tournament in Gabon and Equatorial Guinea as a result of their superior head-to-head record against South Africa and Sierra Leone, despite suffering a 3-0 defeat to bottom side Egypt in Cairo.





"We have noted that CAF has announced that Niger has qualified in our group," read a letter sent by SAFA to CAF. "Despite South Africa finishing on top of the group in terms of goal difference, which is the universally recognized means of separating teams who are equal on points.





Big names miss out on 2012 Africa Cup of Nations





"We believe that the team finishing top of the log at the end of the competition is automatically determined at the end of 90 minutes play, and that the second place is determined by the other rules.





"We will lay out our objection more fully shortly, but in the meantime wish to signal that we intend to challenge this interpretation and application of the rules."





SAFA president Kirsten Nematandani was defiant after the match, insisting the organization would challenge a lack of clarity in the tournament's rules.





"Do not despair, all is not lost," said Nematandani. "We believe we have a case and we will carry this fight all the way.





"If CAF's rules are ambiguous then we need to challenge that and we are well within our rights to do so. In the meantime be positive, and leave everything in our hands."





South Africa hosted football's biggest tournament last year when they became the first African country to stage a World Cup, but the team known as Bafana Bafana have now failed to reach two consecutive Cup of Nations.





It also proved to be a shocking qualifying campaign for Egypt, with the Pharaohs missing out on next year's event having won the last three tournaments in a row.





Egypt, the most successful team in the history of the Cup of Nations having won it seven times, recently appointed former U.S. coach Bob Bradley in an attempt to reverse their current fortunes.





Two-time winners Nigeria have also missed out on the 2012 competition after Guinea scored a late equalizer in a 2-2 draw on Saturday, to book their place in next year's tournament at the expense of the Super Eagles.

***

(Entertainment Weekly) -- For many, the creative relevance of 3-D cinema remains very much an open question. But when the history of Hollywood's 21st century embrace of 3-D is written, it very well may point to this weekend as the moment when the format definitively established its commercial power at the box office.



"The Final Destination" scared up by far the most box office receipts, banking $28.3 million.



Despite a moviegoing weekend dominated with R-rated violent thriller-type films ostensibly shooting for the same audience, "The Final Destination" scared up by far the most box office receipts, banking $28.3 million for an easy No. 1 berth, according to early estimates from Hollywood.com Box Office.



That's almost $10 million better than the opening frame for the last film in the creatively-dispatching-model-perfect-unknown-actors franchise (which, for those keeping track, was "Final Destination 3").



There's really only one reason why: Although just over half its 3,121 theaters were screening the flick in 3-D, fully 70 percent of its box office take was from 3-D theaters, which typically charge an extra few bucks per ticket for the privilege of watching the film with those comfy stereoscopic glasses. Rest assured, despite its title (and its abysmal "C" Cinemascore grade), this is by no means the final "Final Destination" movie.



The folks at the The Weinstein Company, meanwhile, continue to enjoy good news for their much scrutinized bottom line: Quentin Tarantino's "Inglourious Basterds" landed at No. 2 with a rather spectacular $20 million, just 47 percent down from its opening weekend for $73.7 million total.



TWC's sister company Dimension Films, meanwhile, saw its "Halloween II" debut at third with a nothing-to-sneeze-at $17.4 million. Granted, director Rob Zombie's second re-imagining of the 31-years-old slasher franchise made nothing close to the $30.6 million Labor Day weekend debut of Zombie's first night out with Michael Myers.



But given the steep competition, and the film's $15 million budget, Dimension must be breathing a sigh of relief that their film will most likely see a decent profit.



The box office love continued through much of the weekend's top 10: District 9 dropped just 41 percent with $10.7 million, strong enough to hold on at fourth place and, with a $90.8 mil running total, well on its way to joining the $100 million club.



At number five, "G.I. Joe: The Rise of Cobra" banged out $8 million, a 34 percent drop and $132 million total. And Julie & Julia savored a tiny 16 percent drop for sixth, with $7.4 million in its forth weekend for $70.9 million total.



In fact, the only true disappointment for the weekend was Focus Features' "Taking Woodstock." Director Ang Lee's trip back to the iconic three-day concert debuted at ninth with just $3.7 million, doubly disappointing since it opened wide in 1,393 theaters (after a Wednesday opening in New York and Los Angeles), with a feeble $2,691 per theater average.



By contrast, two limited release debuts did rather well: Vogue magazine documentary "The September Issue" bowed on six screens with a very fashionable $40,000 per theater average; and the extreme-sports-fandom-gone-wrong dramedy "Big Fan" won $13,000 per theater on two screens.



CLICK HERE to Try 2 RISK FREE issues of Entertainment Weekly

***

(CNN) -- She's petite, she's middle-aged, she's bookish, and if she gets a chance, she'll knock you on your keister.



Beth Hollis, second from left, is a librarian who's become a MegaBeth, a roller derby dynamo.



By day, she's Beth Hollis, a 53-year-old reference librarian in Akron, Ohio. By night, she's MegaBeth, an ageless dynamo on the roller derby rink.



"All my life, when I tell people I'm a librarian, they say, 'You don't look like a librarian,' " Hollis said. "And now that I'm a roller derby girl, they say, 'You don't look like a roller derby girl, either.' So I don't know where I fit in."



Hollis has been fitting in at the Akron-Summit County Library for 27 years.



"She's my hero," said Diane Barton, 48, who has worked with Hollis at the library for 18 years. "I just think it's so cool she's doing something so different and so active and so aggressive. You know how we are. We're librarians, so we tend to have that meek and mild stereotype."  Watch her in action as Beth and MegaBeth »



Before discovering roller derby, Hollis had been casting about for a hobby.



"I tried knitting and literally got kicked out of the knitting class for just not being able to get the hang of it," she chortled. "I guess it was just too soon for me to try knitting. I needed something that maybe was a little bit more physical for a hobby."



Boy howdy.



She visited a Rubber City Rollergirls practice last winter after telling her husband, Warren, a retired high school math teacher, that she was going to an audition.



"At that point, I just said, 'I don't care that I have an AARP card in my wallet; I'm going to go for this,' " she said.



Roller derby is a real sport, having ditched the campy, WWE-like spectacle seen on TV in the early 1970s. The Rubber City squad practices six hours a week and competes against teams in Ohio, Michigan, Indiana, Pennsylvania and Kentucky.



A roller derby match, called a bout, consists of two 30-minute halves. Each team has four blockers and one player called a jammer, whose job is to get past the other team's blockers on a 235-foot oval flat track and lap them to score points. Both teams are on offense and defense simultaneously, and the action is fast and rough.



"I think she's awesome," coach Brian "Coachise" Phillips said. "She is 53, so she is our oldest girl on the team, but she works every bit as hard as every other girl on the team, and she is in as good a shape if not better than every other girl on the team."



And she's an inspiration to the other players.



"It makes me actually excited to think that I could play ... for another 30 years, and that's awesome for me, because this is like my favorite thing to do," said Barb "Barbonic Plague" Brown, who at 21 is the youngest player on the team.



Hollis has earned the respect of her team captain, too.



"She's so tiny -- she's probably like 5 feet 4 and maybe 110 pounds or so -- but when she's out there, she's MegaBeth," said Tracy "Eighty-SixHer" Soulsby, 40. "I wouldn't say she's a very hard hitter, but she's a good blocker. Her strength is getting in people's way and then keeping them behind her, not letting them get around her."



The MegaBeth legend grew during a June bout with the Glass City Roller Girls, a team from Toledo, Ohio. Hollis found herself contending with a 6-foot-1, 220-pound foe who goes by the name Pamazon.



"

***

(CNN) -- Tiger Woods admits his personal problems are affecting his game, but the world's top golfer refused to blame media intrusion on his life for his disastrous return to the PGA Tour this week.





Woods defied expectation when he tied for fourth on his comeback last month at the Masters, one of golf's four major events, but struggled at the Quail Hollow Championship in North Carolina as he missed the halfway cut for only the sixth time in 14 years as a professional.





On Friday, he slumped to a seven-over-par 79 that saw him miss the weekend rounds by eight shots -- and a massive 17 behind leader Billy Mayfair.





It was his second-worst single-round score behind the 81 he carded at the 2002 British Open, and his highest 36-hole total meant he missed the cut in a non-major for the first time since 2005.





The 34-year-old, who took a five-month break from playing following the scandal over his admitted marital infidelities, admitted he was feeling pressure due to continued questioning about his private life.





"Well, I get asked every day. Every day I do media, I get asked it, so it doesn't go away. Even when I'm at home, paparazzi still follow us, helicopters still hover around," Woods told reporters in quotes carried by his personal Web site.





"Does it test you? Yes, of course it does. Is that any excuse? No, because I'm out there and I have the same opportunity as everybody else here in this field to shoot a good number, and I didn't do that."





Woods will hope to address problems with his game ahead of the Players Championship at Ponte Vedra Beach in Florida starting next Thursday.





"It'll be interesting because I'll probably get home and hit balls on the range, and I'm going to have to get up there to Ponte Vedra a little early to putt because Isleworth is all torn up," he said.





"My short game was terrible. I three-putted there twice back-to-back, and you can't do that. I didn't get up-and-down at six and chipped the ball off the green at seven. Those shots, you're just throwing away shots when you do stuff like that.





"You have to let it go. It's like baseball, you go 0 for 4 two days in a row like I did, you've got a whole new tournament next week, which is great."





While Woods struggled at Quail Hollow, the 43-year-old Mayfair shot his second successive 68 to claim a one-shot lead from Argentina's Angel Cabrera.





Last year's Masters champion, who played his first two rounds with Woods, fired a 67 featuring an eagle, four birdies and two bogeys.





Current Masters champion Phil Mickelson also carded 68 to be in a tie for third another shot back on 138 along with fellow Americans J.P. Hayes (64), Dustin Johnson (65) and Paul Goydos (70).





Meanwhile, England's Mark Foster will take a three-stroke lead into the final round of the Spanish Open in Seville.





The world No. 363, seeking his second victory on the European Tour, carded a three-under-par 69 in his third round on Saturday.





Spanish duo Alvaro Quiros (67) and Carlos Del Moral (70) were tied for second along with Frenchman Raphael Jacquelin (71).

***

(CNN) -- The future of Iceland's elected government was in question Sunday after another weekend of street protests and the resignation of the government's commerce minister -- both responses to the country's financial mess.



Iceland's Prime Minister Geir Haarde, left, talks with business minister Bjorgvin Sigurdsson in October.



The minister, Bjorgvin Sigurdsson, resigned Sunday, saying the government had failed to restore confidence in the three months after the collapse of several of the country's leading banks, currency and stock market.



Senior government officials from the two parties that make up Iceland's coalition government -- the prime minister's Independence Party and the Social Democrats party -- met Sunday to discuss the government's future but nothing was resolved, a spokesman for the prime minister said.



Another meeting was scheduled for Sunday night and it was "highly likely" that the parties would decide whether the current government would remain, the spokesman, Kristjan Kristjansson, said.



Sigurdsson's resignation followed Saturday's demonstration in which about 6,000 to 7,000 people in front of the parliament building called for the government of Prime Minister Geir Haarde to step down.



Protests have been staged regularly since the collapse, but Saturday's was one of the biggest to date, a spokesman for the prime minister said.



Saturday's demonstration was peaceful, the spokesman, Kristjansson, said. Watch iReport of Saturday demonstration



Riot police intervened during protests earlier in the week, using pepper spray and arresting some demonstrators.



In his resignation letter to the prime minister, Sigurdsson said he was taking his part of the responsibility for the economic situation in the country. But he also said that there were many more who shared responsibility, Urdur Gunnarsdottir, spokeswoman for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, told CNN. No other officials were named.



The night before he resigned, Sigurdsson dismissed the head of the country's financial supervisory authority and requested the authority's board resign.



Haarde announced Friday he has a malignant tumor on his esophagus and would not run for re-election as chair of the Independence Party.



He also proposed that early elections be held on May 9, two years ahead of schedule. The country's five-party parliament has not yet taken up the proposal, Kristjansson told CNN.



Iceland's financial system and currency collapsed in October following a series of bank failures, forcing the International Monetary Fund to intervene.



Iceland sought IMF help after its government was forced to nationalize three banks to head off a complete collapse of its financial system. Trading on the country's stock market was suspended for nearly a week, and inflation jumped to more than 12 percent.



The IMF announced in November it would pump about $827 million into the Icelandic economy immediately, with another $1.3 billion coming in eight installments. Iceland's Nordic neighbors -- the governments of Finland, Norway, Denmark and Sweden -- announced they would lend Iceland another $2.5 billion.



In his resignation letter, Sigurdsson said after the country's financial crash, he hoped the government would re-create trust and restore the country's finances. But he said the effort failed, and he was resigning to help facilitate a restoration of public trust.



Sigurdsson is legally entitled to keep receiving his salary for several months after his resignation, but said in his letter he would not accept it.



CNN's Per Nyberg in London contributed to this report.

***

Los Angeles (CNN) -- After weeks of headlines about the outage of its hacker-compromised online gaming system, Sony on Monday looked to change the conversation with Playstation Vita, a machine they say will "revolutionize" handheld game play.





The gaming system, which will be available by this year's holiday season, marries advances in portable gaming with the Playstation's longstanding gaming pedigree, said Sony president of consumer products Kazuo Hirai.





"Playstation Vita will revolutionize the portable entertainment experience," he said. "It is an experience you really need to see and feel to believe."





The Vita was unveiled as part of Sony's presentation on the eve of the Electronic Entertainment Expo in Los Angeles, which officially begins Tuesday.





The device will have a 5-inch touch screen and feature front and back-mounted cameras and touch pads in addition to a pair of mounted joysticks. The system will let players use any, or all, of those controls during a game.





With more than 80 titles already in development, according to Sony, the Vita will offer cross-platform play, letting players continue some games between the Vita and the Playstation or, in some cases, even play multiplayer games against others using either a Vita or Playstation.





The Wi-Fi only version will sell for $249 and a 3G model, with exclusive AT&T service, will be $299.





The Vita, which Sony had been calling the NGP (next-generation portable) before its official unveiling, marks the company's biggest advance in the handheld gaming space since it introduced the Sony PSP in 2006.





It doesn't feature 3D gaming, like rival Nintendo's 3DS, which was rolled out at last year's E3. But Hirai teased that the dual cameras will be used in another emerging video-game space -- augmented reality.





"With Playstation Vita, the whole world really is in play," he said.





John Davidson, of gaming website GameSpot, liked what he saw of the Vita after an early look, calling its visual fidelity "remarkable."





"Definitely closer to handheld 'HD' experience than previous handhelds," he said in an email to CNN.





Jack Tretton, president of Sony Computer Entertainment of America, didn't waste time Monday addressing the hacker-caused outage that had the Playstation Network down for the better part of a month for most players.





He called it the "elephant in the room" and thanked gamers for staying loyal during the down time.





"You are the lifeblood of this company. Without you there is no Playstation," Tretton said. "I want to apologize, both personally and on behalf of the company, for any anxiety we caused you.





"I know we took you away from what you enjoy most ... and it is you that causes us both to be humble and amazed at the amount of dedication and support you continue to give to the Playstation brand."





Noting the weeks of negative headlines, he jokingly said "you're welcome" to members of the media. He said that more than 90 percent of users have returned to the online network, which saw its online store returned last week.





Sony also kept up the push for 3-D gaming Monday by taking on what's been considered one of the key stumbling blocks to its success: Price.





Acknowledging that the cost of 3-D television remains prohibitive for many gamers, Tretton announced that Sony will be making a Playstation-branded 3-D console that will sell, along with a set of 3-D glasses and the upcoming 3-D game "Resistance 3," for $499.





The 24-inch console, which can also be used to watch 3-D movies and television, offers a split-screen mode for multi-player gaming.





"We know that gaming is going to drive 3-D adoption," Tretton said.





Among the upcoming games Sony featured, the two that got the most attention were "Uncharted: Drake's Deception" and "Bioshock: Infinite."





Both will be available for the Playstation and Vita.

***

ATLANTA, Georgia (CNN) -- A sealed envelope awaits in Rissi Palmer's Bible.





Country singer Rissi Palmer performs for students in an after-school program at Atlanta's Parkside Elementary.





It's her Grammy acceptance speech, the one she wrote as a 12-year-old. She vowed not to open it until she could read it from the stage accepting her award.





Sixteen years later, the time may be nearer when Palmer can open the envelope. The road has been a long one, starting with her standing on a milk crate as a child so she could sing solos in the church choir. But these days, she is an up-and-comer in country music -- and a rare African-American performer in the genre.





Palmer acknowledged this week to students in Atlanta that some people had told her she couldn't sing country because she was African-American. But she said, "When you tell me I can't do something, it just makes me want to do it more."





Palmer told CNN that no one in the music industry had discouraged her based on race but that people who loved her were concerned country stardom might be a tough goal. She said she doesn't believe her story is different from any other musician's: "The music industry is just hard."





Palmer told students at Parkside Elementary School that she grew up listening to all kinds of music, including country. "My mother was a big country music fan," she recalled. The family also listened to R&B and classic soul, such as Sam Cooke, she said.





"I loved the way the country artists wrote songs," Palmer told about 50 students, most of them minorities, in an after-school program at Parkside. She liked the way that country songs told stories: "I always liked telling stories."





"Country Girl," the first single off Palmer's self-titled 2007 debut album, made her the first African-American female in 20 years to hit Billboard's country chart, according to Country Music Television.





Country music is home to a smattering of well-known African-American artists. Charley Pride is by far the most visible, but other artists have dabbled in country as well -- the Supremes, for instance, and Ray Charles. More recently, Darius Rucker, longtime lead singer for Hootie and the Blowfish, hit the top of the country charts as well.





African-Americans always have been in the country music industry, said John Rumble, senior historian for the Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum in Nashville, Tennessee. However, it's rare for an artist -- of any race -- to reach the level of stardom attained by Pride, who had 67 records on the country chart between 1966 and 1990, more than 20 of them in the Top 10.





"Some people at the time, and since, called him the Jackie Robinson of country music, but nobody who followed him has yet reached that level," Rumble said. "... He's almost an impossible standard to match." However, given Rucker's recent success, he is showing "superstar potential" in the country industry, Rumble added.





Palmer lost her mother at an early age but has said her parent's love for country music stayed with her. Still, she said she doubted she could break into the genre.





"When you're a child, you react to something that's familiar and looks like you," she told CMT in 2007. "And there was nobody [in country music] who looked like me. Just being a kid, you don't see black country singers. So you don't think that's a possibility for you. You see black pop singers. You see black R&B singers. You see black rockers. So you say, 'If I'm black and I want to sing, then I probably have to sing R&B.' "





Rumble echoed Palmer's comments about the music industry being tough on new artists. More than ever, "it takes a lot of money to put an artist

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- White House spokeswoman Dana Perino on Friday said she would do the job again -- but only if she could work for her current boss.



Dana Perino said goodbye to the White House press corps at her last briefing as White House spokeswoman Friday.



"I wouldn't do it for anybody but President Bush," Perino said as she briefed reporters for the last time Friday.



"If given the chance to do it over again, would I? Yes," Perino said. "But would I ever come back and do this? No. ... I think it's good to get off the stage."



Perino also thanked the White House press corps.



"We all have difficult jobs, we all work long and tough hours, and it's been an exciting challenge," said Perino, 36. "I know I had some big shoes to fill when I got here -- and I still only wear a size six."  Watch Bush's farewell address »



And she wished President-elect Barack Obama's spokesman, Robert Gibbs, "all the very best."



"Please go easy on him -- for a week," Perino joked with reporters.



In the 80-year history of official White House press secretaries, only two women have been named to the job: Dee Dee Myers, who served former President Bill Clinton, and Perino.



It's been 15 months since Bush named Perino to succeed Tony Snow, who later died of colon cancer, as White House press secretary.  View key moments in the Bush presidency »



"It was about two weeks into the job when I realized that I am never going to be like Tony Snow," Perino said.



Her first goal was to make briefings less heated. She still pushed back, but chose her confrontations carefully.



"If I was testy all the time as a woman in this position, I can only imagine what people would have said about me, so there is a delicate balance, I think, in this position."



During her time behind the White House podium, Perino sparred almost daily with the media on a number of contentious issues, including the president's decision to "surge" troops into Iraq.



Perino said there are some things that she would have done differently.



"I'm sure that I'll have lots," she said Friday when asked if she had any regrets. "I'm going to go on a six-week trip with my husband, and I'm sure there will be long-enough flights for me to think about all the things we could have done better.  View iconic images from Bush's time in the White House »



"Any press secretary always wants to be more proactive, but news happens all over the world," Perino said. "And now with the 24/7 news cycle, in many ways, sometimes, you feel like you're just trying to keep up with that."



"That's not a regret or a disappointment. It's just a fact of life," she added.



As she begins to look beyond her years in the West Wing, Perino, a native of Wyoming who was raised in Colorado, says she is looking forward to spending more time in her own neighborhood in Washington with her husband, Peter McMahon, and their dog, a Hungarian Vizsla named Henry.  Watch Perino prepare for life after the White House »



She is also looking forward to sleeping in.



When asked what she will miss the least from her time in the White House, Perino said, "Absolutely has to be getting up at 4 o'clock in the morning.



"I don't mind working long hours, I don't mind working hard, but getting up when the four is still on the clock is something I hope I never have to do again unless I'm catching a flight to some exotic location," she said.



After January 20, Perino does plan to take a vacation -- which she says will include volunteer work for President Bush's HIV/AIDS

***

(CNN) -- The parents of a missing 10-month-old Missouri girl issued an impassioned plea for her return Wednesday, as police said they have found little to go on in investigating her disappearance.





"We just want our baby back," Deborah Irwin, clutching a teddy bear and crying, said of her daughter Lisa. "Please bring her home. Our two other boys are waiting for her. Please, just drop her off anywhere, we don't care. Just somewhere safe where she can come home, please."





Her husband, Jeremy, urged anyone with information to call police. "Anything, even the smallest information, could help lead to her return," he said.





Lisa Irwin was last seen at about 10:30 p.m. Monday, asleep in her crib, Kansas City, Missouri, police said. Police were called to the home at about 4 a.m. Tuesday.





"It appears the suspect entered/exited through a bedroom window," authorities said in a statement. "Evidence at the scene leads police to believe the child has been abducted."





Jeremy Irwin discovered the child missing when he arrived home from work, CNN affiliate KSHB reported.





Police have said the Irwins are not considered suspects in Lisa's disappearance. Police Capt. Steve Young on Wednesday told reporters the family has been cooperative from the beginning of the investigation, but "everything is still on the table. We haven't ruled anything out."





He said investigators "really haven't developed any good, hard information that we can go forward with." Nearly 50 tips have been received through a tip hotline, he said, but not all of them have been pursued, as some of them have been vague -- a person calling to report a child seat seen in a car, for instance.





"I know everybody's hearts are in the right place, but that's not anything we can do anything with," Young said.





Police have conducted more than 300 "knock-and-talks" and searches of residences in the area, and more than 300 officers were searching for Lisa. There have been three searches of a wooded area near the family's home, he said.





"I promise you, if there's anything we think we can be doing, we've probably done it two or three times already," Young said.





An Amber Alert was issued for Lisa early Tuesday but has been canceled. "Although the investigation and search for Lisa Irwin continue, an active Amber Alert is no longer necessary in this case," police said. However, Lisa is still considered missing and endangered, according to authorities.





Lisa is described as 30 inches tall with blue eyes and blond hair, police said. She weighs between 26 and 30 pounds. She was last seen wearing purple shorts and a purple shirt with white kittens on it. She has two bottom teeth, a small bug bite under her left ear and a "beauty mark" on her right outer thigh. She currently has a cold with a cough, police said.





CNN's Ashley Hayes contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- A pint-sized version of the Tyrannosaurus rex, with similarly powerful legs, razor-sharp teeth and tiny arms, roamed China some 125 million years ago, said scientists who remain startled by the discovery.



An adult Raptorex was about 9 feet tall and weighed about 150 pounds, scientists say.



The predator, nicknamed Raptorex, lived about 60 million years before the T. rex and was slightly larger than the human male, scientists said.



The findings, to be released Friday in the journal Science, are based on fossilized remains discovered in lake beds in northeastern China. They show a dinosaur with many of the specialized physical features of Tyrannosaurus rex at a fraction of its size.



"The most interesting and important thing about this new fossil is that It is completely unexpected," said Stephen Brusatte, co-author of the article, in a conference call with reporters.



"It's becoming harder and harder to find fossils like this that totally throw us for a curve," added Brusatte, a paleontologist with the American Museum of Natural History.



Scientists who have studied the fossilized animal, which was 5 to 6 years old when it died, believe it was an ancestor of the fearsome T. Rex.



"Raptorex really is a pivotal moment in the history of the group where most of the biological meaningful features about Tyrannosaurs came into being," said lead author Paul Sereno, a paleontologist at the University of Chicago.



"And the surprising fact is that they came into being in such a small animal," he added.



Based on estimates of other similar-sized theropods, or "beast-footed" dinosaurs, Sereno and his colleagues estimate an adult Raptorex was about 9 feet tall and weighed about 143 pounds.



By contrast, the Tyrannosaurus rex, which topped the prehistoric food chain  until dinosaurs went extinct about 65 million years ago, was believed to weigh at least five tons.



Scientists hypothesize that Raptorex ran its prey down, using its enlarged skull, powerful jaws and sharp teeth to dispatch animals much larger than itself. Like the T. rex, the Raptorex also had tiny forelimbs, they said.



"We can say that these features did not evolve as a consequence of large body size but rather evolved as an efficient set of predatory weapons in an animal that was 1/100th the size of Tyrannosaurus rex and that lived 60 million years before Tyrannosaurus rex," Brusatte said.



After the remains were discovered, they were smuggled out of China and into the United States, where they were eventually purchased by a Massachusetts collector, Henry Kriegstein, who donated them to science. Sereno was later asked to identify the fossil.



"I hope that this is a pathway that other important specimens that do find their way out of the ground in the dark of night do not get lost to science," Sereno said.



The Raptorex fossil will eventually be returned to China, where it will be put on display near the excavation site, scientists said.

***

(CNN) -- Pakistan on Thursday blocked access to YouTube -- a day after it shut down the social networking site Facebook -- in response to an online group calling on people to draw the Prophet Mohammed.





The Pakistan Telecommunication Authority ordered operators to shut down YouTube "in view of growing sacrilegious contents on it," officials said in a statement.





PTA said Thursday it reached its decision after all "possible avenues were used within its jurisdiction, including using regular channels available on the Facebook and YouTube to launch protest, to avoid appearances of derogatory material available on their websites."





Facebook was blocked a day before "Everybody Draw Mohammed Day," which was scheduled by several Facebook groups dedicated to the idea.





The largest of the groups was unavailable for several hours Wednesday and Thursday.





Facebook said "a small technical issue prevented some users from accessing this page and others for a very short period of time," and that Facebook had corrected the problem as quickly as possible once they became aware of it.





"While it may be considered objectionable to some, the Facebook Pages and Groups in question do not violate our policies," Facebook global communications director Debbie Frost said.





The page was online as of Thursday morning Eastern time.





Frost said Facebook was "very disappointed" to be blocked in Pakistan.





"We are analyzing the situation and the legal considerations, and will take appropriate action, which may include making this content inaccessible to users in Pakistan," she said.





Khoram Ali Mehran of Pakistan's telecommunication authority said the block "is related to the objectionable material that was placed on Facebook."





"We have blocked it for an indefinite amount of time. We are just following the government's instructions and the ruling of the Lahore High Court. If the government decides to unblock it, then that's what we will do," he said.





The telecommunication authority has not received any complaints from Internet users about the blocking of Facebook, he said.





Devout Muslims consider it offensive to depict Mohammed.





There were riots around the world in response to a series of cartoons of Mohammed in a Danish newspaper in 2005, and at least two European cartoonists live under police protection after publication of their drawings of the Muslim prophet.





Mimi Sulpovar, who started one of the Facebook groups, said she read about the idea on a blog after Comedy Central bleeped out part of an episode of "South Park" that mentioned the prophet.





"This is meant to be in protest," she said.





"This is something I have felt strongly about for a long time: Bullying by certain Muslim groups will not be tolerated in a free country," said Sulpovar, who is American.





But Ibrahim Hooper, a spokesman for the Council on American-Islamic Relations, said the idea behind the group was offensive.





"Islam discourages any visual representations of the prophets of God -- Jesus, Moses, Mohammed, anybody -- because we believe it can lead to a form of idol worship," he said.





"The majority of Muslims worldwide object to any representation of a prophet of God," he added.





The idea of "Draw Mohammed Day" originated with a cartoonist who has since distanced herself from the idea, Sulpovar and Hooper said.





"The whole campaign has been taken up by Muslim-bashers and Islamophobes," Hooper said.





But Sulpovar denied being anti-Muslim.





"This extends beyond being able to draw Mohammed," she said. "If it's offensive to you, that's fine, but I don't feel it's right to impose your belief on others through intimidation.





"This is nothing to do with hate or bigotry," she said. "Nobody is inciting violence or preaching open hatred towards individuals."





Sulpovar said she is not a Muslim but added that she had received "hundreds of e-mails from people trying to explain this to me."





One group member said she saw anger and fear on both sides of the controversy but felt that free speech could not be compromised

***

(CNN) -- "A calculated, cold-blooded predator." That was how Connecticut Judge James Bentivegna described a then 22-year-old Joshua Komisarjevsky on December 20, 2002, when the defendant was sentenced after being convicted on 12 counts of burglary.





Today, Komisarjevsky -- now 31 -- sits in a Connecticut courtroom, where a jury will weigh his guilt on murder charges, and potentially pave the way for a death sentence.





Prosecutors say that on July 23, 2007, Komisarjevsky and an accomplice, Steven Hayes, invaded the home of Dr. William Petit, raped and strangled his wife, Jennifer Hawke-Petit, molested one of their daughters, and set the house on fire before attempting to flee.





Hawke-Petit and her daughters -- 17-year-old Hayley Petit and 11-year-old Michaela Petit -- died in the invasion of their Cheshire, Connecticut, home. Dr. William Petit, although severely beaten, managed to escape and crawl to a neighbor's residence.





Hayes was sentenced to death in December, after being convicted of 16 out of the 17 charges related to the three deaths.





Both suspects had lengthy criminal records when they were arrested for the Petit invasion. Komisarjevsky's long rap sheet, in particular, suggest that he was a troubled young man with a penchant for nighttime burglary and crystal meth.





Officials with the Connecticut Board of Pardons and Paroles declined to speak with CNN, citing a gag order in the case. But over 200 pages of Komisarjevsky's parole records have been released, which -- along with previous court testimony -- help paint a picture of the accused.





One of his former attorneys, William Gerace, said that Komisarjevsky came from a close, religious family. But at the age of 14, he began using drugs -- the same year, he claims, that he found out that he was adopted.





By 18, Komisarjevsky had found his drugs of choice: crystal meth and cocaine. He told the parole board that he stole money and electronics from upscale homes to feed his drug habit.





Yet a transcript from his 2002 sentencing paints Komisarjevsky as more than just the average thief. According to a police statement read aloud in court that day, Komisarjevsky admitted that he broke into his first house when he was 14 years old.





"I always wore gloves, with the exception of one incident when I was 14. I always acted alone. Approximately a year and a half ago, I acquired night vision goggles... I used the night-vision equipment during the burglaries (over) the past year," he said, according to the transcript.





Gerace, who was Komisarjevsky's defense attorney at the time, stressed that a need for money, to pay for drugs, drove his client. But he admitted that the way he went about it was unusual.





"Ninety-nine percent of burglaries are (committed by) junkies -- there's nothing romantic about what they do," said Gerace. "That was the first time I'd seen something as exotic as that."





Komisarjevsky confessed that he only broke into homes at night and never during the day -- a point stressed by prosecutors in the 2002 trial. They said his affinity for breaking into people's homes at night showed that he wanted a confrontation, since that was the time when the residents were the most likely to be at home.





Speaking during his December 2002 sentencing, Komisarjevsky appeared repentant. He addressed the court saying, "I've turned my back on my faith in God and my family. And in doing so, I fell flat on my face and deep into hard drugs...the crimes I committed was weighing so heavily on my shoulders."





But the judge was not moved by Komisarjevsky's show of remorse, sentencing him to nine years in prison plus six years of special parole, which has greater restrictions than typical probation.





In April 2007, he was paroled. And three months later, Komisarjevsky was arrested for the Petit home invasion and murders.





What happened then, and what may have driven Komisarjevsky, remains a mystery to Gerace, his former attorney.

***

(CNN) -- Dozens of Defense Department personnel are actively engaged in fighting the wildfires raging in Southern California, Pentagon officials said Tuesday, and thousands more National Guard and active-duty military personnel are available to help.



The Rice fire, east of Camp Pendleton, caused the evacuation of the Fallbrook community.



Paul McHale, assistant secretary of defense for homeland defense, said that 12 Defense Department firefighting teams, with 12 engines, are already working the blazes and more than 17,000 National Guardsmen are potentially available if needed.



In addition, he said, 550 Marines from Camp Pendleton are preparing to deploy to the fire area.



"All of the aid that we provide is the result of a request ... from the state," McHale said. "However, we have been very proactive in independently preparing those capabilities for the possibility of such requests, and we have reached out early to state officials."



California Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger has already called up 1,500 National Guard troops, including more than 200 taken from border duty to help with supplies and security at San Diego's Qualcomm Stadium and DelMar Fairgrounds and Racetrack, where thousands of evacuated residents are taking shelter.



Schwarzenegger also requested and received from the federal government six "modular airborne fire fighting systems" units -- which are C-130s that drop water and fire suppressant on the blazes.  Watch California Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger talk about the crisis »



The Pentagon provided 11 helicopters equipped with water buckets to fight the fires, McHale said. Aerial attacks on the fires, however, have been minimal because of high Santa Ana winds with gusts approaching 70 mph.



In an effort to make room for more civilians who have had to evacuate their homes, sailors stationed in Southern California are abandoning their barracks.



"Orders have been given to all sailors ashore in barracks to move to shipboard billeting to provide room for evacuees," said a Tuesday statement released by the U.S. military.



Only essential personnel are requested to report to duty at Naval Base San Diego, Naval Amphibious Base in Coronado, and Naval Air Station in El Centro.



Those bases have also set up cots and tents for evacuees.



Also, the Navy has offered an Aegis cruiser, a guided missile destroyer, and two fast frigates to support evacuation efforts.



Meanwhile, the Pentagon designated March Air Reserve Base as the primary staging area for medical and relief supplies coordinated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, McHale said.



And some 100 California National Guard medical personnel are helping alleviate "critical staffing shortfalls" at the San Diego Veterans Center, whose hospital staff are under voluntary and mandatory evacuation orders.



The fires are also having a direct effect on military personnel -- McHale said 1,400 Navy personnel and their families have been forced to evacuate, and Camp Pendleton ordered 3,000 Marines to evacuate because of the fire, the Pentagon announced Tuesday evening.



In all, the military has about Video 20 facilities around the San Diego area.  E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- It was an odd sight in Ethiopia's capital this week: a standing ovation for Sharif Sheikh Ahmed, the man whom Ethiopian forces had removed from power in neighboring Somalia two years ago.

Sharif Sheikh Ahmed, Somalia's new president, answers questions at the African Union summit in Addis Ababa.

He once led the Islamic Courts Union, which ruled much of Somalia in 2006 before it was routed by the Ethiopians. Now, Ahmed is the leader of Somalia's U.N.-backed transitional government -- and two days after his election to the post of president, he was welcomed with open arms at an African Union summit in Ethiopia's capital, Addis Ababa.

Two years after the invasion and the guerrilla war it provoked, Somalia has in some ways come full circle. Islamist militias control the country's capital and other key cities; the transitional government is trying to establish a foothold from outside the country; and Ahmed -- commonly known as "Sheikh Sharif" -- is in a position of power.

But several analysts who have studied the region say the new government is in a much stronger position to establish itself inside Somalia and restore order to a country that has been mired in chaos for the past two decades.

"The ascendancy of Sheikh Sharif provides an opportunity to create an inclusive coalition governing from the center outwards," said John Prendergast, co-chairman of the Enough Project, who studies the Horn of Africa for the Center for American Progress think tank.

The transitional government is currently stranded in Djibouti, unable to return to Somalia after its base in Baidoa was seized last week by Al-Shabaab, a radical Islamist militia with ties to al Qaeda. Ahmed now stands at a crossroads between quelling the militia, which once was aligned with the ICU, and including more moderates in his future government, Prendergast said.

"The fulcrum for change is in the hands of Sheikh Sharif's government," he said. "If he is able to put together an inclusive government -- even if it's only on paper, even if it's only in Djibouti -- I think it will quickly defuse any fervor of support for Shabaab."  See a list of Somalia's key players Â»

Rise of Al-Shabaab

Al-Shabaab fighters took control of Baidoa hours after the remaining Ethiopian forces withdrew under a June 2008 cease-fire deal. Rashid Abdi, a Somalia analyst for the International Crisis Group, said the loss of Baidoa is "a clear indication that the transitional federal government has lost any grip -- whatever grip it had -- in Somalia."

But Prendergast said the radical Islamist militia will most likely lose support among Somalis now that its "rallying cry" of getting the Ethiopian forces out of Somalia is gone.

"What the Islamists did was, they wrapped themselves up in the mantle of Somali nationalism and, for the last two years, they have hitched their star to throwing the Ethiopians out," he said.

Prendergast predicted that Al-Shabaab fighters "will sustain themselves for awhile and temporarily expand, but I don't envision it to be a long-term prospect at all."

Last year, the United States put Al-Shabaab -- which means "The Youth" -- on its list of terrorist groups. Analysts say Al-Shabaab models itself after the Taliban's puritanical Islamic rule.  See a timeline of recent events in Somalia Â»

Stig Jarle Hansen, a Nairobi, Kenya-based expert on Somalia for the Norwegian Institute for Urban and Regional Research, said Al-Shabaab fighters have been trained in Afghanistan, and the group has "clear connections" to al Qaeda.

There has been evidence that the group has extended its reach into the United States, as well.

The FBI is investigating what appears to be a massive recruitment effort by Al-Shabaab in the United States' Somali communities, particularly in Minneapolis, Minnesota, where more than a dozen young men of Somali descent have gone missing in recent months.

One member of Minneapolis' Somali community, Shirwa Ahmed, 27, blew himself up in an apparent suicide bombing in

***

You wanted to know more about greenwashing, and Scot Case, from environmental marketing firm TerraChoice, answered.



Greenwashing expert Scot Case of TerraChoice



"Why are green products often more expensive than ones that don't say they are green or environmentally friendly? Is it just because green has become a new form of 'premium brand'? Isn't this bad news if we want to make more people environmentally aware when they go shopping?" Harriet Gladwell



Case: First, it should be noted that not all greener products are more expensive. The remanufactured toner cartridges I purchase at a nationwide office-supply store, for example, carry the same warranty as other cartridges at a 30-percent lower cost. This greener option is less expensive because the manufacturer avoids the cost of manufacturing the plastic and electronic components. They simply reuse the parts from recycled cartridges.



There are also greener products that do not cost extra. There are cleaning products and paints, for example, that have been certified as meeting tough environmental standards by EcoLogo or Green Seal that deliver the same high-quality performance one expects without costing any extra.



Other greener products might be slightly more expensive initially, but generate substantial savings for the consumer. Energy-efficient compact fluorescent lightbulbs (CFLs), for example, are still four times more expensive than traditional cheap incandescent light bulbs. However, CFLs use 75 percent less electricity and last 10 times longer, so they don't have to be replaced as frequently. As a result, the typical CFL saves consumers $30 over the life of the bulb.



There are now energy- or water-efficient versions of all sorts of products -- refrigerators, windows, air conditioners, televisions, dishwashers, ovens, showerheads, washing machines, etc. The more efficient versions are typically more expensive initially to reflect the higher-quality components used to make them, but they quickly pay for themselves in lower energy and water costs. Look for products that are Energy Star registered. Even better, look for products that have been independently certified as meeting the Energy Star standards.



Why are other greener products still more expensive sometimes? It boils down to the simple laws of supply and demand. Any new innovative product, whether it is "greener" or not, costs extra initially. It costs money to research and develop the product and to build the factories and supply chains it takes to make the product. Manufacturers try to recoup those costs as quickly as possible during the initial sales of the product. As demand increases, however, additional manufacturing efficiencies -- economies of scale -- begin to emerge that permit the prices to fall. In addition, high prices attract competitors with similar products, and the additional competition helps force prices lower.



Are some manufacturers attempting to earn additional revenue by presenting their greener options as a premium brand? Absolutely. Just as some clothing manufacturers charge extra to have their name brand applied to a shirt.



It is also possible, however, to buy high-quality, greener products, at very good prices, at growing numbers of mainstream retail outlets. When DVD players and cell phones were first introduced, they were only available to the very wealthy. Now everyone has at least one. The same is increasingly true with greener product offerings.



"What are the most obvious signs that a company is greenwashing the public with false claims? What words and phrases should raise a red flag?" Carla Dos Santos



The most obvious sign a company is greenwashing is if the company fails to provide proof of their environmental claims. Legitimate environmental claims can be certified by independent outside third-party auditors. Manufacturers can also provide test data and other relevant information on Web sites.



Consumers should also beware of generic environmental claims that are so vague they are likely to be misunderstood. Watch out for broad claims like "eco-friendly," "earth kind," "all natural," "eco-safe" or other green babble. Even phrases like "biodegradable," "recyclable" and "compostable" can be misleading if they fail to clarify how the products were tested or under what circumstances the claim is

***

(CNN) -- The mood at Hong Kong's Metropark Hotel was subdued Thursday -- but only because most of the guests were in their rooms nursing hangovers from a night of partying the evening before.



Quarantined guests and hotel employees wave through the glass at Hong Kong's Metro Park Hotel.



And with good reason. For seven days, the 200 guests and 100 staff members at this modest business hotel in the Wanchai bar district have been in involuntary confinement after health officials determined that a guest there had contracted swine flu.



But in another 24 hours -- at 8:30 p.m. Friday to be precise, as guests kept reminding themselves -- they would be free to leave.



"Last evening, people perked up a bit," said Kevin Ireland, an Indian national. "We're cheerful. We're happy we're getting out tomorrow."



For most of the guests here, it was a case of being at the wrong place at the wrong time. They picked the same hotel as a 25-year-old guest from Mexico who tested positive for the H1N1 virus.



And Hong Kong health officials -- unwilling to see a repeat of the SARS epidemic in 2004 that killed nearly 300 people -- placed the hotel on lockdown.



That was last Friday night, when Ireland was headed out to grab some Italian food with friends but hotel staff stopped them at the door.



Since then, the guests have kept themselves busy trying to ward off boredom as they waited out their seven-day confinement.  Images from a British hotel guest »



Most stayed cocooned in their tiny rooms, flipping through channels on the television or staying connected with their work colleagues via Internet chats.



With no pool to lounge by and just one restaurant to pick from, guests milled about in the lobby to pick up food or get their temperatures taken once a day.



"We go down to the lobby for food and then back to the room to eat your food," said Leslie Carr, a British man. "Not many people are downstairs hanging around to talk or discuss anything."



Outside, bars and clubs lay only a short walk away. But police in face masks stood guard at the door, barring exit. Packs of reporters and camera crews peered through the hotel's glass windows.



The British contingent organized a quiz night once. When a French national had a birthday, the country's consulate sent wine and champagne.



The Hong Kong government, itself, tried its best to make living arrangements as comfortable as possible. They delivered a box of chocolates to guests, comped their rooms and offered them free long-distance phone calls.



But food was a constant complaint. Guests, tired of hotel fare, were allowed to order take-out -- a boom in business for area eateries.



"A tribal instinct sort of manifested itself," Ireland said. "You get into linguistic groups. You hang with people of the same country and region."



Mark Moore, a British national, spent many hours kicking himself for changing his plans at the last minute -- the day before the quarantine. He was scheduled to fly home at the end of a business trip, but decided to spend the weekend visiting friends and family in Hong Kong.



"I wish I'd left the day before," Moore said. "I definitely wish I'd gone home a day early."



Tempers sometimes flared. Guests questioned the point of a quarantine when they were allowed to flout health safety recommendations.



Many walked around without the blue surgical masks they were expected to cover their mouth and noses with. Each also had to take a 10-day dose of anti-viral medication. None have tested positive for the virus.



"We were all using the same elevator when we knew the virus can spread through touching objects," Ireland said. "The health workers worked in shifts. I don't know if they go home or to some other place where there's some sort of quarantine. And we're handing money to pay the people outside bringing our food. I'm not wearing gloves, the

***

(CNN) -- Worries about high tides overwhelming parts of Thailand in recent days have morphed into fears about water- and insect-borne diseases in the flood-ravaged country.





Bangkok's central business district has avoided major flooding so far, but outlying areas are chest- or waist-deep in water.





"The water in those parts is a filthy black color containing sewage, garbage and dead animals with a nasty smell. Mosquitoes are also breeding rapidly," said Igor Prahin of Bangkok.





More than 370 people have died since the flooding began after heavy monsoon rains.





U.S. Ambassador to Thailand Kristie A. Kenney said Monday that "the worst may be over for central Bangkok," but about 2 million people are still affected by the flooding. The United States has pledged a total of $1.1 million in aid.





CNNGo: Updated travel information for tourists





Charities working in the country have warned of diseases such as diarrhea, dengue fever and malaria in the coming days and weeks.





"There are places on the outskirts of Bangkok and in other parts of the country which have been flooded for nearly two weeks," said Matthew Cochrane of the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.





"The country's prime minister has said that the city has 'dodged a bullet' -- the economic impact of central Bangkok being flooded would have been huge, and thankfully that did not happen -- but a huge part of the country is still under water," Cochrane said.





"Outside the city it is certainly a humanitarian crisis, because there are people who have been cut off for weeks without any aid, supplies or food."





UNICEF said it was providing 20,000 mosquito nets and handing out 20,000 pamphlets explaining how to stay safe and healthy in flood-stricken regions.





Supatra (Jenstitvong) Assavasuke, who lives east of central Bangkok, took in two friends whose house on the west side of the city is submerged under 1 to 2 meters (3 to 7 feet) of water. It's unclear how long they will need to stay.





She and her family have helped donate about 3,000 liters (almost 800 gallons) of drinking water to those in worse-off areas.





"Those who got affected, they lose their houses, they lose their jobs, their cars -- many things," she said.





But even those in the capital faced possible shortages of water.





The Metropolitan Waterworks Authority said it had reduced the amount of tap water processed for residents from 900,000 to 400,000 cubic meters per day, because of high algae counts at one of its plants.





Prime Minister Yingluck Shinawatra said authorities would speed up the process of draining water into Bangkok's canals and into the sea, raising hopes that water levels in the city could start to sink. However, the government has warned it may take more than a month for the floods to recede.





Already, the flooding has caused an estimated $6 billion in damages, the Thai Finance Ministry has said.





The Thai government has set up more than 1,700 shelters across the country, where more than 113,000 people have taken refuge.





Yet many are trying to push through with their daily routines.





In Bangkok's Chinatown area, a food vendor up to her knees in murky water continued to serve patrons at her small cart.





One resident traveled down a street by row boat as a nearby bicyclist pedaled through thigh-deep flooding.





And a man walked his dog near Bangkok's Grand Palace, the dog chest-deep in water.





CNN's Bryony Jones, Kocha Olarn and Germain Perez contributed to this report.

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN)  -- The two men running Michael Jackson's estate gained new powers and an extension of their authority until the end of the year in a court hearing Friday.



An investigator's report said Michael Jackson's children are doing well with Katherine Jackson as their guardian.



Los Angeles Superior Court Judge Mitchell Beckloff also accepted an investigator's report that said Jackson's three children are adjusting well under the guardianship of Katherine Jackson.



"It looks like the children are really doing wonderfully with their grandmother guardian," Beckloff said.



Joe Jackson sat in the courtroom for the hearing on estate and custody matters. It was the first time Michael Jackson's father has attended the hearings since his son's June 25 death.



John Branca and John McClain, named as executors of Jackson's 2002 will, have been handling the estate's business as temporary special administrators since July while the will probate process is completed.



Branca was a longtime attorney for Michael Jackson, who was rehired by the pop star just a week before his death, according to estate lawyer Howard Weitzman.



McClain is a former music industry executive who worked with Jackson for years.



Katherine Jackson's challenge of Branca and McClain appears headed for a trial in December, unless an agreement is reached between them. Her lawyers have not publicly given their objections to the two men, but have suggested the trial would explore possible conflicts of interest that would prevent them from running the estate.



Jackson's lawyers have also said a Jackson family member should be included as an executor.



While Joe Jackson did not speak to reporters after the hearing, a Jackson family friend, Majestik Magnificent, talked about the special administrators.



"Why are they even here? Why are they even involved in this? This is a family affair," he said.



Until now, the administrators had to ask for court approval for every agreement they made for the estate, including a deal for a movie that will hit theaters at the end of October.



"Things went well for the estate, because the estate can now continue to do it's business," Weitzman said after the hearing.



Beckloff said that while the case is fascinating, his calendar is too full for him to be involved in all of the estate's business. With their new powers, the special administrators only have to notify the court and the Jacksons about deals.



Michael Jackson's mother and three children, along with unnamed charities, are the beneficiaries of the estate, which is estimated to be worth hundreds of millions of dollars.



An odd moment came in the hearing when a woman who has previously filed a papers claiming to be the mother of Michael Jackson's youngest child, Prince Michael II, spoke up to remind the judge she was there. She says her name is Billie Jean Jackson.



At the end of the hearing, Joe Jackson approached her, but she frowned at him and walked away.



Majestik Magnificent later wondered aloud why reporters even give any attention to "crazy" people surrounding the case.

***

(CNN) -- When it comes to the Academy Awards, Hollywood has some biases.



The late Heath Ledger won a Golden Globe for his performance as The Joker in "The Dark Knight."



Summer blockbusters get short shrift. Comedies aren't taken seriously. And animated features? They almost never get drawn.



Which, on the surface, doesn't bode well for three of the biggest movie stories of the year: "The Dark Knight," Robert Downey Jr.'s performance in "Tropic Thunder," and Pixar's latest marvel, "WALL-E."



Each earned critical plaudits and box office success. And each faces an uphill struggle nabbing major-category Oscar nominations when the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences announces its shortlists Thursday morning.



Awards expert Tom O'Neil, who follows the Oscars for the Los Angeles Times' TheEnvelope.com, says the best-picture front-runners are "Frost/Nixon," "The Curious Case of Benjamin Button," "Milk" and Golden Globe best drama winner "Slumdog Millionaire." Barring a completely out-of-the-box surprise, that leaves "Dark Knight," "The Reader," Clint Eastwood's fast-gaining "Gran Torino" and possibly "Doubt" or "Revolutionary Road" to battle for the final slot.  Watch who took home the Globes »



O'Neil believes "Dark Knight," the year's top box office draw, has "an excellent shot" of making the best-picture list.



"We know that because Oscar voters belong to guilds that have their own awards, 'Dark Knight' has a strong chance," he says, noting that the Directors Guild, Producers Guild and Writers Guild have all nominated "Dark Knight" for their top awards. Read what EW's Dave Karger has to say about that



"WALL-E," however, is almost certainly out of the best-picture race, he says. Animated features, no matter how successful, have fared poorly in general categories. Indeed, only one animated feature -- 1991's "Beauty and the Beast" -- has ever been nominated for best picture.



With the addition of the best animated feature category in 2001, it's doubtful that even the best Pixar has to offer will cross over to best picture, particularly since the Academy ignored classics including "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs," "Fantasia" and "Toy Story."



"Oscar voters like reality," says O'Neil.



Either way, the Oscars could probably use the ratings help a box office success can bring to its broadcast. In recent years, the Academy has nominated several independent or low-budget films for top awards, many of which didn't crack the $100 million mark at the box office. Oscar ratings have tumbled; last year's numbers for "the Super Bowl for women" -- as the Oscar broadcast is known by advertisers -- were the lowest on record and a far cry from 1998, when more than 55 million people watched all-time box office king "Titanic" take home the top prize.



That's not to downgrade the expected front-runners, especially since the Oscars' intention is to honor some of the year's best films and performances (though critics have carped they've often not done so). Still, it might behoove the Academy to pay attention to box office as well as prestige, particularly when several films have garnered both. Almost three-quarters of the respondents to an unscientific USA Today Internet survey have said they'd be more likely to watch the Oscar ceremony February 22 if "The Dark Knight" is nominated for best picture.



"If a film is very successful, it shouldn't be automatically relegated to the minor leagues," producer Peter Guber told The Associated Press. (Ironically, Guber co-produced the 1989 "Batman," which, despite big box office and Jack Nicholson's Joker, was nominated for just one Oscar -- for Anton Furst's set design. It won.)



Historically, summer blockbusters haven't always been ignored. "Jaws,

***

(People.com) -- While she does not know who donated the kidney that potentially saved her life, Natalie Cole is on the mend and "really doing well," the Grammy-winning singer said at Thursday's Harold Pump Foundation Gala in Beverly Hills to honor Earvin "Magic" Johnson and Bill Russell.



Natalie Cole had a kidney transplant in May. "I'm just really, really thankful," she says.



"It's remarkable what a new kidney does to your life. I have no complaints. ... I'm pretty amazed. I have been working on my stamina."



Cole, whose transplant surgery took place in May, says, "I just went to the doctor today. He is thrilled. I'm just really, really thankful. I'm thankful to the doctors, I'm thankful to the family that donated the kidney."



In terms of the support she received, the Los Angeles, California-based Cole, 59, says, "My sisters who live in Florida, they came out, my son, oodles of friends. I got sick in New York, I wasn't at home. I didn't know how many good friends I had until this happened. It was beautiful. I had people come and see me every day in the hospital for 10 days."



Having already announced a Hollywood Bowl comeback performance set for September 9, Cole says, "I only wish for anyone to have to go through this, that they have a circle of friends like I did. I was very blessed."



When it came to the medical procedure, she says, "It is hard to find a match. A lot of people want to donate a kidney, but they're not in a position to because they have health issues of their own, and a lot of people need them. That's why the list is long and it takes a long time.



"My friend was on dialysis for six years before he got a new kidney. I was on dialysis for eight months. I'm almost not even the typical person who has kidney failure."



Thankful as she is for the gift, Cole is prevented from knowing who donated the organ. "I don't know who they are. I have not met them, it's all anonymous," Cole says.



One thing she did know, however: the family specifically requested that the organ go to Cole. "That's what was so awesome, their family basically requested that the kidney go to me," she says. "We are not sure how they knew."



Would she like to meet the donor? "Absolutely, are you kidding? I would probably kiss them all over the place."



Try 4 FREE PREVIEW Issues of PEOPLE, CLICK HERE NOW

***

NASSAU, Bahamas (CNN) -- John Travolta testified Wednesday that would-be extortionists threatened to go the media with stories implying "the death of my son was intentional and I was culpable somehow."



John Travolta's son died of a seizure in January at the age of 16.



Travolta testified for the second time in a case against paramedic Tarino Lightbourne and former Bahamian Sen. Pleasant Bridgewater. The defendants are on trial, accused of plotting to extort $25 million from Travolta after 16-year-old Jett Travolta died from a seizure in the Bahamas in January.



Travolta and his wife, actress Kelly Preston, entered the downtown Nassau courthouse Wednesday morning surrounded by security personnel. The actor took the stand appearing nervous, and he took a long, deep breath before beginning his testimony.



Travolta told the court a longtime employee of his became upset after learning someone was demanding money of the actor in the wake of his son's death. The employee learned through the family attorney, Travolta said, that it was "in regards to a paper I signed in the Bahamas."



In earlier testimony, one of Travolta's lawyers, Allyson Maynard-Gibson, said Bridgewater approached her in the days after the January 2 death of Jett, saying she had a legal client who had a document Travolta might want. Bridgewater gave her copies of the papers, which included ambulance dispatch reports and a paper signed by Travolta releasing the ambulance company from legal liability, Maynard-Gibson testified. Watch In Session's Ashleigh Banfield discuss case »



The paramedic expected Travolta would pay millions to prevent publication of the documents because "he would not want his name tarnished in media,"  Maynard-Gibson said.



Bridgewater told Travolta's lawyer that her client believed the documents could suggest that Travolta was negligent by wanting to take his unresponsive son to his private jet for a flight to a Florida hospital, instead of going directly to a local hospital, she said.



In testimony last week, Travolta said a nanny found Jett unresponsive at the home on the island of Grand Bahamas, where the family was spending their New Year's holiday.



Travolta said he initially told the ambulance driver to rush them to an airport where his private jet was parked. Travolta, who is a pilot, said he wanted to fly his son to a West Palm Beach, Florida, hospital instead of driving him to one in Freeport.



The paramedic, however, asked Travolta to sign a statement releasing the ambulance company from liability.



"I received a liability of release document. I signed it. I did not read it. Time was of the essence," Travolta testified last week.



Travolta said that while he and his wife were riding in the ambulance with their son, they decided to divert to the hospital. At the hospital, Travolta was told his son "wasn't alive," he said.



On Wednesday, Travolta testified that he learned of a demand for $25 million or "stories connected to that document would be sold to the press."



"The stories would imply the death of my son was intentional and I was culpable somehow," Travolta said.



An attorney representing Bridgewater and Lightbourne asked Travolta if the defendants ever contacted or threatened him directly. Travolta said they did not, that he heard specifics about the situation through his attorneys.



Travolta's testimony lasted only a short time. He was excused and is not expected to return to the witness stand.



One of the actor's attorneys, Michael McDermott, took the witness stand Wednesday afternoon and began testimony about a videotaped meeting between him and one of the defendants.



The video is expected to be played Thursday for the jury.

***

(CNN) -- The nation's foreclosure crisis threatened a high-profile victim this week:  TV legend Ed McMahon, best known as Johnny Carson's sidekick on "The Tonight Show."



Ed McMahon and his wife, Pam, talk to CNN's Larry King about their mortgage problems.



The Wall Street Journal reported Tuesday that McMahon was $644,000 in arrears on a $4.8 million loan for a home in Beverly Hills, California, and his lender had filed a notice of default.



McMahon and his wife, Pam, appeared on CNN's "Larry King Live" on Thursday night to talk about their financial woes and other topics.



Some highlights:



Larry King: What did happen, Ed?



Ed McMahon: It's a combination, it's like a perfect storm. Economy problems. Selling the house right now is a tremendous operation .... We've had this house on the market for two years. We've shown it, I don't know how many, 50 organizations or people. Nobody has made an offer. I mean, it's just a lovely home. I hate to leave it. I want to keep the home. I want this all to work out.  Watch McMahon tell King what went wrong »



King: And the payments, you can't make -- what's the problem?



Ed McMahon: Well, if you spend more money than you make, you know what happens. And it can happen. You know, a couple of divorces thrown in, a few things like that. And, you know, things happen. You want everything to be perfect, but that combination of the economy, I have a little injury, I have a situation. And it all came together.



King: Did you break your neck?



Ed McMahon:  I broke my neck. I had a fall. ...



King: Has that stopped you from working?



Ed McMahon: Oh, sure. You know, you can't work with this [brace] around your neck. And I have to wear this.



King: But, Pam, the assumption is that the McMahons are multimillionaires and multimillionaires -- how much behind are you, $644,000, right? That's what's reported? ... If you're a millionaire, shouldn't you be able to pay $644,000?



Pam McMahon: I think over the years, you know, it's just a kind of a combination of maybe Ed working so hard and not kind of looking at proper management, which happens a lot. ... Because you're a celebrity, people think you have a lot more than you have. And you always want to take great care of all of your friends and your family and everybody, and you do. And you don't, and I think, you know, we didn't keep our eye on the ball. We made mistakes.



King: And are they foreclosing?



Pam McMahon: Yes, they are. ...



King: So you will lose this home?



Ed McMahon: It's possible, yes. But now, I'll tell you what's happened, oddly enough. Today, all kinds of wonderful things have happened. New things have happened. And new interest in this house. Where the house had no interest, now there's all kinds of, tons of interest. So who knows what's going to happen. I'm optimistic. ...



King: Ed, why have you gone public?



Ed McMahon: Well, I figured I wanted to, in a sense, speak for the million people you mentioned [facing foreclosure]. I heard that figure today and I just couldn't believe it. Anyway, the million people that now have foreclosure signs on their house, or nearby. And I just want to give them hope, give them optimism, give them some kind of guidance. Get the best corrective people you need around you. Keep working on it. Don't stop. There's a lot of people that are hard workers, did everything right, didn't do anything wrong