(CNN) -- All five members of a family found slain inside a Beason, Illinois, home early this week were beaten to death, police said Thursday.



Police officers stand patrol outside the Gee household late Monday evening.



A pathologist determined that the five -- Raymond Gee, 46; Ruth Gee, 39; and three children -- had been beaten, Logan County Sheriff Steve Nichols told reporters. "All the injuries at the scene were from blunt-force trauma."



The three children were identified as Justina Constant, 16, Dillen Constant, 14, and Austin Gee, 11.



A 3-year-old girl remained in critical but stable condition Thursday at a hospital, Nichols said.



He said he would not divulge or speculate what the family was beaten with, and remained tight-lipped about many aspects of the deaths, including when authorities believe they occurred.



Beason is in central Illinois, about 45 miles northeast of Springfield, the state capital.



A task force has been formed with officers from several different agencies to investigate the homicides, the sheriff said. Processing of the crime scene concluded Wednesday afternoon, and "hundreds of seized items" are being processed, he said. "Forensic evidence in this case is significant."



The sheriff has said authorities received a 911 call about a possible shooting at the home shortly before 4:30 p.m. Monday.



Nichols said authorities are looking for a gray-primer-painted pickup truck that was seen in the area Sunday night. "We'll take any tip that anybody has," he said.



A tip line has been set up at 217-732-3000, Nichols said.

***

KABUL, Afghanistan (CNN)  -- Two coalition U.S. soldiers were killed along with three Afghans, including a police official, while trying to disable a roadside bomb in southern Afghanistan Sunday, the U.S. military said.



Afghan police destroy poppy fields in Helmand province.



The explosion was under investigation, the military said.



The soldiers were part of a convoy of coalition troops accompanying Gulab Mangal, the governor of Helmand province, to a village where he intended to talk to residents about alternatives to opium farming.



The convoy came upon two bombs stacked on top of each other, said local journalist Abdul Tawab Qureshi.



When the soldiers tried to disable the bombs, the second one went off, added Qureshi, saying the blast killed the police chief of the province's Nad Ali district, Mohammed Nader; a police officer; and a translator.



Over the years, opium and heroin -- both derivatives of the poppy -- have served as a major source of revenue for the insurgency, most notably the Taliban movement that once ruled Afghanistan.



Though southern Afghanistan still provides about two-thirds of the world's opium and heroin, poppy cultivation has dropped by 20 percent -- to the lowest level since 2006.



CNN's Atia Abawi contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- The Saudi lawyer who represented a woman kidnapped and raped by seven men said his license to practice has been reinstated.



A protest appeared in India in November against the Saudi sentence.



Lawyer and human rights activist Abdul Rahman al-Lahem told CNN's Nic Robertson that the Justice Ministry has reinstated his license.



Al-Lahem had previously told CNN that the Saudi judge revoked his license as punishment for speaking to the media about his client's case, which attracted international attention.



His client, an engaged teenager, was raped by seven men who found her alone with a man unrelated to her. She has said she was meeting with the man to retrieve a photograph. The attack took place in Qatif in March 2006.



The seven rapists were sentenced to two to nine years in prison but she also was sentenced to 200 lashes and six months in prison for having violated the kingdom's strict Islamic law by being alone with an unrelated man.



The woman's sentence provoked outrage in the West and cast light on the treatment of women under Saudi Arabian law.



Under Saudi law, women are subject to numerous restrictions, including a strict dress code, a prohibition against driving and a requirement that they get a man's permission to travel or have surgery.



In challenging what he said were his suspension and disbarment, al-Lahem said he had received threats on his life from the religious right.



Last month, Minister of Justice Abdallah bin Mohammed al-Sheikh, in a phone call to a Saudi Television newscast, said the lawyer's license had never been revoked.



"Such decisions are made through institutions in the kingdom," he said. "The punishment of the lawyer or any lawyer does not come from a reaction; it comes from a carefully examined procedure within a special council in the ministry."



He said the council charged with deciding law license revocations had not issued any decisions in the case. E-mail to a friend

***

(Mashable) -- Ever think that Google's homepage was just a little too sparse? If all of that white space bothers you, your prayers have been answered: Now you can customize your background on Google.com.





You can now choose any photo or image from your hard drive or your Picasa Web Albums to enhance your search experience. A new link on the bottom left-hand corner of Google.com will soon appear for all users that will give them the ability to change their search background. The rollout begins with the U.S. over the next few days, with international users to follow.





The announcement, written by Google VP of Search Products Marissa Mayer, doesn't go into much detail as to why Google decided to add this feature. Personalization isn't something new -- iGoogle, Gmail and other Google products offer this type of feature already. However, the search giant has been working diligently to reduce clutter on the homepage.





The new feature immediately reminds us of Bing, Microsoft's upstart search engine. Every day it has a different photo on its homepage, and it has proven to be a popular feature.





Will you be customizing your Google homepage? Is this a smart move by the company? Let us know in the comments.





© 2010 MASHABLE.com. All rights reserved.

***

NEW DELHI (CNN) -- India's Tata Motors Monday announced it would begin delivery of the Nano, billed as the world's "cheapest car", in July.



Tata Motors expects to begin delivery of the Nano, billed as the world's cheapest car, in July.



The four-door Nano is currently being built in "limited numbers" at a company plant in the north Indian hill state of Uttrakhand.



Tata Motors, however, aims to make 350,000 Nanos a year from 2010 at another unit elsewhere in the country, a company statement said.



"It is to the credit of the team at Tata Motors that a car once thought impossible by the world is now a reality. I hope it will provide safe, affordable, four-wheel transportation to families who till now have not been able to own a car. We are delighted in presenting the Tata Nano to India and the world," company chief Ratan Tata told a news conference in Mumbai to announce the "commercial launch" of the $2,000 car.  Watch more on the Nano »



Tata Motors said the Nano would initially be available through bookings or reservations filed on a request form priced around $6, or Rs 300. Tata will accept the bookings from April 9 to April 25.



Within 60 days of the closure of bookings, Tata Motors will process and announce the allotment of 100,000 cars in the first phase of deliveries, through a computerized random selection procedure, it added.



"Deliveries will commence from July 2009," said the company statement.

***

(CNN) -- Cristiano Ronaldo and Gonzalo Higuain scored the goals that gave Real Madrid a 2-0 win at Racing Santander on Sunday -- a result that sees Manuel Pelegrini's side return to the top of the Spanish Primera Liga.





Real's 12 consecutive league victory ensured that Real will face title rivals Barcelona in next weekend's crunch league match in pole position on goal difference.





Barcelona's 4-1 victory at home to Athletic Bilbao on Saturday ensured that Real needed another win to regain top spot and they took the lead in the 24th minute.





Ronaldo teased a foul out of Jose Moraton in the penalty area and from the resulting spot-kick, the Portuguese international fired home his 18th league goal of the season.





Despite dominating the match, Madrid had to wait until the 76th minute for their second goal, Higuain sliding the ball home from Guti's pass for his 24th goal of the season, two behind Lionel Messi at the top of the scoring charts.





Meanwhile, Spanish international striker David Villa took his season's goal tally to 20 with two late goals as Valencia defeated Osasuna 3-0, to take a firm grip on third position.





Joaquin opened the scoring in the 47th minute before Villa netted his first with a minute to go -- and then doubled his tally with an injury-time penalty.

***

(CNN)  -- An apparent natural gas explosion in downtown Bozeman, Montana, leveled three businesses Thursday morning, according to city and state officials.

An explosion rocks downtown Bozeman, Montana, on Thursday in a photo from iReporter Sean Gallik.

"When we say gone, we mean gone. These three businesses are gone," said Montana Gov. Brian Schweitzer, who added that the state is providing help for clean up, and to businesses and residents who are affected.

One person remained unaccounted for Thursday evening, Bozeman Assistant City Manager Chuck Winn said.

"The situation remains unsafe for anyone to enter," Winn said. "So in terms of a search -- we are unable to do so at this time."

Winn said city crews are making progress cleaning up the area, but the damage is great. He said a meeting was planned Friday morning to give business owners and residents information about when they can return.

"It literally looks like a bomb went off in downtown Bozeman," he said. iReport.com: Photos from the scene

"Roofing material, construction material is scattered for three or four blocks," he said. "It was a very violent explosion."

Schweitzer added that the situation would "not be over in 24 hours."

The blast occurred about 8:15 a.m. on the town's Main Street, Fire Chief Jason Shrauger told CNN.

The city government declared a local emergency after the blast. Initially, 11 people were reported missing, but 10 were later accounted for, Winn said.

It was not clear what triggered the blast.

Bozeman is in south-central Montana, about 100 miles southeast of the state capital, Helena.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN)  -- An attorney for convicted Washington-area sniper John Allen Muhammad, who is scheduled to be executed November 10, will seek clemency from Virginia Gov. Tim Kaine on October 22.



John Allen Muhammad listen to testimony from victims' relatives during his 2004 sentencing.



Jonathan Sheldon said he will also file an appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court on November 2. He posted the dates Tuesday on his law firm's Web site.



During a three-week period in October 2002, police say, Muhammad and young accomplice Lee Boyd Malvo shot 13 people, killing 10. Malvo, who was 17 at the time, was convicted in one shooting and was sentenced to life in prison.



Muhammad is to be executed for the murder of Dean Harold Meyers at a Manassas, Virginia, gas station. Meyers was killed by a single bullet, which became the signature of the two-person sniper team.



Kaine told CNN affiliate WTOP Radio during its "Ask the Governor" program last month that he couldn't imagine a circumstance under which he would grant clemency.



"I know of nothing in this case that would suggest that there is any credible claim of innocence or that there was anything procedurally wrong with the prosecution," Kaine said.



Under Virginia law, condemned prisoners can choose to die by electric chair or by lethal injection. If the inmate does not state a preference, he or she is executed by lethal injection.

***

(CNN) -- North Korea on Monday proposed replacing the 1953 armistice that ended the Korean War with a formal peace treaty, a step it said would pave the way for breaking the international impasse over its nuclear program.





But the communist state said international sanctions imposed after a series of nuclear weapons and missile tests should be lifted before it returns to the negotiating table, a suggestion the United States quickly dismissed.





The cease-fire that ended the three-year Korean War never led to a permanent peace treaty, leaving the North Korean-South Korean border the world's most heavily militarized frontier.





In a statement carried by the official news agency KCNA, North Korea said that a final settlement of the conflict is "essential" to talks aimed at persuading it to dismantle its nuclear program.





"When the parties are in the state of war where they level guns at each other, distrust in the other party can never be wiped out, and the talks themselves can never make smooth progress, much less realizing the denuclearization," it said. "Without settling such [an] essential and fundamental issue as war and peace, no agreement can escape from frustration and failure as now."





Pyongyang has refused to return to the talks, which also involve the United States, Russia, China, South Korea and Japan, insisting that it wants to talk directly with the U.S. government. But Washington says it will not lift sanctions or normalize relations with the North until it takes irreversible steps toward dismantling its nuclear program.





"We're not going to pay North Korea for coming back to the six-party process," State Department spokesman P.J. Crowley said Monday.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Pro-Tibet activists jumped security barriers and scuffled with police outside the Chinese embassy in London Sunday as hundreds of demonstrators gathered to protest a visit by Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao.

A pro-Tibet protester runs past a police cordon outside the Chinese Embassy in London.

Protesters carrying Tibetan flags chanted "China Murderers," and "China Out of Tibet," as Wen, on a three day trip to Britain, arrived at the embassy.

China has long been criticized by the international community for its human rights record in Tibet. Tibetans are pushing for autonomy from China and greater religious freedom.

Wen was greeted at the embassy by a firecracker display in honor of the Chinese New Year before being escorted inside by security personnel.

A group of protesters attempted to jump over security blockades when Wen's motorcade arrived at the embassy. Several were wrestled to the ground by police and arrested.

Police said five people were detained, according to the UK's Press Association.

Approximately 150 Chinese counter-protesters were also at the demonstration chanting pro-Chinese slogans.  Watch demonstrations outside the Chinese embassay in London »

Wen is due to meet British opposition party leaders on Sunday before sitting down with Prime Minister Gordon Brown on Monday.

Brown was among a number of international leaders who skipped the opening ceremonies of the 2008 Olympic Games in Beijing, amid an intense campaign from human rights groups opposed to China's international policies and human rights record.

***

(CNN) -- Myanmar will allow Rohingya refugees back into the country if they can prove that they are Bengali, Thailand's foreign ministry said.

A photograph released by the Thai navy shows a group of men captured on December 12.

The agreement was reached in side talks between the Thai and Myanmese foreign ministers during the 14th ASEAN summit, a meeting of Southeast Asian nations held in Thailand over the weekend, said Thai Foreign Ministry spokesman Thairit Charungwat on Monday.

Thousands of Rohingya refugees -- a Muslim minority group from Myanmar -- have fled to Thailand over the years, saying they are persecuted by Myanmar's hard-line military government.

In recent months, controversy has erupted as the Thai military has been accused of intercepting boatloads of Rohingya, sabotaging their vessels and abandoning them at sea. Thailand eventually acknowledged such actions, after initial denials.

About 20,000 Rohingya migrants already live in Thailand, according to its foreign ministry, which says Thailand is being inundated.

The refugees -- who lack documentation -- live on the fringes in Thailand and Myanmar. But in Myanmar, "things like forced relocation, forced conscription, forced labor -- these things are exacerbated for the Rohginyas," said Benjamin Zawacki of Amnesty International.

"In addition to that, they suffer from what is really systemic discrimination, systemic persecution. Things, for example, like not being able to marry outside their ethnicity, very strict restrictions on movement, the inability to work for the government, to hold jobs as civil servants. They are summarily disenfranchised. They are not able to vote. They are not even held to be citizens."

The latest group of 78 Rohingya boat people, who arrived Thailand a month ago, has been detained there. Some of the 78 have required medical treatment, after being abused by the Myanmese navy, they say.

"They will have to be sent back, according to our law," Thailand's Prime Minister Abhisit Vejjajiva told CNN. "They are entering the country illegally."  Watch CNN's "The Forgotten People" on Rohingyas' escape to Thailand Â»

Myanmar says it will take refugees back if they can prove that they are Bengali, a recognized ethnic group in Myanmar. Proof would include confirmation by relatives, a standard practice in a country that often lacks documentation. But the refugees have resisted being returned to Myanmar, saying they would be killed.

"At least this issue is being raised at international and regional level," Charungwat said. "Myanmar has also started to establish communication and participation on this issue, and join with ASEAN, as it is a regional issue to be solved."

***

NAIROBI, Kenya (CNN) -- Kenya needs $230 million over the next six months to feed millions affected by drought, the United Nations said in a new report.



Farmers carry food handouts from the World Food Programme at a distribution spot near Nanyuki.



The three-year failure of annual rains has reduced crop output, the main source of food for the country of 37 million. The drought has also affected water production and prompted power rationing in the east African nation. Kenya gets most of its energy from hydro-generation.



About 3.8 million Kenyans need emergency food aid, and conditions are expected to deteriorate in the next few months, the United Nations World Food Programme said Wednesday.



The rate among children under 5 suffering malnutrition has gone from 15 to 20 percent in some cases, the report said.



"People are already going hungry, malnutrition is preying on more and more young children, cattle are dying -- we face a huge challenge and are urging the international community to provide us with the resources we need to get the job done," said Burkard Oberle, Kenya director of the World Food Programme.



The organization said it is helping about 2.6 million people in Kenya affected by drought while the government is supporting 1.2 million more until the end of October.



"In order to feed all 3.8 million people for the next six months, WFP and the Kenyan government will require strong support from donors in the weeks ahead," the report said.



More than 17 million people across the Horn of Africa need help from the United Nations, which is battling funding shortfalls.



Some of the most dire nations include Somalia and Uganda, which need $164 million and $96 million respectively.

***

CHICAGO, Illinois (CNN) -- Authorities arrested a man accused of secretly taping ESPN sports reporter Erin Andrews in the nude and posting the videos on the Internet, the FBI said Friday.



ESPN reporter Erin Andrews claims someone videotaped her while she was nude and posted video online.



Authorities arrested 48-year-old Michael David Barrett at Chicago O'Hare International Airport on Friday. Barrett faces a charge of interstate stalking, the FBI said.



Barrett is accused of taping Andrews while she was nude in two hotel rooms. He then made eight videos that he posted on the Internet, the FBI said.



Barrett allegedly filmed seven of the eight videos at a hotel room in Nashville, Tennessee, in September 2008. FBI agents said they found evidence that a peephole to the door of Andrews' hotel room had been altered.



The FBI learned that Barrett checked into the same hotel at that time and asked for a room adjacent to Andrews using his home address to register for the room.



According to a criminal complaint, Barrett tried to sell the videos to celebrity gossip Web site TMZ.com. Employees at the Web site also helped in the investigation providing Barrett's information to Andrews' attorney.



Andrews works as a sideline reporter traveling around the country covering college football games.



Barrett will have his first court appearance in Chicago at 10 a.m. (11 a.m. ET) Saturday, authorities said.



The maximum penalty for the charge of interstate stalking is five years in federal prison, the FBI said.



CNN's Greg Morrison contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- A long-hidden message has been discovered inside Abraham Lincoln's pocket watch, the Smithsonian's Museum of American History announced Tuesday.



The message in the watch differs slightly from what the watchmaker later said he wrote.



Watchmaker Jonathan Dillon was repairing Lincoln's watch in April 1861 when he heard about the attack on Fort Sumter, South Carolina, and wrote a short message on the metal inside the watch, the Smithsonian said.



There it remained, unseen for almost 150 years, it said.



In a 1906 interview with The New York Times, Dillon reported that as soon as he heard the news about the first shots of the Civil War, he unscrewed the dial of the watch and wrote on the metal, "The first gun is fired. Slavery is dead. Thank God we have a President who at least will try."



The actual message that the museum found differs from the watchmaker's recollection. It says, "Jonathan Dillon, April 13-1861, Fort Sumpter [sic] was attacked by the rebels on the above date J Dillon, April 13-1861, Washington, thank God we have a government, Jonth Dillon."



According to the Smithsonian, it was not unusual for professional watchmakers to record their work inside a watch.



"Lincoln never knew of the message he carried in his pocket," said Brent D. Glass, director of the National Museum of American History.



The museum decided to open the watch after being contacted by the watchmaker's great-great-grandson, Doug Stiles, who had heard about the message Dillon said he had inscribed and wanted to see if it was really there.

***

(CNN) -- The number of people killed by a typhoon that slammed into Taiwan and China earlier this month continues to rise, Taiwan announced Thursday.



Tsai Sung Yu holds photos of his mother, brother, sister-in-law and niece who were all killed in the mudslides.



At least 543 people are now known to have died when Typhoon Morakot hit Taiwan, the country's Central Emergency Operation Center said Thursday.



At least 117 people are still missing, and at least 46 people were injured. Emergency services also reported that 60 human limbs had been found, separately from the number of dead and wounded.



Kaohsiung county was the worst hit, with 472 dead, 72 missing and 13 hurt, one seriously, the emergency center said.



Morakot dropped 102 inches of rain on Taiwan August 8 before it roared on to mainland China the next day.



More than 1.4 million people in China were forced to relocate because of the storm and more than 6,000 homes were destroyed. At least six people were killed there, China's Ministry of Civil Affairs said after the storm passed.



Taiwan President Ma Ying-jeou apologized last week for the slow response to the typhoon. He said he plans sweeping changes to the country's rescue agencies and may punish some government officials.



"We will try our best to do a better job in the rescue work that has been criticized for being too slow," said Ma.



"There are things that we have to correct and we also will be responsible for whatever mistakes or neglect that government officials have made."



Rescuers have struggled to locate many who were missing in remote mountainous areas of southern Taiwan.



Ma also apologized a week earlier for failings of the rescue effort as he traveled around the typhoon-battered island. He said heavy rain grounded rescue helicopters in the first few days after the storm hit, delaying relief efforts.



Ma said the storm destroyed buildings, homes, roads and farms, causing about NT$100 billion (U.S. $3 billion) in damage.



CNN's Eileen Hsieh contributed to this report.

***

(CNN)  -- The entire population of Taloga, Oklahoma, was evacuated Thursday because of a raging fire that has burned tens of thousands of acres, officials said Friday.



Wildfire threatens a house in Edmond, Oklahoma, on Friday.



All of the residents, about 400, left the Dewey County town, but have been allowed back in, said Bill Challis with the fire department in Clinton, Oklahoma, south of Taloga. Clinton is among dozens of fire departments helping battle the blaze.



Wildfires have been burning in northwest and central Oklahoma since Thursday, according to the state Department of Emergency Management.



A large wildfire also came within inches of homes north of Edmond late Friday morning and was still burning during the noon hour, CNN affiliate KOCO reported.



Oklahoma Department of Public Safey officials also report that one to two city blocks of Weleetka, in Okfuskee County, were on fire, according to KOCO.



The Federal Emergency Management Agency  has approved the state's request for federal assistance for  fighting the wildfire in Dewey County, where Taloga is located.



The original call about the Taloga fire came in Thursday at about 12:30 p.m. (1:30 p.m. ET), Challis said. Officials don't know how the fire started.



Brett Russell, also with the Clinton Fire Department, said about 60,000 acres have burned. There are no reports of anyone injured.



As of about 11 a.m. Friday (12 p.m. ET), the Taloga fire was about 50 to 60 percent contained. About 80 fire departments helping battle the blaze, Russell told CNN.



An Oklahoma Army National Guard Blackhawk helicopter was helping with aerial fire suppression, according to the state.

***

(CNN) -- Barcelona midfielder Alexander Hleb has turned down a move to Inter Milan in favor of returning to Bundesliga club Stuttgart on loan for the season.



Alexander Hleb is presented to the media after completing his loan move to former club Stuttgart.



Hleb had been expected to be part of the swap deal that saw Zlatan Ibrahimovic and Samuel Eto'o switch clubs earlier this week.



But the 28-year-old Belarus international has opted against joining Cameroon striker Eto'o at the San Siro due to the limited prospects of regular football under Jose Mourinho, and instead decided to return to Germany.



Hleb left Stuttgart four years ago to move to English Premier League side Arsenal, where he spent three seasons -- including reaching the Champions League final in 2006, which the Gunners lost to Barcelona.



Top 20 summer transfer targets



Hleb eventually ended up moving to the Nou Camp last summer, but struggled to claim a place in the side and was omitted from the 18-man squad that beat Manchester United in this year's Champions League final.



Hleb told Stuttgart's official Web site he had moved to Markus Babbel's side because of their prospects for the coming season.



"I have opted for Stuttgart because the team has great potential and I am convinced that we can achieve a lot together," the 28-year-old said.



Stuttgart general manager Horst Heldt added: "We have signed a world class player with Alexander Hleb. He will increase the quality of our squad even further."



Stuttgart had seen moves for both Real Madrid's Klaas Jan Huntelaar and Vagner Love of CSKA Moscow break down in recent weeks.

***

(CNN) -- A man went over Niagara Falls and survived Wednesday afternoon, one of the few people to ever survive the plunge unprotected, authorities said.



It is unclear whether the man chose not to aid in his rescue or was physically unable to do so, officials say.



The man was seen entering the icy water just above Horseshoe Falls, on the Canadian side, and apparently jumped in about 2:15 p.m, Niagara Falls, Ontario, Fire Chief Lee Smith said.



Smith said the unidentified man was in the near-freezing water for "40-plus" minutes before he was rescued by Niagara Parks Police and Niagara Falls firefighter Todd Brunning.



Brunning, who was tethered to shore, swam about 60 meters (nearly 200 feet) into the river and was able to get hold of the man and bring him to shore.



Niagara Parks Police initially used a helicopter from a private company, Niagara Falls Helicopters, to attempt a rescue of the man. When that failed, they used the wind from the chopper's rotors to push the man closer to shore, Smith said.  Watch chopper hover over man in icy water »



He said the man was "being rotated in a cyclic fashion" by the river's very strong currents.



The man did not aid in his rescue, officials said, though it was not immediately clear whether he was physically unable to or he did not want to do so.



Niagara Falls Fire Capt. Dave Belme said the man was not wearing any clothes when he was rescued, but he added that it's not unexpected for a person to lose things while being washed down the falls.



The man's "chances of survival without the quick response would be lessened," Smith said.



All of the agencies train for situations like this, he said, and they are put to the test about a dozen times a year. Still, he called Wednesday's rescue "amazing."

***

(CNN) -- Arsenal moved to within three points of leaders Chelsea at the top of the English Premier League after Cesc Fabregas inspired them to a 2-0 victory at Bolton to spoil new manager Owen Coyle's first match in charge.





Captain Fabregas produced an impressive display on his return from a hamstring injury and scored his 10th league goal of the season in the 28th minute after a neat one-two with Eduardo.





His surging run then led to substitute and fellow-Spaniard Fran Merida scoring the second 12 minutes from time as former Wanderers player Coyle's reign at the Reebok Stadium got off to a losing start.





With these two teams due to meet in the return fixture at the Emirates Stadium on Wednesday, Arsene Wenger's side could well take over at the top of the table in the next few days.





Bolton remain second from bottom, with Coyle having swapped one relegation battle with Burnley for another.





Earlier in the day, Blackburn captain Ryan Nelsen put the seal on his side's long-awaited return to winning ways as they overcame Fulham 2-0 at Ewood Park.





Nelsen applied the finish to Benni McCarthy's 54th-minute free-kick to put Rovers within touching distance of their first three-point haul since November.





Defender Chris Samba had earlier settled the home side's nerves with a fortuitous 24th-minute opener after he ricocheted home an attempted clearance by former Blackburn winger Damien Duff.





In the day's other match, Aston Villa failed to cash in on slip-ups by their Champions League-chasing rivals after being held 0-0 at home by West Ham.





Villa could have closed the gap on the top four after Manchester City, beaten at Everton, and Tottenham, held at home by Hull, both dropped points on Saturday.





But a combination of a below-par performance and some fine saves by Robert Green meant they had to settle for their first goalless draw of the league campaign.

***

NEW YORK (CNN)  -- Just days before his death, the Brooklyn, New York, middle-school student who died from an antibiotic-resistant staph infection had visited a hospital with skin lesions and was treated with allergy medicine, according to the family's lawyer, Paul Weitz.





Omar Rivera, 12, a New York seventh-grader, died of drug-resistant staph on October 14.





Omar Rivera's mother, Aileen, took the 12-year-old boy to Kings County Hospital in Brooklyn because she had been dissatisfied with the treatment he received at a clinic, Weitz told CNN. He said the hospital treated him with Benadryl, a common anti-allergy medicine.





According to hospital spokeswoman Hope Mason, Omar did not show signs of a staph infection when he was treated at the hospital.





"I can confirm the child was brought to the emergency room after midnight on Friday, October 12. He was treated for non-MRSA-related conditions and was released," said Mason. "We will be closely examining whether more could have been done to detect the infection at that time."





MRSA is short for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, and is responsible for more deaths in the United States each year than AIDS, according to new data. The germ resists all but the most powerful antibiotics.





Omar, a seventh-grader at Intermediate School 211, was pronounced dead on October 14 at Brookdale Hospital.





Twenty-five to 30 percent of the population carry the staph bacteria -- one of the most common causes of infection -- in their bodies, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. While such infections are typically minor, invasive MRSA infections can become fatal, because they are caused by drug-resistant staph. E-mail to a friend





CNN's Emily Kerschner and Jennifer Rizzo contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Claudio Ranieri's Roma side are through to the final of the Italian Cup, despite losing 1-0 to Udinese in the second leg of their semifinal on Wednesday.





Serie A leaders Roma will now face Inter Milan at their own Olympic stadium next month in a battle of the leading two teams in the table -- after going through 2-1 on aggregate.





Remarkably it will be the fifth time in six seasons that the teams are meeting in the final, with each winning two finals apiece prior to May's showpiece.





The only goal came with nine minutes remaining when Alexis Sanchez fired a shot through goalkeeper Julio Sergio's legs from an acute angle.





That gave Roma some nervy moments as the clock ran down. Marco Cassetti was sent off for a second bookable offence, meaning the visitors played the last six minutes with just 10 men.





And they were lucky not to concede again when Gokhan Inler's fierce drive from long range struck the post.





Serie A champions Inter secured their place in the final with a 2-0 aggregate win over Fiorentina last week.





Meanwhile, in the English Premier League, Aston Villa boosted their hopes of reaching the fourth Champions League place with a 2-0 win at relegation-threatened Hull.





Gabriel Agbonlahor put the visitors ahead in the 13th minute, taking advantage of some poor Hull defending.





And Villa secured their win when James Milner netted a 75th-minute penalty after the England midfielder had been fouled in the area by George Boateng.





Villa are up to sixth place, three points behind fourth-placed Tottenham although they have played a game more, while remain third bottom of the table, three points behind fourth bottom West Ham United.

***

MIAMI, Florida (CNN) -- Miami police issued a plea for information Saturday after at least one person with an assault rifle opened fire on a crowd of people on a streetcorner Friday night, killing two teens and wounding seven other people.



Evidence markers dot the Miami street where nine people were gunned down with an AK-47 Friday night.



"We need the community to come together, someone come forward and give us a tip," Miami Police Officer Kenia Alfonso told CNN.



"There are a lot of people in that area. Someone must have seen something, someone must know who could've done this horrific crime."



Alfonso said two teens, ages 16 and 18, died in the attack, which broke up a game of craps in front of a grocery store about 9:50 p.m. Friday in the city's Liberty City neighborhood.



Five of the shooting victims were still in the hospital Saturday night, according to CNN affiliate WSVN.



Others told WSVN that a masked man with an AK-47 burst onto the scene and ordered everyone to the ground.



"Boy came round the corner; he was like, 'Get down,' and he just started shooting," 16-year-old victim Andrew Jackson told WSVN.  Watch as resident describes scene as "war zone" »



Six of the nine shot were current or former Northwestern Senior High School students, Alfonso said.



"It was like a war zone," resident Joan Rutherford told WSVN. "I witnessed this guy laying there with his face, looked like it was completely tore off. His eyes was all I could see, and he had a grip on some money and gasping and trying to lift his head up to say something."



Police Chief John Timoney said that at least one man with an AK-47 "discharged numerous rounds, then ran around the corner. There were some more rounds discharged there from an AK-47 and another weapon."



One of those wounded was in critical condition Saturday and undergoing surgery, Timoney said.



"We are convinced that because of the amount of people out here last night that there is somebody that knows the individuals or individual involved, and we need them to come forward," Timoney said, according to WSVN.



"These are weapons of war, and they don't belong on the streets of Miami or any other street in America," Mayor Manuel Diaz said.  Watch Miami residents call for stricter laws »



Alfonso said police did not know the motive for the shooting and had no suspects.



CNN's Patty Lane contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- South Carolina authorities have located a 555-pound teenager and his mother, who faces a charge of violating a custody order, police said Thursday.



Alexander Deundray Draper, 14, "is possibly at a stage of critical health risk," social services said.



Alexander Deundray Draper, 14, of Travelers Rest, South Carolina, and his mother, Jerri Althea Gray, were located at about 4:30 p.m. near a laundromat in Baltimore, Maryland, by the Baltimore County Sheriff's Office, said Matt Armstrong, a spokesman for the Greenville County Sheriff's Office in Greenville, South Carolina.



"Draper was checked out by EMS [Emergency Medical Services] personnel and turned over to the Maryland Department of Social Services," Armstrong said.



The South Carolina Department of Social Services will work with its Maryland counterpart to have the boy returned to South Carolina, he told CNN affiliate WYFF.



The mother is being held in a detention center and will be extradited to South Carolina on an outstanding warrant, he said.  Watch report on finding teen and his mother »



"The understanding was that the individual was of the weight where it was decided by medical authorities that he needed treatment that was not being provided for by his mother," Armstrong said.



Earlier in the day officials said the boy "is possibly at a stage of critical health risk."



Gray was supposed to appear in family court Tuesday with her son and failed to do so, the sheriff's office said. During the family court hearing, the boy was ordered into state custody because of medical neglect, as well as his mother's failure to appear. The Department of Social Services then contacted the sheriff's office, authorities said.



The warrant said Gray was served with papers Monday and told to report to court for a hearing in which the department would seek state custody of Draper. "The defendant has avoided the custody proceeding and has concealed the child," the warrant says.



Travelers Rest is about 10 miles north of Greenville, South Carolina.



CNN's Jackie Damico contributed to this report.

***

Washington (CNN) -- International arms dealer Viktor Bout has been indicted by federal authorities on a series of new charges, including counts of illegally purchasing U.S. cargo planes to ferry weapons to warring parties and regimes in Africa and the Middle East.





The new indictment, announced in New York and Washington Wednesday, comes as the United States steps up efforts to extradite Bout to New York from Thailand, where he has been jailed since 2008.





The indictment charges Bout, a Russian native, and his alleged American co-conspirator, Richard Chichakli, with the illegal purchase of a Boeing 727 and a Boeing 737 and with money laundering and wire fraud. Chichakli remains at large, authorities said.





The Justice Department said Bout has been an international weapons trafficker since the 1990s, carrying out a massive weapons trafficking business by assembling a fleet of cargo planes to transport weapons to parts of Africa, the Middle East and South America.





"The arms that Bout has sold or brokered have fueled conflicts and supported regimes in Afghanistan, Angola, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia, Rwanda, Sierra Leone and Sudan," the Justice Department said.





Bout "allegedly made a career of arming bloody conflicts and supporting rogue regimes across multiple continents, even using the U.S. banking system to secretly finance a private fleet of aircraft," said U.S. Attorney Preet Bharara.





The superseding indictments were returned by a grand jury in the Southern District of New York. The previous indictment of Bout centered on his alleged efforts to send millions of dollars worth of weapons to arm guerrilla fighters in Colombia.





Thai courts to date have balked at extraditing Bout to the United States on the basis of the original charges.





"The United States has apprised Thai authorities of the new charges against Bout ... and will continue to work closely with them on this matter," the Justice Department statement said. "The United States is also coordinating with Interpol to locate and arrest Chichakli."





Tuesday, a Thai court rejected a request by Bout to be released on bond.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- An extended trip to Ecuador by two Americans changed from a dream to a nightmare after a brutal attack last week, according the couple's blog and U.S. officials.



State Department spokesman Robert Wood confirmed Tuesday that the U.S. Embassy in Ecuador had been told that two Americans from Bend, Oregon, were attacked in the city of Esmeraldas, on Ecuador's northern coast. But he said he could provide no further information because of privacy laws.



Two State Department officials, however, said that the man was stabbed more than 24 times and that his fiancée was beaten and raped.



CNN does not name the victims of sexual assault and has removed publication of the man's name to help protect the identity of the woman.



The couple was evacuated to the United States on Tuesday for treatment, the officials said.



The couple wrote a blog throughout their trip. In the most recent post on Monday, the woman wrote that her fiance was in intensive care after three surgeries.



"I was informed by the head surgeon there is no certainty he will survive," she wrote.



The earlier postings were happier reflections on their visit to Ecuador, a year-long trip they planned after getting engaged and selling all their belongings.



In the blog, the couple seems unconcerned about safety, posting that they occasionally hitchhiked, visited the homes of strangers and posed for pictures with new friends they made on their travels.



One senior official told CNN that the victims' parents complained to U.S. consular officers in Ecuador  that the Embassy did not do enough to warn Americans that many people have been attacked in Esmeraldas.



The State Department's  Web site advises caution when traveling to the northern border region of Ecuador, including Esmeraldas.



The travel advisory section notes that "U.S. government personnel are under limitations with respect to traveling alone and over-nighting in these areas due to the spread of organized crime, drug trafficking, small arms trafficking, and incursions by various Colombian terrorist organizations."



The Web site says that since 1998, at least 10 U.S. citizens have been kidnapped and one killed near Ecuador's border with Colombia.



Wood on Tuesday expressed the State Department's "deep sympathy" for the victims and said the department worked with the victims' families to provide assistance.



"It's a horrible and shocking incident" he said.

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN)  -- Rapper Kanye West and his business manager must complete 50 hours of community service in exchange for the dismissal of charges stemming from a Los Angeles airport scuffle with paparazzi last year.



Kanye West must complete 50 hours of community service by December 23.



West has already attended 12 hours of anger management classes and paid for the camera that was broken during the incident, his lawyer told the judge during a hearing Friday morning.



Police arrested West and Don Crawley on September 11, 2008, after an altercation with a photographer and a cameraman who were taking their photos, airport police said.



West and Crawley were later charged with three misdemeanors counts: vandalism, battery and grand theft.



"There was not a situation where there was a lot of time for either defendant to reflect on what they were doing," said Los Angeles Superior Court Commissioner Mark Zuckman.



Zuckman, who presided over Friday's hearing, said he could take the position that "a brief impulsive response" by West and Crawley "doesn't necessarily demonstrate a severe character flaw that needs to be addressed in a criminal case."



Still, he said, he did not want "to send a message that ripping the camera from someone's hand and destroying it [in] an act of vandalism is acceptable, no matter what kind of provocation caused them to be angry. There are other remedies."



Zuckman said if anyone had been injured in the incident, his decision would have been different.



West and Crawley have until December 23 to complete 50 hours of community service, Zuckman said. If they do, he will dismissed the charges.



If convicted, West could have faced up to two years and six months in jail, while Crawley could have faced up to five years, according to Frank Mateljan, the spokesman for the city attorney.

***

Washington (CNN) -- Legendary performers mingled with Washington heavyweights as the 32nd annual Kennedy Center Honors paid tribute to five people on Sunday night.





"On a day like this, I remember, I'm the president, but he's 'The Boss,'" President Obama said as he saluted Bruce Springsteen. The singer and songwriter was honored for his lifetime of contributions to the performing arts, as were writer, composer, actor, director and producer Mel Brooks; pianist and composer Dave Brubeck; opera singer Grace Bumbry; and actor, director and producer Robert De Niro.





Notables such as House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, broadcaster Barbara Walters and television personality Jon Stewart helped fete the performers.





Describing the honorees, the Kennedy Center said: "With his hilarious movies and musicals, Mel Brooks has created comedic gems that will keep us laughing for years to come. Dave Brubeck's genius has dazzled us for six decades and has helped to define an American art form. Grace Bumbry helped to break the color barrier on her way to one of the most illustrious operatic careers in the 20th century.





"One of America's greatest cinematic actors, Robert De Niro has demonstrated a legendary commitment to his characters and has co-founded one of the world's major film festivals. With his gritty and honest songs that speak to the everyman, Bruce Springsteen has always had his finger on the pulse of America."





The honorees are selected by the Kennedy Center's Board of Trustees based on contributions to American culture, through dance, music, opera, theater, movies or television.





This year's celebration is to be shown in a two-hour special on CBS on December 29.

***

(CNN) -- More than 200 former fighters and other members of the Maoist People's Liberation Army -- including minors -- were discharged from a Maoist camp Thursday in line with Nepal's ongoing peace process, officials said.



Those being discharged were part of a group deemed "disqualified" by United Nations findings in 2007, which identified at least 4,008 such combatants -- including 2,973 minors.



The "disqualified" status applied to anyone under the age of 18 who was serving in the liberation army, and those who joined the Maoist group after its 10-year insurgency to abolish the country's monarchy ended in 2006.



More than 15,000 died in the fighting and more than 100,000 people were displaced, according to the United Nations Web site.



Nepal became a republic in 2008 following elections in which the people voted to abolish the monarchy.



"Those who left the Sindhuli camp today are no more members of the [Maoist] People's Liberation Army," Nanda Kishore Pun, commander of the Maoist People's Liberation Army, told CNN in a phone interview from Sindhuli, about 150 km (93 miles) southeast of Kathmandu.



The discharge process is expected to end in about a month.



As part of the rehabilitation package for the disqualified combatants, the United Nations has offered to provide vocational skills training and education up to high school to those who want such opportunities, but Pun said that these offers are still being discussed.



The process of the discharge is seen as in important part of the Nepal's ongoing peace process. The Maoists and other political parties in the country are discussing ways to integrate the 19,602 verified Maoist combatants into Nepal's security forces -- a move that made up part of the peace deal signed in 2006 to bring the peace process to a conclusion.



Once the minors remain out of the command and control of the Maoist military structure for six months to a year, the Unified Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist (UCPN-M) can be considered for removal from the list of parties that recruit and use children, which is included in the annual U.N. Secretary-General's report on Children and Armed Conflict.



As the discharge and rehabilitation process began, about a dozen of the disqualified combatants were listed as being under the age of 16 and about 500 were under the age of 18. Though called combatants, the United Nations said the minors were used as messengers, cooks and porters during the fighting.

***

(Mental Floss) -- 1. Bobby Murcer's biggest fan

Former New York Yankee Bobby Murcer warms up  during Old Timers Day Yankee Stadium on July 7.

Our first story has a fairy-tale middle and a horrible ending.

In August of '77, Bobby Murcer of the Cubs promised to hit a home run for terminally ill fan Scott Crull. That night, Murcer hit two of them. Pretty amazing, especially when you consider Murcer only hit nine homers the whole next season. But that's not why Crull -- a 12-year-old from Calumet City, Illinois -- makes this list.

Broadcasting the game nationally on ABC, Keith Jackson told the country how Murcer had fulfilled the dying boy's last wish. Eyes watered, spines tingled.

There was only one problem -- nobody had ever told the boy he was dying. His parents were horrified. Weeks later, Crull passed away.

2. The good luck charmers

Every sport has its own strange traditions. I'd argue hockey's "throwing an octopus on the ice for good luck" is the weirdest. Tossing the eight-tentacled cephalopod was the brainchild of Detroit storeowners Pete & Jerry Cusimano.

The date: April 15, 1952. The logic: one tentacle for each of the eight victories it took to win the Stanley Cup. Later that spring, most likely fueled by the good luck octopus, the Red Wings won the title.

PETA has objected to this practice, which continues to this day. The Red Wings mascot is not a Red Wing, but Al the Octopus.

3. The John 3:16 guy

Also known as "Rainbow Man," the born-again Rollen Stewart and his John 3:16 signs were fixtures at major events in the 1970s and 80s. He brought his message to the World Series, Super Bowl, Olympics, and World Cup.

He was outside Buckingham Palace when Di and Charles wed; he went to see the Pope in Alaska.

But he was more religious fanatic than sports fan. According to the Los Angeles Times, Stewart planned to assassinate President Bush and candidate Clinton in 1992. And he's now serving three life sentences for holding a maid hostage at a Los Angeles Hyatt, also in 1992.

By the way, chapter three, verse sixteen of the Gospel of John says, "For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life." This is also printed on cups at the In-N-Out Burger.

4. The All-Star heckler

For 12 years, Maryland lawyer and Washington Bullets fan Robin Ficker was the NBA's most prominent heckler. With season tickets behind the visiting team's bench, his antics were legendary.

When he reminded Frank Layden of the Jazz that "USA Today" had rated him Worst Dressed Coach, Layden had to be restrained by security. With the Bulls in town, Ficker loudly read excerpts of Maverick, coach Phil Jackson's sex-laden 1975 autobiography. During the 1993 Suns-Bulls NBA Finals, Charles Barkley (of the Suns) flew Ficker to Phoenix and bought him a ticket behind the Chicago bench. Ficker was ejected in the first quarter.

The Bullets became the Wizards in 1997 and moved into the MCI Center the following season. Ficker's new seats were not in shouting distance of the visiting team, forcing him into heckling retirement. Last year he received 9.5% of the vote in a losing bid for Montgomery County Executive.

5. Kim Jong-il

That's right, the world's most feared dictator is a hoops junkie. During a 2000 visit, then-Secretary of State Madeleine Albright presented him a basketball signed by Michael Jordan. The Chicago Bulls are the favorite team of Kim Jong-il, who reportedly has a video library with every game Jordan ever played.

At 5'3", the Supreme Commander of the Korean People's Army is roughly the same height as Muggsy Bogues.

6. David Letterman's Stalker

David Letterman's biggest fan was also

***

BAGHDAD, Iraq (CNN) -- Shada's back aches more and more each day as she literally bears her family's burden. Clothed in a black robe, she strains under her husband's weight.



Shada now carries her husband around the house. His legs were blown off in a bombing.



Murtada, a 29-year-old taxi driver, was once a proud husband and father. But one morning last October, he kissed his family good-bye and set off to work. Within hours, their world was shattered. A bomb blew off both his legs above the knee.



"I lost consciousness for a bit. I knew I was wounded," he says.



"I was under the car. I saw my legs were severed, just flesh and skin. I was holding my legs, bleeding."  Watch Shada strain to carry her husband »



Helpless, the daily burden is now on Shada. She carries Murtada when he needs to be moved.



She can't even leave the house because of the constant care she provides her husband.



"I want to work, but I can't really because then who will stay with my husband?" she says. "Who will take him to the bathroom? My first concern every morning is my husband."  See the struggles of Iraqi women »



The attack did to Murtada what roadside bombs, rocket fire, and sniper shootings have done to thousands of Iraqis. Since the war began, the estimates of wounded Iraqis have ranged from tens of thousands to hundreds of thousands of people.  Go inside Iraq with CNN's Arwa Damon »



According to Iraq's Health Ministry, 25 percent of the wounded have lost at least one limb.



Murtada is one of these grim stats, and his life is now a nightmare. He has stumps where his legs used to be and hasn't been able to get prosthetics. He moves around by lifting himself with his arms, riding in a wheelchair or being carried by his wife.



Life has forced Shada to tap into a physical and emotional strength she did not know she possessed. Their 3-year-old son helps care for his father.



One time, Murtada admits his thoughts turned dark. "I was thinking, 'Is this really going to be my life?' And then I was thinking about my son and how I can't provide for him, and then I began thinking about poisoning myself."



This small family lives in a small rented house in a Shiite neighborhood in western Baghdad. Shada has endured many tough times amid war and conflict. Her brother was shot dead and her father died because of poor health care.



Neighbors have helped the family financially, and Shada tries to make ends meet by selling gasoline on the street.



But the circumstances have forced the man she relied on to rely on her.



"I look at him like a baby, with the needs of a baby," she says. "Nobody but me can help him. I cannot go to the markets because of him. I am asking people for help because I cannot leave him alone in the house." E-mail to a friend

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN)  -- Porn icon Marilyn Chambers was found dead in her Los Angeles home Sunday night, but investigators do not suspect foul play, according to a Los Angeles County Sheriff's spokesman.

Marilyn Chambers rose to fame as an adult-film actress in the 1970s.

Chambers began her career in 1970 as a model for Ivory Snow soap, and starred two years later in the porn classic "Behind the Green Door."

"She was a really nice girl," said actor Ron Jeremy, who co-starred with Chambers in adult films starting in the 1970s.

Chambers' death was a "total shock," Jeremy said, because they had been scheduled to sign a contract Monday to perform together in an off-Broadway "tongue-in-cheek" re-enactment of the porn classic "Deep Throat."

"What's strange is that she was at a stage where she was totally happy and totally content with her life," Jeremy said. "Her life was falling together, and she was doing really well."

A family member found Chambers, 56, in the mobile home where she lived in the Canyon Country area and called police Sunday evening, sheriff's spokesman Steve Whitemore said.

The death appeared to be from natural causes, although toxicology tests have not been completed, Whitemore said.

The coroner's investigation has not been completed, and no cause of death has been determined, according to a spokesman with the Los Angeles Medical Examiner's office.

Although her career was mostly in X-rated films, Chambers' fame was boosted by the irony that her face had graced the Ivory Snow box, a soap advertised as "99 and 44/100 percent pure."

Chambers eventually co-starred with all of the best-known porn actors of the 1970s and 1980s, Jeremy said.

***

(CNN) -- Snow Leopard, the highly anticipated new operating system for the Mac, will be released ahead of schedule Friday, Apple announced Monday.



"Ordered already: I'm just one of those nut cases," one Twitter user wrote about the new release.



The Mac OS X Snow Leopard will be available as an upgrade to the current Leopard system for $29 and can be pre-ordered now, the company said.



"Snow Leopard builds on our most successful operating system ever, and we're happy to get it to users earlier than expected," said Bertrand Serlet, Apple's senior vice president of software engineering. "For just $29, Leopard users get a smooth upgrade to the world's most advanced operating system and the only system with built-in [Microsoft] Exchange support."



The company said in a news release that, for Snow Leopard, Apple engineers refined 90 percent of the 1,000 projects that currently make up its operating system.



Among the anticipated features will be what Apple promises to be faster applications, including e-mail and Web browser Safari 4, while freeing up 7 GB of drive space, compared with the current system.



An upgraded QuickTime system will let users more easily view, record, trim and share video, the company said, and it will include improvements to the system's iCal calendar, podcast producer and wiki server.



The system had been scheduled for a September release date. But speculation in recent days had centered on an earlier release.



Apple rival Microsoft is set to release Windows 7, a new version of its PC operating system, on October 22.



Mac users were reporting that Apple's online stores were unavailable Monday morning, presumably to add the order page for Snow Leopard.



The announcement Monday created the buzz typical of any Apple announcement among the world of devoted Mac users. Both "Snow Leopard" and "Mac OS X Snow" had become trending topics on Twitter on Monday morning -- with response mostly positive.



"Ordered already: I'm just one of those nut cases," one user wrote.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Iraq's smaller religious groups have been facing "ongoing severe abuses," and the situation requires a response from the United States, a religious freedom watchdog said Tuesday.



In late November, members of a Christian Iraqi family sit in a home in Lebanon after fleeing violence in Mosul.



The U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom issued a report citing "threats and intimidation" against Chaldo-Assyrians and other Christians, Sabean-Mandaeans and Yazidis.



The commission wants the U.S. State Department to designate Iraq as a "country of particular concern" -- a status that would allow policy responses, including public condemnations, the denial of state visits, and even sanctions. Spokeswoman Judith Ingram said such a designation would draw attention to the abuses and "encourage a robust policy response."



There has been "reconciliation" between Iraq's dominant Shiite and Sunni religious groups, but tensions continue to reverberate and that's a concern, the commission said. But the smaller groups don't have "militia or tribal structures to protect them" and they "do not receive adequate official protection."



"Iraq's non-Muslim religious minorities -- particularly Christians, Mandaeans and Yazidis -- have suffered religiously-based attacks and other abuses, and have fled the country, at rates far disproportionate to their numbers, seriously threatening these communities' continued existence in Iraq," the report said.



"Lacking militias, and in the case of the Mandaeans unable to defend themselves for religious reasons, they are easy prey for extremists and criminals, and they do not receive adequate protection from the authorities. As in earlier years, they also are caught in the middle of a Kurdish-Arab struggle for control of disputed northern areas where the minorities are concentrated and have been targeted because of this."



Examples include Christian protest over provincial election legislation and anti-Christian violence in Mosul this autumn and election intimidation of non-Muslims in Nineveh province in 2005. The Iraqi Constitution also "gives Islam a preferred status, providing a potential justification for abuses and discrimination against non-Muslims."



The commission is recommending that the incoming Obama administration ensure "safe and fair provincial elections" and "security and safety for all Iraqis." It calls for making prevention of religious abuse a "high priority" and urging the Kurdish region to support "minority rights." It also urges addressing the displaced persons' and refugee problem.



CNN's Joe Sterling contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Portugal declared three days of national mourning Monday amid fears the death toll from devastating floods and mudslides on the island of Madeira could rise above 42.





Search teams have been working to find more victims after floodwaters caused by heavy rains swamped the capital Funchal, unleashing a torrent of mud that swept away homes, roads and trees. At least 120 people were injured.





Rescuers were trying to drain a two-story undergound car park at a shopping center where many people are thought to have become trapped.





Rescuers feared were that when rains started on Saturday many people may have rushed to retrieve their cars, but ended up trapped in the car park, CNN's Portuguese affiliate, RTP state TV, reported.





Flags were flying at half staff on government buildings in Lisbon in respect of the victims. European Commission President Jose Manuel Durao Barroso was due there later Monday to give a news conference describing what assistance the European Union can offer to Portugal.





Madeira-born footballer Cristiano Ronaldo also paid tribute to the victims as his team Real Madrid played Villarreal on Sunday. He lifted his jersey after scoring a goal to reveal a white T-shirt with "Madeira" written on it.





Ronaldo wrote on his blog later that he was "incredulous, shocked and dismayed" by the disaster, and offered his assistance.





The mayor of Funchal, Miguel Alburquerque, has warned it was "very probable" the toll will rise.





"Our main concern is for the damaged and flooded homes, the cars buried and swept away by water, where we fear we will find new bodies," he told the Jornal de Madeira newspaper, according to Agence France-Presse.





Rescuers were still hunting for other people believed missing in the deluge as efforts to clear up got under way.





Authorities said about 250 people had been evacuated to military bases and other safe locations.





Pedro Barbosa of the Civil Protection Agency told CNN all the damage occurred in just a few hours Saturday morning due to "very concentrated, very intense" rains that sparked flooding and mudslides.





The mudslides and flooding damaged roads and homes in Funchal, and in Ribeira Brava, which are both on the southern portion of the Atlantic island.





Madeira, an autonomous region of Portugal, is a popular resort destination. There have been no reports of any dead or missing tourists.





Barbosa said Saturday's heavy rains were the worst in Madeira since 1993, when a storm killed eight people.





Madeira is one of the Madeira Islands, an archipelago about 600 miles (1,000 kilometers) southwest of the Portuguese mainland.





CNN's Al Goodman contributed to this report.

***

BOSTON, Massachusetts (CNN) -- A 23-year-old medical student pleaded not guilty Monday to an indictment alleging first-degree murder charge in a killing tied to Craigslist.



Philip Markoff is charged with killing a woman and robbing another in Boston hotels in April.



Philip Markoff is accused in the the fatal shooting of one woman and the robbery another in Boston hotels earlier this year.



A Massachusetts grand jury late last week indicted him on seven counts, including first-degree murder.



Markoff is charged with the April 14 fatal shooting and attempted robbery of Julissa Brisman, 25, and the armed robbery of a 29-year-old Las Vegas woman on April 10. Investigators have linked both crimes to ads on the popular Web site Craigslist.



He is also charged with "the armed and forcible confinement" of the two women, as well as two counts of unlawful firearm possession, the Suffolk County District Attorney's Office said.  Watch Markoff in court »



The grand jury returned the indictment late Thursday, and it moves the case from Boston Municipal Court to Suffolk Superior Court, where Markoff entered his not guilty plea on Monday. He previously had pleaded not guilty in the city court and is being held without bail.



Markoff's attorney, John Salzberg, had no comment on the new indictment.



Prosecutors said Brisman, a model from New York who advertised as a masseuse on Craigslist, was shot three times at close range and suffered blunt head trauma at the Marriott Copley Place hotel.



The Las Vegas woman was robbed of $800 in cash and $250 in American Express gift cards at the Westin Copley Place hotel, police reports said.



Markoff, a second-year medical student at Boston University's School of Medicine, also has been charged in a nonfatal hotel assault in Rhode Island.



He has been charged with assault with the intent to rob, assault with a dangerous weapon, possession of a handgun and use of a firearm while committing a crime of violence, stemming from an April 16 robbery attempt at a Holiday Inn Express in Warwick, Rhode Island.

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN) -- An American Airlines Boeing 757 made an emergency landing at Los Angeles International Airport an hour after taking off because the crew smelled smoke in the cockpit, a fire department official said.



Inflatable chutes extend from a jet that made an emergency landing Tuesday in Los Angeles.



American Airlines spokesman John Hotard said there was evidence of smoke in the cabin, but he could not say if it was visible or just an odor.



Flight 31 was headed from Los Angeles to Honolulu, Hawaii. There were 188 passengers and seven crew members aboard.



When it landed, the pilot ordered an emergency evacuation. Passengers evacuated by inflatable slides.  Watch passengers slide down chutes »



"It was split-second, 'Go, go, go. Don't take any bags with you. Just go, get off,' " said passenger Julie Brown. "And we just walked to the exit door, and there's that huge slide."



Five passengers had minor cuts and bruises, Hotard said.



Hotard said the flight was the first of the day for the aircraft, and there were no reports of problems with it in the past 30 days.



The pilot requested an emergency landing as a precaution, Hotard said.  Watch as official tells what happened »



American Airlines spokesman Tim Smith said most passengers would take an afternoon flight to Hawaii, although he added that a "handful" of passengers were not continuing to Honolulu. He did not specify why.



CNN's Tracy Sabo contributed to this report.

***

(CNN)  -- Portsmouth will play Chelsea in the FA Cup final after an upset 2-0 extra-time victory over Tottenham Hotspur in the second semifinal at Wembley on Sunday.





French striker Frederic Piquionne opened the scoring for Avram Grant's men nine minutes into extra-time.





Former Tottenham midfielder Kevin-Prince Boateng scored the second with three minutes remaining from the penalty spot after referee Alan Wiley awarded a spot kick as Wilson Palacios fouled Aruna Dindane.





It was a humiliating defeat for Tottenham and their manager Harry Redknapp, who steered Portsmouth to FA Cup triumph in 2008 before leaving the cash-strapped club for White Hart Lane.





His team went into the match as overwhelming favorites against a Pompey team who had been relegated from the Premier League the day before without playing, having been deducted nine points after going into administration.





But all that was forgotten as their fanatical fans enjoyed a famous victory which owed much to good fortune and some excellent goalkeeping from England international David James.





Their breakthrough goal could be credited to the appalling Wembley pitch as Spurs defender Michael Dawson slipped at a crucial moment and Piquionne took full advantage.





Tottenham thought they had equalized almost immediately through Peter Crouch but Wiley ruled it out for a push on James.





With Tottenham camped in the Pompey half, Dindane broke clear and although Palacios got the ball in his challenge he also pulled him down and Wiley had no hesitation in pointing to the spot.





Spurs reject Boateng scored past Heurelho Gomes with relish to seal a famous cup victory.





An overjoyed James said they had deserved their win after being written off before the semifinal.





"We played very well throughout the team, he told ITV.





"Look what it means to Pompey, it's fantastic.





"We were eight- or nine-to-one to win beforehand but we have proved people wrong."





In truth, Tottenham had been the more accomplished side in a generally scrappy match and Crouch will be rueing a headed miss against his former side in the second half in which he also hit the post.





Aaron Mokoena had to make a goalline clearance from a Vedran Corluka cross in Tottenham's best spell of pressure, but Pompey were always a threat on the break and took their chances when offered.





They will play double-chasing Chelsea at Wembley on May 15 and again will start as massive underdogs.

***

(CNN)  -- Authorities have seized $1 billion worth of marijuana plants and have arrested 82 Mexican nationals with ties to drug cartels in the first week and half of an effort to eradicate marijuana fields from California's Fresno County, the county sheriff's office said Wednesday.



The 82 suspects arrested so far have links to Mexican drug cartels.



Operation Save Our Sierra began July 13 and involves local, state and federal agencies working together to remove marijuana growing operations, investigate and arrest drug traffickers, and remove infrastructure on public lands in Fresno County, a news release said.



"This is a high-intensity drug trafficking area," U.S. Drug Czar Gil Kerlikowske said in a phone interview. "I think what should be highlighted here is the local authorities' work to reclaim the land from the drug traffickers."



The 82 suspects arrested so far have links to Mexican drug cartels, local authorities said, though they did not release further details.



Eastern Fresno County, where the seizures have been made, is mountainous and sparsely populated. Growers exploit the area's streams, rivers and lakes to create elaborate drip lines for their plants. A mature plant can be worth $4,000, said Fresno County Sheriff Margaret Mims.



"Fresno County is roughly the size of Connecticut, and the drug traffickers target these areas because they know there is not that significant of a law-enforcement presence," Mims said. "The chances of getting caught are slim."



"The bottom line is our public lands are being destroyed by foreign drug trafficking and heavily armed Mexican cartels," George Anderson of the U.S. Department of Justice said Wednesday at a news conference highlighting the seizures.



The operation is the largest in Fresno County history and one of the largest in California, Mims said.



"What makes this operation unique is the approach: prevention, enforcement, eradication and reclamation," she said.



Intelligence gathered for the operation began in February, with community presentations about prevention. The effort is now focused on shutting down the at least 70 marijuana farms identified by local authorities.



The operation is expected to continue into November, when colder weather makes marijuana growing more difficult.



At least 330,000 marijuana plants have been seized, Mims said.



"This shows what can be accomplished at the local level when agencies work together," Kerlikowske said.



Kerlikowske, who flew to Fresno County on Wednesday and toured a marijuana farm, said his office is one of the primary sponsors of the operation.

***

COLORADO SPRINGS, Colorado (CNN) -- President Bush told the 2008 graduating class at the U.S. Air Force Academy on Wednesday that the "only way America could lose the war on terror is if we defeat ourselves."



President Bush and Air Force Academy graduate Michael Riddick of Aiken, South Carolina, celebrate graduation.



Speaking on a cloudy day at Falcon Stadium, the president compared the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan to America's earlier conflicts, particularly World War II.



"Our nation is once again contending with an ideology that seeks to sow anger, hatred and despair: the ideology of Islamic extremism," he said.



"In today's struggle, we are once again facing evil men who despise freedom and despise America and aim to subject millions to their violent rule.



"We assumed this obligation before," he said, referring to the rebuilding of Germany and Japan after World War II, a conflict that saw the loss of more than 400,000 American lives.  Watch more of Bush's speech »



"Germany and Japan, once mortal enemies, are now allies of the United States. And people across the world have reaped the benefits from that alliance," he said. "Today, we must do the same in Afghanistan and Iraq. ... We'll lay the foundation of peace for generations to come."



But today's wars differ from those of the past, Bush acknowledged, and not only because of modern technology that allows "greater precision" in warfare.



"One challenge is that in the past, in Germany and Japan, the work of rebuilding took place in relative quiet," he said.



"Today, we're helping emerging democracies rebuild under fire from terrorist networks and state sponsors of terror. This is a difficult and unprecedented task -- and we're learning as we go."



The measure of success in war has changed, he said.



"In the past ... there were public surrenders, a signing ceremony on the deck of a battleship, victory parades in American cities. Today, when the war continues after the regime has fallen, the definition of success is more complicated."



Nonetheless, he said, in Iraq and Afghanistan, there is a clear definition of success: when those countries are rid of al Qaeda, when they are economically viable, when they are democracies that can govern effectively and when they are strong allies on the war on terror.



"These successes will come," he told the class. "And when they do, our nation will have achieved victory, and the American people will be more secure. "

***

(CNN) -- Former "Frasier" star Kelsey Grammer and wife Kayte Walsh Grammer are expecting twins, the actor said Sunday.





He made the announcement backstage at the Golden Globes after winning the award for best actor in a TV drama series for his roll in "Boss."





"I'm really looking forward to meeting these new arrivals in our lives, I really am," he said.





Grammer, 56, married the 32-year-old former flight attendant in February in New York, just after Grammer's divorce became final from his third wife, Camille Donatacci, who appears on "The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills."





He predicted Sunday that Kayte will be an "extraordinary" mother.





"She's one of the most loving, amazing, warm human beings I've ever met," he said.





Grammer currently portrays Chicago Mayor Tom Kane in the Starz series "Boss." He closed his Globes acceptance speech by thanking his wife "for the future and what a magnificent year it's been."





Grammer and Donatacci had two children -- Jude, now 7, and Mason, 10. Grammer also has daughters Spencer, 28, and Greer, 19, from previous relationships.





He told CNN's Piers Morgan in October that "I think (Donatacci) married me because I was Frasier."





Grammer also told the CNN host that his "parting gift" to his third wife was her role in the reality series "The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills."





"Whether or not it worked well for her doesn't matter," Grammer said. "It was my way of saying, 'Look, you always wanted to be famous. Here you go.' "





CNN's Jack Hannah contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- The last remaining places for European football's showpiece tournament will be decided on Tuesday when eight nations compete in the second leg of the Euro 2012 playoffs.





Ten countries have already qualified, along with co-hosts Poland and Ukraine, for the four-yearly tournament taking place in June and July.





The most evenly-poised tie is in Lisbon, where 2004 hosts Portugal take on Bosnia-Herzegovina following Friday's 0-0 draw in Zenica.





Turkey reached the semifinals in 2008, but face an uphill struggle to appear at the 14th staging of the event after Croatia won 3-0 in the first leg in Istanbul.





Montenegro, competing for the first time as an independent nation, will also have to overhaul a deficit at home after losing 2-0 in Prague to the Czech Republic -- who finished runners-up on debut in 1996 after the split with Slovakia.





Estonia caused a surprise by reaching the playoffs after taking second place in Group C behind Italy, meaning 2010 World Cup qualifiers Serbia and Slovenia missed out.





However, the East Europeans are unlikely to be included in the December 2 group-stage draw after losing 4-0 in Tallinn to the Republic of Ireland on Friday. The Irish have qualified for the finals only once, in 1988.





Next year will be the last time the tournament is played by 16 teams ahead of an expansion to 24.





World champions Spain will defend their European title, having qualified as group winners along with Germany, Russia, France, the Netherlands, Greece, England and Denmark.





Sweden went through as the second-placed team with the best record.

***

Bangkok, Thailand (CNN) -- Thai police said Tuesday that they would seek court permission to extend the detention of a Lebanese man they have charged with illegal possession of explosive materials.





The move comes amid tension after the United States and Israel warned their citizens in Bangkok on Friday of the possibility of an imminent terrorist attack.





The police charged the man, Atris Hussein, on Monday after finding "initial chemical materials that could produce bombs" in an area just outside Bangkok. The police said Hussein, who also holds a Swedish passport, led them to the location.





The authorities are accusing Hussein of trying to attack spots in Bangkok that are popular with Western tourists and say he is believed to belong to Hezbollah, the Shiite Muslim group active in Lebanon that the United States views as a terrorist organization.





Hussein will be brought to the criminal court Tuesday, so that the police can request authorization to continue to hold him as they pursue their investigation, said Piya Uthayo, a police spokesman. The charges of illegally possessing explosives carry a maximum sentence of five years in prison.





Thai authorities said Sunday they were still looking for another suspect of Middle Eastern origin in the case, providing a sketch of his face.





The materials found Monday in Samutsakorn, southwest of Bangkok, included 400 boxes of fertilizers weighing a total of more than 4,000 kilograms and 1,500 liters of liquid ammonia nitrate, together with 400 electric fans, according to CNN affiliate MCOT.





They were found in a shop house, a type of store common in Southeast Asia that gives onto the sidewalk and also serves as the owner's residence.





Based on comments from Hussein, the authorities believe that "Thailand is only a transit point to send these initial explosive materials to other regional countries," said Police General Priewpan Damapong.





A U.S. Embassy statement on Friday spoke of "foreign terrorists" who may be planning attacks "in the near future." It urged U.S. citizens to exercise caution when visiting public areas where large groups of Western tourists gather in Bangkok. Israel issued a similar alert later Friday.





Thailand is a highly popular tourist destination, and Bangkok serves as a major transport hub for the Southeast Asian region.





The country has undergone periods of unrest in recent years. It experienced a spate of political violence during anti-government demonstrations in 2010.





And Muslim separatists in southern Thailand have long battled government forces in a country that is overwhelmingly Buddhist, with a number of bombings taking place last year.

***

Srinigar, Indian-administered Kashmir (CNN) -- Indian authorities flooded the streets of Srinagar with security forces Thursday to quell four days of violence sparked by the death of a schoolboy.





Authorities were attempting to disperse anti-India protesters Sunday when a tear gas shell hit the 13-year-old boy, Whamiq Farooq Wani, in the head and killed him as he played cricket in a stadium, protesters say.





While a formal curfew has not been declared, security forces have been keeping people off the streets.





Police said having security forces deployed has kept down violence over the last four days.





A senior police officer said more than 100 people, including members of the Indian security forces, were wounded in the violent clashes between the Muslim protesters and security forces -- who used tear gas and baton charges to disperse the mobs.





Two young protesters were hit by tear gas and smoke shells in Wednesday's violence in the old city, and hospital sources said their conditions are serious.





Clashes and incidents of stone-throwing by anti-India protesters continued to be reported from various points in Kashmir Thursday.





Srinagar, the capital city, remained shut along with other towns in protest of the teenaged boy's death. Shops, businesses and government offices were closed.





Indian police and paramilitary troops, as well as the Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF), erected barricades at road intersections in Srinagar's old city to cut off pedestrian and vehicular traffic, witnesses said.





"The people were not allowed to go out of their homes to buy milk and other essential items this morning. The security forces are enforcing tight restrictions in our area," said resident Ayub Zargarc reached by telephone.





The security restrictions were not as stringent outside the old city, where some vehicular and pedestrian movement was seen on the streets patrolled by the Indian police.





"Barring a few stone-pelting incidents, the overall situation in Kashmir remained peaceful today," Farooq Ahmad, inspector general of police in the Kashmir zone, told CNN.





Authorities arrested two senior leaders of the pro-dialogue moderate separatist conglomerate All Parties Hurriyat Conference (APHC) and placed its chairman, Mirwaiz Moulvi Umar Farooq, under house arrest today, according to police. Authorities said they were arrested to prevent them from fomenting trouble in the city.

***

(CNN) -- Fiat Group, fresh from an agreement to buy a piece of troubled automaker Chrysler, has plans to purchase GM Europe and spin off the recombined carmakers into a new company.



Fiat's update of the Cinquecento. The company says its small car expertise can help GM Europe get back on track.



If successful, the new company would become one of the largest car manufacturers in the world behind Toyota. The combined company would generate about $100 billion annually with sales of between 6 and 7 million cars a year.



"Clearly they're trying to take advantage of the opportunity when a lot of stakeholders may be willing to accommodate them," said John Bonnell, an auto industry analyst with JD Power and Associates.



"It may be their only opportunity to get to the kind of scale necessary to succeed in this market."



In an interview with the Financial Times, Sergio Marchionne, chief executive officer of Fiat, detailed a plan to separate Fiat Auto core car divisions and join with Opel/Vauxhall, Saab and GM's other European operations.



Last week, Fiat agreed to take an initial 20 percent of Chrysler as the U.S. manufacturer filed for bankruptcy protection.



"It's an incredibly simple solution to a very thorny problem," Marchionne told the Financial Times.



Marchionne hopes to have the deal finished by the end of this month, and list shares for the new company -- which may be called Fiat/Opel -- by the end of August.



Fiat has only recently gotten itself back on track. In his five years at the helm of Fiat, Marchionne has helped turn around the troubled Italian automaker.



Analysts say its small-car technology can help Chrysler, known for its minivans. In the past five years, Fiat has been able to regain market share in Europe with its economy fuel-saving cars as well as its luxury line, Alfa Romeo.



Marchionne is scheduled to meet with German government officials Monday to discuss the plan. Opel is GM Europe's German unit.



To secure the deal, Fiat is hoping to secure loans from the German government, raising concerns in Germany about helping to fund the Chrysler deal. The company plans to keep its plants operating in Germany, but will reduce workforce, which is likely to raise political concerns.

***

(CNN) -- He never told a lie, as the story goes. So maybe if he were alive today, President George Washington could tell a New York City library what he did with two books he checked out 221 years ago.





The two books -- weighty discourses on international relations and parliamentary debates -- were checked out on October 5, 1789.





They were due on November 2, 1789, but weren't brought back.





Since then, they've been steadily collecting a fine of a few cents each day, adding up to more than $4,000 by the New York Society Library's informal estimate.





"I'm sorry, math is not my thing at all," said Jane Goldstein, the assistant head librarian when asked to hazard a guess.





The fine at the time was 2 pence a day. Now, it's 15 cents -- "It's really gone up, hasn't it?" she quipped.





One of the librarians, Matthew Haugen, guessed the fine to be in the region of 3,000 British pounds, or about $4,577.





"He stuck with the pence concept," Goldstein said.





The library first learned of the missing books when it discovered a yellowed ledger in its basement





It listed all the people who had checked out books from the city's oldest library between July 1789 and April 1792.





Next to the works "Law of Nations" and the 12th volume of "Common Debates" was the name of the person who checked them out: "President."





At the time, New York was the capital of the United States, and the library was the only one in town.





Soon after, the capital was relocated to Philadelphia and then Washington D.C.





The New York library, a subscription library that was New York's first library open to the public, has known about the missing books since the 1930s. The matter came up again recently because the library is capturing the ledgers in digital form to preserve the records.





Library officials cross-checked the books mentioned in the ledger with the ones in their collection.





"Volume 12 (of "Common Debates") was still missing," as was the other book, Goldstein said.





The library is not so concerned about the fine as it is about each book.





"We don't know where it is," she said. "We have tried to find it and we can't," she said.

***

(CNN) -- Phil Donahue has rarely shied away from controversy. On his long-running syndicated talk show, he debated issues including abortion and the death penalty, and his MSNBC show was canceled in 2003, he maintained, because of his antiwar stand.



Phil Donahue, right, made "Body of War" about disabled veteran Tomas Young, seated.



Now the former talk show host has co-directed and co-produced an independent film, "Body of War," about a disabled Iraq war veteran, Tomas Young, who questions the conflict's rationale.



Young joined the military after the September 11 attacks and was sent to Iraq. After less than a week there, he was shot in the spine, paralyzing him from the waist down. "Body of War" is the story of his coming home and adjusting to his new reality.



The film has earned excellent reviews and was named best documentary of 2007 by the National Board of Review. It airs on The Sundance Channel on Tuesday night.  Watch Donahue talk about politics and war »



Donahue talked about "Body of War" and the recent presidential election on "American Morning" with CNN's Carol Costello.



CNN: What did you hope to prove by [making "Body of War"]?



Phil Donahue: Well, this work by ... Ellen Spiro and Phil Donahue is our attempt to show the harm in harm's way. In the middle of the most sanitized war of my lifetime, nobody sees this pain. These people are all below the radar. What you see in our film is a drama taking place behind the closed doors of thousands of homes in this country. I'm telling you, less than 5 percent of us have sacrificed, and the American people are not seeing this. I think this is a shame.



CNN: Well, let's see some of that. We're going to show a clip right now.



(Begin video clip)



Tomas Young: When I made the phone call on September 13, it was because I saw the pictures of [President Bush] standing on top of the pile, saying that we were going to smoke the evildoers out that did this to us. All that had to happen so I could fly 10,000 miles away to not shoot around, because all I saw were women and children running away from gunfire, before I took a bullet myself.



(End video clip)



CNN: Got a lot of wonderful reviews already. I just want to ask you what your hope is for when Barack Obama takes office for veterans of the Iraq war.



Donahue: Well, he will stop the pretense. He will stop it immediately. Oh, the troops, the troops, we love the troops ... [but] the troops come home and the V[eterans] A[dministration] doesn't call them back. We have to stop all this. We think if we say it, it's true.



So, I see Barack Obama as -- first of all, the smile alone is going to restore this nation to the world's family of nations. ... They're going to be fascinated with the guy, and he is going to exploit this special attention to the benefit of this nation. I am pumped.



CNN: The bar is high for him.



Donahue: Yes.



CNN: He's got the weight of the world on his shoulders.



Phil Donahue, thank you for joining us.



Donahue: Thank you, Carol.

***

New York (CNN)  -- Spider-Man's alter ego cannot escape the harsh realities of the current economic times and will lose his job in an issue of the Amazing Spider-Man hitting stores this week.





Peter Parker, official photographer of the mayor by day and New York City crime fighter by night, is going to face new challenges, including unemployment.





"He's going to struggle with unemployment and trying to save the city while he can barely afford to keep a roof over his head," said Steve Wacker, Marvel Comics senior editor.





Parker has always been a grounded character with real-world problems, Wacker said. His aunt is frequently sick, he has girlfriend troubles, and he sometimes struggles to find work. In addition, Spider-Man story lines are often set against a backdrop of current events.





In the near future, Parker will have to juggle paying bills and buying "web-fluid" and other materials to fix his superhero costume in addition to keeping his dual identities under wraps.





Parker's work history includes photographer, assistant high school coach, science teacher and scientific researcher, according to his biography on the Marvel Web site. His education includes a college degree in biophysics and some postgraduate work in biochemistry.





It was at a science exhibit he attended as a teenager that he was bitten by a radioactive spider and acquired the creature's strength, agility and weaving ability, says Marvel Comics.





And although Parker has skills few other others can claim, he probably won't list these on his resume: superhuman strength, ability to cling to most surfaces, fast traveling ability aided by web-slinging and spider-sense danger avoidance system.





The Amazing Spider-Man comic was first published in 1963.

***

(CNN)  -- The last of six Texas A&M University mariners who went missing in the Gulf of Mexico was found dead Sunday afternoon, the Coast Guard said. The other five crewmates were rescued earlier in the day.



Members of the Texas A&M Offshore Sailing Team are shown in this photo from the team's Web site.



The deceased mariner was identified by the university as Roger Stone, the vessel's second safety officer.



The survivors -- four university students and a safety officer -- told the Coast Guard they were forced off their sailboat after it took on water and capsized.



"The flooding was so fast that the thing flipped over," Coast Guard Capt. William Diehl told CNN.



The sailboat, named Cynthia Woods, was one of about two dozen boats heading from Galveston, Texas, to Veracruz, Mexico, for the annual Veracruz Regatta race, which began on Friday.



Diehl said the boat was well-stocked with safety equipment -- including emergency radio beacons, life rafts and ring buoys -- but the crew could only manage to find four life jackets after the boat tipped over.



"The survivors told us that [when] they went into the water, they had four life jackets among the five, and they huddled together and they exchanged the life jackets among them so that they could stay afloat," Diehl said.



Communication with the boat was lost about midnight Friday, and the boat missed its 8 a.m. radio check the next morning, the Coast Guard reported.



A sailboat matching the description of the missing 38-foot boat was found overturned about 5:15 p.m. Saturday, authorities said.



The five survivors were found several hours later about 23 miles south of Freeport, Texas, according to the Coast Guard's press release. They were lifted to safety by a U.S. Coast Guard helicopter around 2 a.m. local time and taken to University of Texas Medical Branch in Galveston for treatment.



The search for the missing crew member involved two Coast Guard helicopters, a Falcon jet, a Marine Corps C-130 -- which has night-vision capabilities -- and the Coast Guard cutter Manowar.



All of those on board the capsized sailboat were experienced sailors, Diehl said.



"They were very well trained," Diehl said. "Obviously [they were] the more senior cadets at the university here, and they had very experienced safety people on board."



When rescuers retrieved the capsized boat's hull, Diehl said the keel was missing.



"That's the part that keeps the sailboat balanced in the water," he said. "And from talking to the survivors this morning, that's where the flooding started for them."



The 725-mile Veracruz regatta began on Friday and boats are expected to arrive in Veracruz on Wednesday and Thursday.

***

Los Angeles, California (CNN) -- Comedian Betty White -- currently enjoying a career resurgence at age 88 -- said Wednesday that she credits her longevity in the entertainment industry to "sheer blind luck."





"I'm the luckiest old broad that ever drew a breath," White told CNN's "Larry King Live."





After a cameo on a popular Super Bowl commercial in January and a series of comedic sketches on Craig Ferguson's "Late, Late Show," White's fans campaigned successfully via Facebook for her to host NBC's "Saturday Night Live."





White admitted to King that she was nervous about the May 8 show and said she finds herself questioning, "What are they doing with me?"





She said she had been approached to host "SNL" three times "many, many years ago," but declined because she associated the show with New York, and as a California girl, "I'm so not New York."





White got her start in show business in 1949 on a local television show. She went on to star in two hit sitcoms, "The Mary Tyler Moore Show" and "Golden Girls."





"I think the reason for the longevity is that ... several generations have gotten to know me over the years so I've become ... sort of part of the family," she said.





Most recently, she appeared in the blockbuster "The Proposal" with Sandra Bullock and Ryan Reynolds. And to add to her current hot streak, White recently signed on to be a series regular on a new TV Land cable channel sitcom titled "Hot in Cleveland" opposite Jane Leeves, Wendie Malick and Valerie Bertinelli.





"I'm not hot again, but I'm surprised to still be working," White said. "I just am amazed and I'm thrilled and I'm going along with it and enjoying it."





White has also continued her work for animal health and well-being, including a 46-year partnership with the Los Angeles Zoo, calling it one of her two loves in life -- alongside show business of course.





"It's such fun," she said. "Why should you stop something you enjoy so much?"

***

Washington (CNN) -- A 90-year-old Michigan man who officials say rounded up and shot Jews in Nazi death camps during World War II is a step closer to being deported, the Justice Department announced Tuesday.





In January, a judge found John Kalymon of Troy, Michigan, to have been an armed member of the Nazi-sponsored Ukrainian Auxiliary Police from 1941 to 1944.





Tuesday, an appeals board dismissed Kalymon's attempt to block his deportation from the United States. Kalymon immigrated to America from Germany in 1949 and became a U.S. citizen in 1955. A federal judge in Detroit revoked his U.S. citizenship in 2007.





"John Kalymon and his Ukrainian Police accomplices were indispensable participants in Nazi Germany's campaign to exterminate the Jews of Europe during World War II," said Assistant Attorney General Lanny Breuer. Breuer said tens of thousands of Jewish men, women and children were murdered in L'viv or rounded up and shipped to the Nazi death camp in Belzec or to Nazi forced labor camps.





In a news release last month, the Justice Department said Kalymon "personally shot Jews while serving, killing at least one" and "participated in violent anti-Jewish operations in which Jews were forcibly deported to be murdered in gas chambers and to serve as slave laborers."





"This case is one of more than a hundred cases successfully prosecuted by the Department of Justice against wartime Nazi perpetrators," said Eli Rosenbaum, head of the Justice Department's Nazi-hunting unit.





Rosenbaum said that since the government launched its program to find and deport former Nazis in 1979, 107 individuals have been prosecuted, and 180 suspected Axis persecutors who attempted to enter the United States have been blocked from doing so.





Although authorities believe only a small number of former Nazis -- mostly in their 90s -- remain alive in the United States, the government is determined to keep up the hunt and deport those they find.





Rosenbaum said the program "reflects the government's continuing commitment to pursuing justice on behalf of the victims of the Holocaust and other human rights crimes."

***

(CNN) -- The wife of missing adventurer Steve Fossett has asked a court to declare him dead.



Steve Fossett and wife Peggy in a February 2006 photograph.



Fossett was last seen in early September, flying a single-engine plane on a pleasure flight from a Nevada ranch. A month-long search for the plane was unsuccessful.



"As difficult as it is for me to reach this conclusion, I no longer hold out any hope that Steve has survived," wrote Peggy V. Fossett in court documents filed Monday with the Cook County [Illinois] Circuit Court.



She asked that the will of her husband of 38 years be admitted to probate.



At about 8:45 a.m. on September 3, the millionaire took off on what he said was to be a solo pleasure flight over the Sierra Nevada mountain range.



He had planned to fly over the Nevada desert for two to three hours, and was expecting to return for lunch to the Nevada ranch, from which he departed. He was carrying a single bottle of water and had no parachute, lawyers for Mrs. Fossett said in the court documents.



At 3 p.m., when he had not returned, a search began that ultimately included thousands of volunteers. It continued until October 2.



"No one involved in the search holds out any hope that Fossett is still alive," the petition said.



Rick Rains, a sheriff's supervisor of the San Diego County Sheriff's Department, said Fossett's plane was last spotted at 11 a.m. less than 20 miles from the ranch's airport. "Given the timeline and the sighting of Fossett's plane, I believe he was within 20 to 25 miles of the ranch when he crashed," Rains said.



But, he noted, "the terrain is very difficult to search, with many areas where the crevices, deep ravines and closely grown trees make it impossible to see from the air what is on the ground."



"If Fossett was physically able to find water to survive on in the Nevada desert, he would have been physically capable of signaling searchers, by doing something as simple as crafting a large X of sticks or rocks, or by starting a signal fire," Rains said.



In affidavits supporting his wife's petition, Fossett's doctor described the 63-year-old man as physically and mentally fit.



Robert Keilholtz, a captain in the California Civil Air Patrol who was involved in the search, noted that the difficulty in finding wreckage was underscored by the fact that World War II-era plane wreckage was discovered last spring in the mountain range.



In the search for Fossett, wreckage from eight other crashes was discovered, one of them from the 1960s, the lawyers said.



Fossett made his money in the financial services industry, but is renowned for his daredevil exploits, which include nonstop, round-the-world trips aboard a balloon, a fixed-wing plane and a boat.



At the time of his disappearance, Fossett was working on a project to build a single-man submarine and to build a vehicle capable of breaking land speed records by traveling at up to 800 mph, lawyers for his wife said. E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- The body of a University of Georgia professor accused of killing three people was found Saturday buried in woods near Athens, Georgia, authorities said.



George Zinkhan, a professor at the University of Georgia, disappeared after the slayings of his wife and two others.



George Zinkhan, 57, is suspected of fatally shooting his wife and two other people last month outside a community theater in Athens, which is home to the University of Georgia.



Cadaver dogs discovered the body with two guns in a wooded area of northwest Clarke County, about a mile from where Zinkhan's red Jeep Liberty was found last week, Athens-Clarke Police Chief Joseph Lumpkin said.



Athens-Clarke County police confirmed the identity of the body, citing results from the Georgia Bureau of Investigation.



The guns are like those authorities believe were used in the shootings, Lumpkin said.



The body was found "beneath the earth," Lumpkin said, without any clothes.



"A person who's not accustomed to the woods would never have found the body," he said.



Significant "efforts" were undertaken to conceal the body's location, Jim Fullington of the GBI said.



Authorities say Zinkhan fatally shot Marie Bruce, 47, Zinkhan's wife and a prominent Athens attorney, Tom Tanner, 40, and Ben Teague, 63, on April 25.



The victims all were associated with the Town and Gown Players, a theater group that was holding a reunion picnic at the time of the shootings.



Zinkhan arrived while the Town and Gown event was under way and got into a disagreement with his wife, police said.



Police believe he went to his car -- where the couple's children apparently were waiting -- and returned with two handguns.



In addition to the three deaths, two other people were wounded, police said.



After the shooting, Zinkhan left with his children -- ages 8 and 10 -- in the car, police said. He drove to a neighbor's home in nearby Bogart, Georgia, where he lived, and left the children with the neighbor.



Authorities put out bulletins across the nation for Zinkhan after the shootings and revealed that he had purchased a May 2 ticket in March to the Netherlands, where he owns a house.



The day of the flight passed without any sign of Zinkhan.



He had been an endowed marketing professor at the University of Georgia's Terry College of Business. The university fired Zinkhan the day after the shootings.



CNN's Marylynn Ryan contributed to this report.

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- Chesley B. "Sully" Sullenberger III was "the right guy at the right time at the right moment" to guide a jet safely onto the surface of the Hudson River, a neighbor and friend said.

Chesley Sullenberger is an Air Force veteran who has been with US Airways since 1980.

Sullenberger has a cool, calm and collected style -- honed by decades of flight experience and research on safety issues, friend and neighbor John Walberg told the Contra Costa Times newspaper.

All 155 passengers and crew aboard Flight 1549 survived.

The 57-year-old former Air Force fighter pilot has been flying for more than 40 years, and has been with US Airways since 1980.

His two-page resume is packed with achievements and highlights his broad aviation experience.

The pilot speaks internationally on airline safety, and collaborates with the Center for Catastrophic Risk Management at the University of California-Berkeley, whose researchers look for ways to avoid air disasters.  Watch a pilot applaud Sullenberger's skills Â»

Passenger Joe Hart praised the plane's crew as "phenomenal, in all respects."

"Once the pilot said 'brace for impact,' the flight attendants made sure everybody knew they had to be buckled in and bent over," Hart said.

"Then they sat in their chairs, strapped themselves in, and in a regular cadence, until we hit the water, they just continued to chant 'brace, brace, brace' so that nobody would sit up. And that, I think, helped prevent a lot of injuries on impact."

CNN affiliate WKOW in Madison, Wisconsin, identified the co-pilot as Jeffrey Skiles, 49.

Barbara Skiles told WKOW that, in conversations since the incident, her husband has praised the rescue effort.

"He was really grateful and really impressed about the response that they got, how quickly boats were at the side of the airplane," she said.

Sullenberger was primed to help passengers aboard the Airbus A320 survive the crisis, said Karlene Roberts, a university  professor who co-directs the center.

"I can imagine him being sufficiently in charge to get those people out," she said. "He's got that kind of personality, which is to his credit."  Watch how passengers call pilot a hero Â»

Sullenberger's resume is packed with achievements.

After graduating from the Air Force Academy in 1973, he had a brief but distinguished Air Force career during which he flew the Vietnam-era F-4 Phantom fighter jet.

He was a flight leader and training officer with experience in Europe and the Pacific and at Nellis Air Force Base, Nevada, where he was the mission commander for Red Flag exercises. The exercises are for advanced aerial combat training, a position delegated to top pilots.

Among those who congratulated Sullenberger was Lt. Gen. John Regni, the Air Force Academy superintendent, who graduated with Sullenberger.

"He not only showcased unbelievable airmanship, but exemplary character as well," Regni said.

"In addition to superb judgment under utmost pressure, by checking his aircraft twice to ensure there were no passengers left behind he epitomized the 'service before self' concept we strive to instill in our cadets," Regni said.

Sullenberger is president and CEO of Safety Reliability Methods Inc., a company he founded. The firm provides emergency management, safety strategies and performance monitoring to the aviation industry.

He was an instructor and Air Line Pilots Association safety chairman, accident investigator and national technical committee member, according to a biography on the Web site of his company.

He participated in several U.S. Air Force and National Transportation Safety Board accident investigations, and worked with NASA scientists on a paper on error and aviation, according to his resume.

He was widely praised after Thursday's forced water landing, apparently caused by a "double bird strike," which crippled the plane's engines.

"It was an amazing piece of airmanship," said Peter Goelz, a former managing director of the National Transportation Safety Board.

Even New York

***

(CNN)  -- Honduran prosecutors issued arrest warrants for the country's six top military commanders for abuse of power in connection with the coup that ousted President Jose Manuel Zelaya last year.



The Honduran high command, including Gen. Romeo Vasquez Velasquez, the country's top military chief, face charges for bursting into Zelaya's residence and transporting the president to neighboring Costa Rica, Attorney General Luis Rubi said.



The June 28 coup deepened a political crisis that remains unresolved, despite a new president being elected in November.



Rubi himself filed the arrest warrants at the Supreme Court on Wednesday.



In addition to abuse of power, the military commanders face charges of illegal expatriation of a citizen.



The manner in which Zelaya was ousted was key in how other countries and international bodies interpreted the military action.



The de facto government of Roberto Micheletti and his supporters have insisted that Zelaya's removal was a constitutional transfer of power.



But the United Nations, the Organization of American States, the European Union and most nations -- including the United States -- condemned the coup and demanded that Zelaya be reinstated immediately



The crisis erupted in June when Zelaya -- despite congressional and supreme court decisions calling it illegal -- pushed forward with a plan to hold a referendum that could have led to changing the constitution to allow for additional presidential terms.



The Supreme Court signed an arrest warrant for Zelaya but not to send him into exile.



Now, the Supreme Court has three days to decide whether to ratify the charges and start a case against the military officers.



Armed Forces spokesman Col. Ramiro Archaga said that the military respects the rule of law and are willing to appear before the justice system.



The announcement of the arrest warrants came as U.S. Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Western Hemisphere Affairs Craig Kelly visited with the key players in the crisis in Honduras.



Kelly met with Micheletti Wednesday, though details of the talks were unknown except for a statement from acting Honduran Foreign Minister Carlos Lopez Contreras, saying that calls for Micheletti's resignation were not part of the dialogue.



Meanwhile, Zelaya remained holed up inside the Brazilian Embassy in the Honduran capital of Tegucigalpa. He has been there ever since sneaking back into the country in September.



In another development, the Honduran congress was to take up the issue of amnesty for Zelaya and other players in the crisis next week.



Journalist Elvin Sandoval contributed to this report.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- President Bush on Wednesday hailed the election of Barack Obama as "a triumph of the American story."





"Americans can be proud of the history that was made yesterday," President Bush said Wednesday.





Obama's rise to become the nation's first black president is "a testament to hard work, optimism and a faith in the enduring promise of our nation," Bush said in the White House Rose Garden.





"No matter how they cast their ballots, all Americans can be proud of the history that was made yesterday," said Bush, whose second term in the Oval Office will end when Obama is sworn in on January 20.





Bush said he had called Obama and had also spoken to his opponent, Sen. John McCain.





"I congratulated [McCain] on a determined campaign that he and Gov. [Sarah] Palin ran," the president said.  Watch Bush praise presidential candidates »





Bush said turning over the White House to Obama "will be a stirring sight."





"I know millions of Americans will be overcome with pride at this inspiring moment that so many have waited for for so long," Bush said.





Moving toward Obama's January 20 inauguration, Bush promised the president-elect he can count on "complete cooperation" as he makes the transition to the White House.





Speaking later at the State Department, Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice said her department "will do everything that we can" to ensure a smooth transition.  Watch Rice pledge a smooth turnover at the State Department »





Rice, an African-American like Obama, also called Tuesday's election "an extraordinary step forward" in the nation's history.





"I am especially proud because this is a country that's been through a long journey in terms of overcoming wounds, and making race not the factor in our lives," Rice said.





Bush warned America's enemies not to expect any letup in national security during the transition.





"The United States government will stay vigilant in meeting its most important responsibility, protecting the American people," Bush said.





On Thursday, Obama is expected to receive his first top-secret intelligence briefing, similar to the one Bush gets every day, according to U.S. officials familiar with the process.





In a message to CIA employees obtained by CNN, CIA Director Michael Hayden says Director of National Intelligence Michael McConnell will lead Obama's first briefing.





Bush pledged to fulfill his duties as president until the final day of his presidency.





"I will continue to conduct the people's business as long as the office remains in my trust," the nation's 43rd president said.

***

(CNN) -- Heavy rain that began pounding California on Tuesday threatened to unleash dangerous floods and mudslides, especially in areas ravaged by wildfires.



Residents of La Canada Flintridge, California, fill sandbags to prepare heavy rains in the fire-affected area.



"Very heavy rain is likely over the Sierra Nevada and foothills from later today through Wednesday morning as a strong and very moist Pacific storm moves into the region," the National Weather Service said. Up to 8 inches of rain could fall in areas above 4,000 feet, it said.



Forecasters described it as the first major storm of the season.



The Santa Cruz County Office of Emergency Services issued a mandatory evacuation order for 60 homes in a section of Davenport, an unincorporated community north of Santa Cruz along the state's central coast. The San Lorenzo Valley high school, middle school, and elementary schools are closed, the county said.



Many roads were flooding in Santa Cruz County, emergency management officials said.



The area burned in the summer's Lockheed fire, increasing the chances of mudslides in the current storm.



Wind gusts above 50 mph were reported from automated observation sites at high elevations, and rainfall was heavy over the Santa Cruz Mountains, the weather service said.



Gusty winds were reported in the San Francisco Bay Area, but heavy rain there was expected to end by early evening.



"Although it has been very dry for a lengthy period of time, excessive amounts of rain of this magnitude may produce flooding in locations that normally do not flood during an early autumn rainfall," the weather service said.



California's Emergency Management Agency was conducting conference calls with the National Weather Service to stay abreast of the latest reports, spokesman Greg Renick said.



The agency had advised other agencies to make emergency preparations, he said. Sandbags have been positioned at vulnerable locations.



"We have activated the state Operations Center in Sacramento and also activated the centers in Los Alamitos and Oakland," Renick said.



One major area of concern is the land burned by the Station wildfire in August and September, forecasters said. That 160,000-acre fire destroyed about 80 homes in Los Angeles County.



"The heavy rain will create favorable conditions for mud and rock slides over burn scars," said the weather service, which issued numerous flood watches and warnings.



Forecasters said debris flows also were possible in or near areas burned by blazes such as the Big Meadows Fire in Yosemite National Park, the Power Fire in Tulare County and the fire in San Bernardino National Forest.

***

(CNN) -- Sen. Barack Obama on Monday blamed lobbyists, special interests and "an ethic of irresponsibility" in Washington for the financial crisis that has swept the country in recent weeks.



Sen. Barack Obama said Monday there needs to be more oversight in Washington.



The senator from Illinois sided with congressional Democrats, who say a government bailout of the financial sector must include government oversight.



"We cannot give a blank check to Washington with no oversight and accountability, when no oversight and accountability is what got us into this mess in the first place," Obama said.



President Bush's top economic advisers this weekend presented a $700 billion plan to Congress to take control of "illiquid assets," including bad mortgages.



Bush urged Congress to pass the plan as is, but Democrats on the Hill already are circulating a counterproposal.



Sen. John McCain, Obama's Republican rival for the presidency, said Monday that the government's proposal puts too much power into the hands of Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson.



In a conference call Monday with reporters, McCain's top campaign officials refused to say how the senator from Arizona would vote on the plan because it is not yet clear what the final version will contain.



At a campaign event Monday in Green Bay, Wisconsin, Obama laid out the reforms he would pursue as president to avoid another economic crisis.  Watch Obama talk about the crisis on Wall Street »



First, Obama said that he would reform "our special interest-driven politics." He said members of his administration would not be able to use their position as a steppingstone for lobbyist careers.  Watch what Obama says about McCain's role in the situation »



Obama said he would make the government "open and transparent" and put any bill that ends up on his desk online for five days before he signs it.



Secondly, Obama said he would "eliminate the waste and the fraud and abuse in our government." He pointed to fixing the health care system and ending the war in Iraq as ways to cut costs.



Obama also said that he and his running mate, Sen. Joe Biden, would crack down on excessive spending from both parties and close loopholes for big corporations.



Obama said he would pursue "updated, common-sense regulations" in the financial market.



Earlier Monday, McCain told voters he was "greatly concerned" about the government's proposed rescue plan.



"Never before in the history of our nation has so much power and money been concentrated in the hands of one person," McCain said at a town hall meeting in Scranton, Pennsylvania.



The Republican candidate said that while he admires and respects Paulson, "this arrangement makes me deeply uncomfortable."



McCain said a high-level oversight board should be created to shepherd the government's proposed $700 billion bailout plan.



McCain criticized Obama for not putting up a plan to address the financial situation.



"At a time of crisis, when leadership is needed, Sen. Obama has simply not provided it," he said.  Watch what McCain says about Obama's leadership »



Obama has said several times since the recent Wall Street crisis that, in meeting with top economists, he was encouraged to not roll out a specific plan for fear of overly politicizing the work of Congress on a government bailout of financial firms.



He has, however, offered ideas for the plan -- including limiting pay for executives of businesses that are bailed out by the government and making sure the effort includes a specific plan for the money to be repaid.



McCain on Monday proposed creating a bipartisan oversight board that would be able to "impose accountability and establish concrete criteria for who gets help and who doesn't."



The Republican presidential candidate said the board should be made up of "qualified citizens who have no agenda." He pointed to Warren Buffett, former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney and New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg as potential board members.



Buffett, chairman and CEO of Berkshire Hathaway, supports Obama. Romney backs McCain, and Bloomberg is an independent.



McCain also called

***

WASHINGTON (CNN)  -- A new national poll suggests most Americans favor an economic stimulus package even if it comes with an $800 billion price tag, although that support doesn't indicate the public wants to see a new era of big government.



Two-thirds of people polled think Present-elect Barack Obama's stimulus package will help the economy.



Fifty-six percent of those questioned in a CNN/Opinion Research Corp. survey released Tuesday said they favor the stimulus package that President-elect Barack Obama is proposing; 42 percent were opposed.



Obama is pushing Congress to pass the plan soon after he's inaugurated on January 20, to help jump-start an economy mired in a deep recession.



The poll also indicates that two-thirds of the public thinks the stimulus package will do just that, with 17 percent saying it will help the economy a lot and another 50 percent feeling that it will help the economy somewhat. Twenty-one percent say the stimulus package won't help the economy very much and 10 percent say it won't help at all.



But Americans seem to be split on whether they'd like more government regulation of business and industry, with 39 percent saying there's too much government regulation and an equal amount saying too little. Twenty percent said the amount of government involvement is just right.  Watch why most Americans back the bailout »



"Attitudes toward government have not changed since 2006, when the economy was still in pretty good shape," said CNN Polling Director Keating Holland. "Most still say the government is doing too much that should be left to individuals and businesses, and trust in government is still low."



On the other hand, he said, "with the economy in such poor shape, government action to stimulate the economy seems to get an exemption to the general concerns about big government."



There also appears to be a divide between the parties when it comes to government involvement.



"Six in 10 Democrats want to see the federal government do more," Holland said. "But three-quarters of Republicans would like to see a smaller government. The tiebreaker is independents. A majority of the independents polled say that government is doing too much that should be left to individuals and businesses."



The poll also suggests that a declining number of Americans trust the government to do what's right. iReport.com: What should Obama do first?



Twenty-two percent of those polled said they trust the government to do what's right most of the time. That's down 6 points from when the question was asked two years ago. Sixty-six percent said they trust the government some of the time, and 9 percent said they never trust Washington. On the opposite end of the spectrum, 3 percent said they can always trust the government to do the right thing.



The CNN/Opinion Research Corp. poll was conducted Friday through Sunday, with 1,013 adult Americans questioned by telephone. The survey's sampling error is plus or minus 3 percentage points.

***

(CNN) -- Aftershocks rattled southern Taiwan in the hours after a magnitude 6.4 earthquake shook the island, but left it relatively unscathed.



Thursday morning's quake was followed by more than 15 aftershocks, the largest reaching 4.8.



Taiwan's interior ministry reported 12 minor injuries -- nine in Kaohsiung county, two in Jia Yi county and one in Tainan county.



The quake struck about 8:20 a.m. (7:20 p.m. Wednesday ET) in a mountainous region about 25 miles northwest of Taitung, on the southeast coast, and 40 miles east of Tainan and Kaohsiung on the southwest coast.



The region includes Taiwan's Maolin National Scenic Area and is still recovering from a direct hit by Typhoon Morakot that killed hundreds in August. The typhoon dumped more than two feet of rain, causing serious mudslides in the south, including one that buried the village of Shiao Lin under 50 feet of mud.



Shuo Hong, an orthopedic surgeon in Taipei, about 155 miles away from the epicenter, felt the earthquake during a meeting at a hospital. "We were debating whether or not to run for shelter, but the hospital is safe," he said "It is built to resist a 7.0-magnitude earthquake.



"It was shaking for about 20 to 30 seconds, shaking more than what we expected," Hong said.



Were you there? Did you feel it?



The Taiwan Ministry of Interior and the National Fire Agency said electricity was cut off in parts of Kaohsiung county, Jia Yi city and Jia Yi county. Taiwan's official news agency reported that a fire broke out in Jia Yi city.



Residents in southern Taiwan reported cracks in some buildings and major bridges. Train service was also disrupted in some areas, Taiwanese media reported.



Two small hotels near the epicenter that were contacted by CNN reported no damage, though the buildings shook for a few seconds during the quake.



Albert Yu, communications manager of the humanitarian organization World Vision, told CNN he was about half-way through a 90-minute trip via high-speed train from Taipei to Tainan when the quake struck. Passengers did not feel the quake, he said, but operators stopped the train and announced what had happened before inspecting the tracks for stability.



During the delay, Yu said people were calm, "opening laptops ... and chatting with people around them."



Yu said World Vision "has already been on high alert responding to the quakes in Haiti and Chile, so we're closely monitoring reports in the earthquake in southern Taiwan."



Residents in Taipei, the capital, also felt the shaking.



Earthquakes are far from uncommon on the nearly 14,000-square-mile island -- about the size of the U.S. states of Maryland and Delaware combined -- which sits across the juncture of the Eurasian and Philippine tectonic plates.



A 6.4-magnitude earthquake struck the same general region in December. The island took a double hit on December 26, 2006, when earthquakes of 7.1 and 6.9 magnitude hit eight minutes apart.



The largest recorded quake to strike Taiwan was an 8.0-magnitude quake in 1920, but the worst earthquake disaster stemmed from a 7.1-magnitude quake in 1935 that killed more than 3,200 people -- followed by a 6.5-magnitude quake that killed more than 2,700 people three months later.



More recently, a 7.6-magnitude earthquake killed more than 2,400 people in 1999.



CNN's Christine Theodorou and Journalist Andrew Lee contributed to this report

***

(CNN) -- Norway has condemned the ransacking of the Sri Lankan embassy in Oslo by Tamil demonstrators.

The entrance to Sri Lanka's embassy in Oslo on Sunday.

Video posted on Norway's TV 2 Web site showed demonstrators smashing through re-enforced glass at the embassy on Sunday. The aftermath showed embassy offices that had been trashed, with furniture, artwork and potted plants dumped on the floor. Countertops had been bashed and splintered.

"Please help the Tamils. Stop the massacre of Tamils," a sign carried by one of the demonstrators said.

The foreign ministry said it has requested that police tighten security at the embassy, which is located in an office building.

"I deeply deplore the fact that unauthorized persons unlawfully forced their way into the Sri Lankan embassy in Oslo and caused extensive damage," said Foreign Minister Jonas Gahr Store. "This is a violation of Norwegian law and an action that is totally unacceptable."

Rohitha Bogollagama, Sri Lanka's foreign affairs minister, called for authorities to "seek immediate arrest of the perpetrators of this serious act of terror" during a CNN interview in New Delhi, India.

The attack came as Sri Lanka's president ordered military troops to restrict their offensive against Tamil Tiger rebels while the nation celebrates the Sinhala and Tamil New Year. The two-day celebrations began Monday.

The order was meant to allow the thousands of Tamils trapped by the fighting to travel for the New Year, said a statement from the office of President Mahinda Rajapakse.

Troops are in the midst of an intense military push in northern Sri Lanka, where they have snatched back large swaths of land from the Tamil rebels.

The rebels have fought for an independent homeland for the country's ethnic Tamil minority since 1983. The civil war has left more than 70,000 people dead.

A statement on the Sri Lankan defense ministry Web site called on Norway to "bring the perpetrators to justice immediately."

"The perpetrators can be readily identified on the CCTV recording which has been made available to the authorities," the statement said. "The demonstrations, which had been building up in intensity in the past few days, provide an indication that something was being planned."

CNN's Harmeet Singh and Iqbal Athas contributed to this report

***

Lagos, Nigeria (CNN) -- More than 160 people have been arrested in connection with the massacre earlier this month of scores of people in central Nigeria, a national police spokesman told CNN Monday.





Of the 163 arrested, 41 will be charged with homicide, said spokesman Emmanuel Ojukwu. The other 122 will be charged with rioting, arson and possession of firearms, he said.





More than 200 people died in the March 7 massacre,  according to some estimates. They took place in predominately Christian towns near the city of Jos, where about 150 people, mostly Muslims, were reported killed in January.





The region lies on a faith-based fault line between Muslim-dominated northern Nigeria and the mainly Christian south.





Ojukwu said the ethnic backgrounds of those arrested are mixed, but they are all from the area near Jos.





Human Rights Watch said the attacks by Muslims with guns, machetes and knives apparently were in retaliation for the previous attacks against Islamic communities and the theft of cattle from herdsmen.





Last week, at least 11 more people were killed in a predominantly Christian village.





Choji Gyang, special adviser on religious affairs to the governor of the Nigerian state of Plateau, has said the attackers were Muslim herdsmen, some dressed in military uniforms. They also stole about 120 cattle from the village, he said.





The violence has put much of oil-rich Nigeria, Africa's most populous nation, on edge. Authorities in Lagos took the unusual step of sending a text message to residents earlier this month to try to put them at ease.





The violence often pits Christians and Muslims against each other. But John Onaiyekan, Roman Catholic archbishop of Abuja, Nigeria, and former Nigerian President Olusegun Obasanjo have said that the violence is fueled more by other factors: ethnic, social and economic problems.





"If you have one group or a community that has land that's been encroached upon by another community or even by itinerant cattle farmers, then the people who lay claim to the land will fight back," Obasanjo recently told CNN. "If there are job opportunities in an area, and persons believe they are indigenous to that area, and (are) not getting enough out of the jobs that are available, they will fight those who are getting the jobs."

***

(CNN) -- Elephant seals equipped with electronic tags and robotic mini submarines using sonar were just two projects during the International Polar Year (IPY) that aimed to investigate the effects of global warming in polar regions.

An elephant seal with a custom-designed electronic tag. The tags fell off when the animals molted.

The fourth IPY, which began in March 2007 and actually covered two full years, ended last month, after 160 scientific projects were undertaken by researchers from over 60 countries.

A joint project by the International Council for Science (ICSW) and World Meteorological Organization. (WMO), the IPY hoped to spearhead efforts to better monitor and understand the Arctic and Antarctic regions. The project had international funding of about US$ 1.2 billion over the two-year period.

"The International Polar Year 2007/2008 came at a crossroads for the planet's future," said Michel Jarraud, Secretary-General of WMO in a press statement. "The new evidence resulting from polar research will strengthen the scientific basis on which we build future actions."

Researchers found that in the Arctic during the summers of 2007 and 2008, the minimum extent of year-round sea ice decreased to its lowest level since satellite records began 30 years ago.

According to a report published by the IPY organizing committee in February, their research indicates that global warming is affecting Antarctica in ways not previously identified.

Other evidence of climate change came from IPY research vessels that found warming waters in the Southern Ocean and an increase in melting ice that is creating fresher bottom water around the coast of Antarctica.

Among efforts to study the effects of climate change on Antarctica, was aNorwegian Polar Institute project to study marine mammals. Custom-designed tags were attached to elephant seals to study the animals' habits, although researcher realized the tags could also help with field research on climate change.

The electronic tags -- which fell off when the seals molted -- sent back data on temperature and salinity the oceans around Antarctica, particularly around the Fimbul Ice Shelf in east Antarctica.

While ice-shelf melt has been recorded in the west of Antarctica, scientists are concerned that it could happen in the east as well.

Another project to study the underside of an Antarctic glacier deployed an autonomous robot submarine. The team from the U.S. and British Antarctic Survey sent the "Autosub" on six missions to study the Pine Island Glacier and how changes in ocean temperature were affecting the West Antarctic Ice Sheet.

Using sonar, the submarine picked its way around the glacier and sent back data that created three-dimensional maps that scientists used to determine where and how the warmth of the ocean waters was melting the glacier's base.

"If [the West Antarctic Ice Sheet] were to melt completely, global sea levels would rise by as much as 5 meters," said Stan Jacobs, the U.S. lead scientist on the project.

"Because so little is known about ice-sheet behavior, this research will take us a step further in understanding how ice sheets will contribute to sea-level rise."

***

(CNN) -- When 3-year-old Rowan Isaacson darted away from his father and dived into a herd of grazing horses, it easily could have been the end of the small autistic boy. He was babbling under the hooves of a boss mare.





Rupert Isaacson says he noticed immediate improvement in his son's language skills when he started riding.





"I thought he was going to get trampled," recalled Rupert Isaacson, Rowan's father.





But the horse, Betsy, dipped her head and chewed with her mouth in submission. Isaacson, who had trained horses for a living, had never seen it happen so spontaneously. Rowan had seemingly made a connection.





The Austin, Texas, family had been struggling with Rowan.





His wild tantrums were nearly driving Isaacson and his wife, Kristin Neff, to divorce. All the while, little Rowan was becoming unreachable.





"He would just stare off into space," Isaacson said. "I was worried it was going to get progressively worse and that eventually, he might float away from us entirely. Luckily, right about that time is when he met Betsy."





Isaacson began riding Betsy, a neighbor's horse, with Rowan. He says he noticed immediate improvement in his son's language skills.  Watch Rowan and Betsy »





"He would start to answer. He would start to talk. We would do song games up there on the saddle. I would take books up there in the saddle," Isaacson said.





Autism specialists say that horse riding can be effective in gaining access to autistic children.





Experts make a distinction between the kind of recreational therapeutic riding Isaacson was using with Rowan and hippotherapy, which is a medical treatment that uses horses and is supervised by a licensed speech-language pathologist.





"People perceive it's the interaction with the horse that's making the change. However, the movement of the horse is extremely powerful, and it's that movement that's having neurological impact on the autistic child," said Ruth Dismuke-Blakely, a speech-language pathologist and hippotherapy clinical specialist in Edgewood, New Mexico.





According to preliminary analysis of an ongoing study by Dismuke-Blakely, hippotherapy has been shown to increase verbal communication skills in some autistic children in as little as 18 to 25 minutes of riding once a week for eight weeks.





"We see their arousal and affect change. They become more responsive to cues. If they are at a point where they are using verbal cues, you get more words," Dismuke-Blakely said. "It's almost like it opens them up. It gives us access."





She cautions that a horse's movements can be powerful. For some autistic children, riding too long can overstimulate their nervous system, leading to more erratic behavior.





On Betsy, Rowan was at ease. After about three weeks, Isaacson says, Rowan's improved behavior was translating into the home and outside world as well.





But not consistently.





In late 2004, Isaacson, a human rights activist, brought a delegation of African bushmen from Botswana to the United Nations. Among the men were traditional healers, who offered to work with Rowan.





Isaacson says he was skeptical, but he had experience with the bushmen and allowed the healers to lay their hands on his son.





"I was kind of flabbergasted at Rowan's response. For about four days while they were with him, he started to lose some of his symptoms. He started to point, which was a milestone he hadn't achieved," Isaacson said.





When the tribal healers left, Rowan regressed.





Isaacson says he couldn't help but wonder what would happen if he were to give Rowan a longer exposure to the two things that he seemed to have responded well to: horses and shamans.





"I know it sounds completely crazy," he said. "I just had a gut feeling."





Isaacson took his wife and son to Mongolia.





"It's the oldest horse culture on the planet. Everyone still gets around on a horse there -- so

***

(CNN) -- Authorities arrested at least nine people after a "series of fights" at the nation's biggest shopping mall sent chairs flying and caused after-Christmas shoppers to flee, officials in Minnesota said Tuesday.





Police and security officers at the Mall of America arrested a mix of young adults and juveniles after a food-court fight around 4 p.m. Monday broke up into brawls elsewhere in the shopping center, Bloomington Police Department Commander Mark Stehlik said. At one point, police received reports of up to 10 separate fights, he said.





Video of one incident showed a man picking up a chair to throw as crowds of shoppers, some screaming, fled a mall food court. The video also showed a group of what appeared to be youths brawling before police officers intervened.





Witnesses described a chaotic scene.





"There were drinks thrown on the floor and chairs being thrown everywhere," witness Tess Dessalgne told television station KARE. She reported that "everyone started running toward the fight," while the video showed others leaving the area.





Another woman told CNN affiliate WCCO that she "didn't really know what was going on" when stores unexpectedly began closing down but soon saw police "pushing us all away from Nordstrom (department store)."





"Unfortunately, as we have witnessed at shopping sites across the country this week, large groups of individuals can come together and create bad situations," mall officials said in a statement. "It is very unfortunate to see these incidents occurring, especially during the holiday shopping season when families are out spending time together."





No serious injuries were reported, the statement said. The mall remained open, although some stores closed down temporarily.





Some witnesses told WCCO the fights began after reports that rappers Lil' Wayne and Drake were visiting the mall.





"I've heard that and some other things as far as speculation. I don't know that there's anything to substantiate that," Stehlik said.





Investigators are still working to determine what caused the fight, he said.





"Frankly, at this time, we don't really have any idea, and we might never. It's hard to say what starts a fight," he said.





The mall responded to a query on Twitter by saying, "Drake is not here."





"There was no shooting," the mall tweeted to one person. "Chairs were thrown in the food court resulting in the loud noise you heard."





At one point, more than 30 officers were trying to calm the crowd, Stehlik said. He described the series of fights as a "highly unusual event."





"We kind of pushed people out toward one of the exit doors and out of the mall in an attempt to quell the crowd a little bit," he said. "Once we got everybody out, the whole thing kind of just settled down and went back to business as usual."





The Mall of America describes itself as the largest retail and entertainment complex in the United States. It says it has more than 520 stores, 50 restaurants and attractions that include an aquarium, flight simulator and a spa for children.





CNN's Ashley Hayes and Catherine E. Shoichet contributed to this report.

***

BAGHDAD, Iraq (CNN) -- A few months ago, it seemed liked nothing could stop Iraqi sprinter Dana Hussain from representing her country in the upcoming Summer Olympics.

Iraqi sprinter Dana Hussain was devastated to learn she could not participate in the Beijing Summer Olympics.

Then, the International Olympic Committee banned Iraq from competing because of what it says is the government's political interference in sports.

Hussain cried for hours after hearing the news, which arrived in the form of a letter to Iraqi officials.

"She hasn't stopped. It's like finding out that a close relative has died," said her coach, Yousif Abdul Rahman.

Abdul Rahman attempted to console Hussain by assuring her that she could compete in the 2012 Olympics.  Watch Hussain react to the news Â»

"In this horrible situation," she said, "who can say I'll even be alive in 2012?"

CNN received a copy of the letter sent to Jassim Mohammed Jaffer, Iraqi minister of youth and sports, and Ali Mohsen Ismail, acting secretary general of the Iraqi general secretariat of the Council of Ministers.

"We deeply regret this outcome, which severely harms the Iraqi Olympic and Sports Movement and the Iraqi athletes, but which is unfortunately imposed by the circumstances," said the letter, signed by two IOC officials.  Watch an official explain the decision Â»

The move stems from an Iraqi government decision in May to suspend the nation's Olympic Committee and form a temporary committee to handle its duties.

The Iraqi government thought the committee had not been operating properly and as a result undermined the sporting movement there.

The government said the original committee held meetings without quorums and had officials serving in one-year posts for more than five years. Many of the officials also lived outside Iraq, the government said. iReport.com: See a cartoonist's take on the decision

Emmanuelle Moreau, a spokeswoman for the International Olympic Committee, said it suspended Iraq's national Olympic Committee in June after the government removed elected officials and put in people the IOC didn't recognize.

She said the IOC proposed to the Iraqi government that officials come to the organization's headquarters in Lausanne, Switzerland, "to discuss possible solutions."

But she said they didn't respond. "We're extremely disappointed with the situation. The athletes have been ill-served by the government in Iraq," she said.

Moreau said Iraq missed a Wednesday deadline for the entry of athletes to compete in archery, judo, rowing and weightlifting.  Watch a historian discuss the Olympics in Iraq under Saddam Hussein Â»

She said there is a chance that track and field athletes could compete if the original committee is reinstated. The deadline for the track team to register is at the end of the month. The Games begin August 8.

A former official from the disbanded Iraq Olympic Committee said the IOC's decision was justified because the government interfered with the national committee by suspending it.

The former official spoke on condition of anonymity because of the sensitivity of the subject.

He said he believed that the government suspended the committee out of "jealousy."

The national committee was making great strides, and the government, namely the Ministry of Youth and Sports, wanted control of it, he said.

The seven Iraqi athletes who were to travel to China for the Games' start in August are disappointed by the decision, officials said. They include an archer, a weightlifter, a judoka, two rowers and two sprinters, one of whom is Dana Hussain.

Her coach called the decision unfair and said he blames "everyone": the Iraqi government and the Iraqi and International Olympic committees.

In the end, Abdul Rahman said, the athletes are paying the price.

"It's a shame after all the efforts, ambitions, risks and dangers," he said.

"I wish from the bottom of my heart they would reconsider this unjust decision for the sake of the athletes."

CNN's Mohammed Tawfeeq and Jomana Karadsheh contributed to this report.

***

CISHAN, Taiwan (CNN) -- Taiwan's leader Ma Ying-jeou said Sunday he accepts responsibility for the government's slow response after Typhoon Morakot slammed into the island killing at more than 120 people and unleashing floods, mudslides and misery.



Mourners kneel and pray to the dead as they face the devastated valley of Shiao Lin.



Ma, who has faced heavy criticism from victims of the disaster, ruled out resignation, insisting his government did its best in the face of difficulties, however he pledged an investigation into any irregularities.



"Certainly, I will take full responsibility whatever the blame is because, after all, I am the president of this country," Ma told CNN, saying heavy rains grounded rescue helicopters in the first few days after the storm hit, delaying relief.



"Once the weather was good -- that is the 14th of August -- we were able to evacuate 2,518 people. It's a record," he said.



Hundreds of people still await rescue in remote areas of Taiwan, where torrential downpours, dense fog, rugged terrain and raging rivers have hampered relief efforts. Washed-out roads and collapsed bridges have made some rescue operations impossible



Touring disaster areas, Ma has been confronted by angry survivors, and even provoked a scuffle when he opened a weekend baseball game as protesters demanded he step down.



Ma has offered apologies and promises to do better.



"We will find out not only to correct the mistakes but (also) to punish the people responsible," he said.



Rescue efforts were ongoing Sunday with military helicopters bringing stranded villagers to their waiting relatives.  Watch rescue efforts in Taiwan »



Others, waiting days in anguish for word on their loved ones, lashed out in anger.



"Local officials don't care," one man said. "There are still people there and they don't do anything."



On Saturday, weeping relatives of typhoon victims set up shrines near devastated villages to calm the spirits of the dead and honor the belief that their souls will return home after seven days.  Watch mourners call home souls of the dead »



Morakot hit the island last weekend, dropping 2.6 meters (102 inches) of rain. Before it roared on to mainland China on Sunday, the storm killed at least 123 people in Taiwan.



The death toll could climb to more than 300 after more villagers buried by mudslides and floodwaters are found, Taiwan officials have said.



Southern and central Taiwan were hardest hit by the storm.



Mudslides inundated some places in the south, including the village of Shiao Lin, where 160 homes were lost. Authorities believe hundreds of people could be trapped under five stories of mud in the village.



International aid efforts were mobilizing on Sunday, however these were complicated by diplomatic pitfalls in the face of China's territorial claims over Taiwan, which it considers a renegade province awaiting reunification.



The U.S. military has begun a "modest" humanitarian aid mission to Taiwan with the dispatch of a Marine Corps C-130 cargo plane carrying plastic tarpaulins for shelter, U.S. defense officials said.



Also Sunday, the USS Denver was en route to the Taiwanese coast with additional humanitarian aid and water purification capabilities, the officials said. The Navy ship is expected to arrive Monday, but officials could not say when it will launch its heavy-lift helicopters to drop the aid.



Sources in Washington have said in providing aid to Taiwan, the United States must be sensitive to its territorial relationship with China.



CNN's John Vause in Cishan, Taiwan; Pauline Chiou in Shiao Lin, Taiwan; and Mike Mount in Washington contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- The dramatic developments in Gaza over the past three days have driven Arab citizens to the streets, where they have displayed anger directed first and foremost at their own governments.



A Yemeni protester rips through an Israeli flag in the capital, Sanaa, on Sunday, December 28.



In Yemen, thousands of demonstrators gathered in the capital, Sanaa, shouting slogans in support of Gaza and its residents and burning Israeli and U.S. flags.



They cried out against the League of Arab States, which delayed discussion on the crisis.



One demonstrator told the Al-Jazeera network, "The Arab League is worthless. ... They're all worthless leaders, and they should all go home." Al-Jazeera is based in Doha, Qatar.



Israel has been conducting airstrikes in Gaza for three days, in what they say is retaliation for repeated rocket attacks into southern Israel by Hamas. Hundreds of people have died, mostly Hamas militants, according to Palestinian security forces.



In Sudan, the scene was similar. A woman wearing a Hamas banner around her forehead told Al-Manar TV, "Where are the Arab leaders? Where are their actions? Enough condemnation and finger-pointing. Show Gaza your support."



Students at the University of Qatar boycotted their classes and demonstrated their support for Gaza.  Watch a report from CNN's Octavia Nasr »



One student spoke about what he saw as his moral responsibility: "Our ancestors claimed that the news about the Palestinian disaster reached them late in 1948. We have a responsibility to our children and the future generations. We can't tell them we heard about the Gaza disaster of 2008 but didn't do anything."



Jordan's parliament held a special session in solidarity with Gaza. But one parliamentarian defied the speaker's orders and burned the Israeli flag before stepping on it in the middle of applause from some of his colleagues.



The images played repeatedly on Arab media.



Egypt has been the recipient of much criticism in this crisis. Hamas supporters say Egypt has sold the Palestinians out by being too close and friendly with Israel and the United States.



From Egypt, political analysts retaliated, blaming Hamas for ending the Egyptian-brokered cease-fire, thus inviting the Israeli airstrikes.



One expert speaking to the Dubai-based Al-Arabiya blamed Hamas for "presenting Gazans on a silver plate to the Israeli monster."



He then blamed Syria and Iran for not taking military action to stop the bloodshed in Gaza.

***

(CNN)  -- The first pictures from NASA's Mars Phoenix Lander, which successfully touched down near Mars' north pole Sunday, showed a pattern of brown polygons as far as the camera could see.



The Mars Phoenix Lander took this image of the planet's surface at its landing site Sunday.



"It's surprisingly close to what we expected and that's what surprises me most," said Peter Smith, the mission's principal investigator. "I expected a bigger surprise."



The landing on the Red Planet's arctic plains -- which ended a 296-day journey -- was right on target, a feat NASA's Ed Weiler compared to landing a hole-in-one with a golf ball from 10,000 miles.



The landing -- dubbed the "seven minutes of terror" -- was a nerve-wracking experience for mission managers, who have witnessed the failure of similar missions.



In mission control at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, they celebrated the lander's much-anticipated entry.



"It was better than we could have imagined," Barry Goldstein, project manager for the Phoenix mission, told CNN.  Watch the celebration at mission control »



The Phoenix's 90-day mission is to analyze the soils and permafrost of Mars' arctic tundra for signs of past or present life.



The lander is equipped with a robotic arm capable of scooping up ice and dirt to look for organic evidence that life once existed there, or even exists now.



"We are not going to be able to answer the final question of is there life on Mars," said principal investigator Peter Smith, an optical scientist with the University of Arizona. "We will take the next important step. We'll find out if there's organic material associated with this ice in the polar regions. Ice is a preserver, and if there ever were organics on Mars and they got into that ice, they will still be there today."



The twin to the Mars Polar Lander spacecraft, Phoenix was supposed to travel to Mars in 2001 as the Mars Surveyor spacecraft. They were originally part of the "better, faster, cheaper" program, formulated by then-NASA Administrator Dan Goldin to beef up planetary exploration on a lean budget.



But Polar malfunctioned during its descent into Mars' atmosphere in 1999 and crashed. An investigation concluded that as many as a dozen design flaws or malfunctions doomed the spacecraft.



The failure of that mission, as well as another spacecraft called the Mars Climate Orbiter the same year, led to NASA to put future missions on hold and rethink the "better, faster, cheaper" approach. Mars Surveyor went to the warehouse.  Watch the challenges the mission faced »



But all was not lost. In 2003, Smith proposed a plan to re-engineer the Mars Surveyor and fly it on a mission to look for signatures of life in the ice and dirt of Mars far North. Mars Phoenix, literally and figuratively, rose from the ashes of Surveyor.



Engineers set to work, testing and retesting the onboard system to ferret out and fix all the flaws they could find. iReport.com: Send your photos, video of space



"We always have to be scared to death," Goldstein said. "The minute we lose fear is the minute that we stop looking for the next problem."



The team was concerned about the Phoenix landing system. NASA had not successfully landed a probe on Mars using landing legs and stabilizing thrusters since the Viking missions in the late 1970s. The other three successful Mars landings -- Pathfinder in 1997 and the Spirit and Opportunity rovers in 2004 -- used massive airbags that inflated around the landing craft just before landing to cushion the impact.  Learn about NASA's past missions to Mars »



The Phoenix doesn't have airbags because the lander is too big and heavy for them to work properly.



Its landing site was targeted for the far northern plains of Mars, near the northern polar ice cap. Data from the Mars Odyssey spacecraft indicate large quantities of ice there, likely in the form of permafrost, either on the surface

***

KABUL, Afghanistan (CNN) -- The Afghan government will change a law that critics say legalizes rape within marriage for Shia Muslims, President Hamid Karzai told CNN Thursday.



Critics had feared that Afghanistan's new Shiite law would set the nation backward.



Karzai told CNN's Fareed Zakaria that he and others were unaware of the provision in the legislation, which he said "has so many articles." Karzai signed the measure into law last month.



"Now I have instructed, in consultation with clergy of the country, that the law be revised and any article that is not in keeping with the Afghan constitution and Islamic Sharia must be removed from this law," Karzai said.



The president's comments came one day after several hundred demonstrators faced off over the law, which critics say prevents women from declining their husband's request for sexual intercourse and essentially legalizes marital rape.



The measure applies to the 20 percent of Afghans who are Shia Muslims. It was part of a nearly 270-page piece of legislation that was written to solidify the identity of the Shia minority in Afghanistan.



The bill languished in the country's parliament for a year-and-a-half before it was recently pushed through in what one legislator called a "chaotic" vote.



Women from various parts of Afghanistan marched in the capital Wednesday to protest the law, which has also been criticized by human-rights groups and Western leaders, including U.S. President Barack Obama.  Watch Karzai react to controversial law ahead of Thursday's comments »



When the demonstrators reached a mosque housing a school run by a conservative Shia cleric who helped implement the law, students came out yelling and cursing and pelted the women with gravel, said Fawzia Koofi, a female member of the Afghan parliament.



Koofi said police did little to protect the women, but a spokesman for the country's interior minister disputed that.



"Police played a completely neutral role," said spokesman Zamarai Bashiri. "The police were able to control the demonstrations very well."



About 300 to 500 women protested the law while 600 to 700 demonstrators marched in support of it, he said. The marchers who opposed the law included several female members of Afghanistan's parliament.



"Both sides were able to express their thoughts and expressions," Bashiri said.



The law has drawn much criticism.  Watch a report on the law »



"I think this law is abhorrent," Obama said recently. "We think that it is very important for us to be sensitive to local culture, but we also think that there are certain basic principles that all nations should uphold, and respect for women and respect for their freedom and integrity is an important principle."



French President Nicolas Sarkozy and German Chancellor Angela Merkel also weighed in.



"We very much hope that the draft piece of legislation is to be withdrawn," Merkel has said.

***

KABUL, Afghanistan (CNN) -- A top Taliban commander has issued a new threat to foreign aid workers, saying that under the insurgent group's new "constitution" they will execute them as spies or hold them in exchange for the release of Taliban fighters.



Taliban militants pose with their weapons as they drive their car in Wardak province. (File photo)



In an exclusive telephone interview Friday night with CNN, Mohammed Ibrahim Hanafi said the Taliban intelligence wing was actively gathering information on foreign aid workers. "If we get someone, that is how we will deal with it under our new constitution," he said.



He added that he was telling "Afghan brothers not to work with NGOs."



In the 15-minute interview, arranged by an intermediary for CNN, Hanafi repeated the Taliban's pledge to keep girls out of public schools.



"Our law is still the same old law which was in place during our rule in Afghanistan," he said. "Mullah Mohammad Omar was our leader and he is still our head and leader and so we will follow the same law as before."



"In my opinion," he added, "Taliban aren't allowing girls to go to schools because Taliban want women to preserve their respect by staying in their homes, not to work as laborers for others."



Dozens of crimes across the country, especially acid attacks, have marred the opening of the new school year in Afghanistan. Afghan girls have been burned and scared randomly with acid as punishment for going to school. More than 600 schools did not open this year because of security issues, according to the Afghanistan Education Ministry.  Watch what females face in Afghanistan »



The schools that did open, however, remain defiant. Young women admitted to CNN being fearful but also said they are determined to get an education and better their lives. It is a sentiment echoed by their principal, a 35-year veteran of Afghanistan's girls schools.



"I am asking those who close schools and throw acid on girls to let the children of this country go to school because it's crime to close the schools, a crime against the children of this country," said Safia Hayat, principal of the Zarghona Girls School in Kabul.



Hanafi, meanwhile, went on to discuss possible reconciliation talks with the Afghan government.



"I don't think there can be any discussion of peace until the the foreigners leave Afghanistan," he said referring to the presence of coalition troops.



While he seemed to confirm that some reconciliation talks were ongoing, Hanafi also said he wondered what kind of peace was possible as long as Afghans are still dying in NATO bombardments.



Hanafi described himself as a commander in the southern province of Helmand, but announced a new Taliban offensive in the north was about to begin and that he would be playing a key role there.

***

Editor's Note: Reese Witherspoon, the Academy Award-winning actress, is honorary chairman of the Avon Foundation and is employed by Avon Products as its global ambassador.



Reese Witherspoon says she wants to banish the myth that young women are not at risk for breast cancer.



(CNN) -- Every three minutes in the United States, a woman is diagnosed with breast cancer.



As a woman, a mother, and a daughter, I find that statistic terrifying. I was never naïve about breast cancer, but hearing this statistic put it all into perspective.   Women close to me have battled the disease and are now soldiers in the greater fight against it. But the moment I heard "every three minutes," I felt vulnerable and scared as I realized that anyone is susceptible.



The only way for me to ease my fears was to take action. I needed to educate myself and others on this disease. As the Honorary Chair for the Avon Foundation, I had resources at my fingertips. I had access to an entire organization that is dedicated to giving back to women and educating people. So I started asking, "What do I need to know?"



It was through that curiosity that I found out the most important fact in breast cancer: Early detection saves lives.



According to the Avon Foundation Breast Cancer Crusade, there is a 97 percent five-year survival rate when breast cancer is caught before it spreads to other parts of the body. When breast cancer first develops, there are usually no symptoms, which is why women need to perform self-exams regularly and contact their doctor upon noticing even the smallest change.



Of course talking about breast cancer and breast health is a personal thing. I too am a private person but encourage all women to break through their reservations and talk to their doctors and physicians.



We must also banish the myth that young women are not at risk for breast cancer. At the Avon Walk in Washington, I met young survivors who were diagnosed in their 20s, an age when most women are graduating from college and just starting their lives as full adults.  Watch Reese and Larry at the Avon Walk »



Women in their 20s and 30s should have a clinical breast exam by a health professional at least once every three years and women 40 and older should have an exam every year.



I am passionate about fighting this devastating disease. I fight for my mother, myself, my children and future generations of women, so one day we will not have to be afraid of breast cancer. I began my fight by learning important first steps in breast cancer detection, and will not end my fight until every woman can stand together saying we are breast cancer free.



More than anything else, I have faith -- faith we will find a cure. I saw this commitment in the faces of the women in Washington -- in the faces of the women walking and the women and men who stood on the sidelines encouraging the 3,500 participants to the finish line. I was cheering right along with them, screaming for action to find a cure.  Avon's next walk will take place in New York City on October 4 and 5.

***

(CNN) -- The relatives of a woman who died on the floor of a New York hospital say they plan to file a $25 million lawsuit against the city and the facility where Esmin Green died.



Esmin Green's daughter, Tecia Harrison, says disciplinary action against hospital workers is not enough for her.



Green's family is also calling for criminal charges against hospital workers, who they say failed to help her and then attempted to cover up the circumstances of her death.



"My sister was killed twice," said Brenda James, Green's sister. "First, by those who neglected to offer her the needed health care. Secondly, she was killed by those who tried to cover up this criminal action."



The family has retained a lawyer, Sanford Rubenstein, to file the suit.



Green, a Jamaican immigrant, had been involuntarily admitted to the Kings County Hospital in Brooklyn, New York, on June 18 for what the hospital described as "agitation and psychosis."



Surveillance camera footage captured the mother of six sliding off of a chair and onto the floor of waiting room of the hospital's psychiatric emergency department, where she lay convulsing for more than a hour before anyone helped her.



The footage appears to capture several employees passing by her as she lay on the floor struggling.



The New York Civil Liberties Union said last week that the hospital falsified medical records for the timeframe covering Green's visit, describing her as awake and going to the bathroom when she is seen on the video.  Watch Green's family after seeing video »



Seven workers, including doctors, nurses and security guards, have been fired or suspended since Green's death, the city's Health and Hospitals Corporation said. It's not clear whether any of the employees have appealed the disciplinary actions against them.



The agency said it referred the matter to law enforcement and is cooperating with the investigation.



"We failed Esmin Green and believe her family deserves fair and just compensation," it said in a statement.



Autopsy results have not been released.



Green's daughter, who reluctantly watched the footage for the first time this week, says disciplinary action doesn't make up for her family's loss.



"Firing is not enough for me, for my brothers. They don't know this wonderful woman they took away from us," said Tecia Harrison, who traveled to New York from Jamaica to attend her mother's funeral Sunday.



"We want them to pay for it," she said.



CNN's Mary Snow contributed to this report

***

(CNN) -- A Pennsylvania soccer mom was chatting with a friend via webcam when she was shot to death by her husband, who then went upstairs and shot himself, police said Friday.



Pistol-packing soccer mom Meleanie Hain was shot dead while chatting with a friend on a webcam, police said.



Meleanie Hain, 31, made national headlines last year as the mother who carried a loaded, holstered handgun to her 5-year-old daughter's soccer game.



She was found dead in her Lebanon, Pennsylvania, home along with her husband, Scott Hain, 33, on Wednesday evening, Lebanon police said.



Hain was in her kitchen talking with a friend via webcam just before her death, police said.  Watch why Hain caused controversy »



The friend, who police will not name, was looking away from the computer screen when he heard a shot and a scream, police said. He turned back to the monitor, he told police, and no longer saw Meleanie Hain but instead saw Scott Hain firing several rounds from a handgun toward where his wife had been.



Police said that the woman's body had already fallen to the floor by the time the friend turned back to the screen.



Scott Hain then went upstairs to a bedroom, where he shot himself in the head with a 12-gauge shotgun, police said.



Meleanie Hain was shot several times with a 9 mm handgun, police said. Her fully loaded 9 mm handgun was found in her backpack hanging on the back of the front door.



The couple's three children were home at the time of the killings, police Capt. Daniel Wright said. They were unharmed and took refuge at a neighbor's house before police arrived, he said.



Investigators have confiscated the webcam and computer, but cannot review what the friend says he saw because the online conversation was not recorded.



The death of the couple came four months after Meleanie Hain told her attorney she was separating from her husband, her attorney, Matthew B. Weisberg, told CNN Thursday. However, police said the couple still appeared to be living together.



Meleanie Hain drew media attention on September 11, 2008, when she carried a Glock strapped to her belt to her daughter's soccer game.



Nine days later her permit to carry a gun was revoked by Lebanon County Sheriff Michael DeLeo, who claimed she showed poor judgment by wearing the weapon to a child's game. County Judge Robert Eby later reinstated the permit.



CNN's Edmund DeMarche and Susan Candiotti contributed to this story

***

(CNN) -- North Korean leader Kim Jong-il has added his brother-in-law to a military board in a move analysts say paves the way for an heir, according to South Korea's state-sponsored Yonhap news agency.

Kim Jong-il has named his brother-in-law Jang Song Thaek to a top military board.

The addition of his kin to the powerful National Defense Commission also solidifies his standing, Yonhap said.

Kim was reappointed Thursday as chairman of the military board in his first major public appearance since a reported stroke in August. His brother-in-law, Jang Song Thaek, is considered his right-hand man, according to Yonhap.

Jang, who has been married to Kim's sister since 1972, currently serves as a director of the Workers' Party, Yonhap said.

"Kim wants to keep the military in check and secure loyalty to both the military and the party," Cha Doo-hyeogn, a North Korea expert, told Yonhap.

Kim also increased the number of members in the military agency to 13, from eight, Yonhap said.

"Overall, the power of the National Defense Commission was strengthened," Seoul's Unification Ministry spokesman, Kim Ho-nyoun, told Yonhap in a briefing.

There were no other major changes in the new parliament, which signifies that Kim, 67, is prepared to maintain the status quo as he readies someone to take over from him, analysts told Yonhap.

Kim's recent health problems and long absence from public functions have prompted speculation on whether he is ready to groom an heir to the world's only communist dynasty. But the secretive nation shields its internal affairs from international scrutiny.

Analysts told Yonhap that Jang may serve as caretaker for Kim's successor, who will possibly be one of his three sons.

***

(CNN) -- The actors of "Slumdog Millionaire" won outstanding performance by a cast in a motion picture, and Heath Ledger posthumously won best supporting male actor at the 15th annual Screen Actors Guild Awards on Sunday.



"Slumdog Millionaire" actors Irrfan Khan, Dev Patel, Freida Pinto and Anil Kapoor accept the film-cast prize.



"It was overwhelming enough to be nominated, but to win this is unbelievable," said "Slumdog" actor Anil Kapoor of the award given to him and his cast mates at Los Angeles' Shrine Exposition Center.



The cast's win comes two weeks after the modestly budgeted movie, about a poverty-raised orphan in Mumbai who goes on the Indian version of "Who Wants to Be a Millionaire," won the Golden Globe award for best drama. The film has been nominated for 10 Oscars, including for best picture.



"The Curious Case of Benjamin Button," the big name when the Academy Award nominations were announced earlier this week, was shut out at the SAG Awards. The movie leads all films with 13 Oscar nods.



Ledger, who was 28 when he died just more than a year ago of an accidental prescription drug overdose, won his award for his role in "The Dark Knight," 2008's box-office king.



Ledger's performance was widely praised, and he won the Golden Globe for best supporting actor two weeks ago. He also is considered the front-runner for an Academy Award for supporting actor.  Watch a roundup of SAG winners »



Actor Gary Oldman accepted the SAG award for his friend. "He was an extraordinary young man with an extra ordinary talent, and it is wonderful that you have acknowledged that and honored that talent tonight," Oldman said.



Josh Brolin, one of four actors who lost to Ledger on Sunday night, compared the SAG awards to "a big campfire we're all showing up for."



"It's not a competition," Brolin said. "We're just happy to party together."



Meryl Streep echoed Brolin's words when she accepted for best leading actress in a movie for her role in "Doubt."



"Can I just say there's no such thing as the best actress," Streep said.



Streep was dressed as if she might ready for Brolin's campfire, wearing black pants, a black blouse and no jewelry except for earrings.



"I didn't even buy a dress," she said.  Watch SAG awards fashion »



Sean Penn, chosen as best leading male actor in a movie for "Milk," told the four actors he won against that he wept when he watched their work. "You're stunning," Penn said.



Penn's took a brief political turn when spoke about "Milk," the story of a gay San Francisco politician assassinated in 1978.



"This is a story about equal rights for all human beings," Penn said. iReport.com: Share your thoughts on the Oscar race



Kate Winslet's win as best supporting actress for her performance as Hanna Schmitz in "The Reader" could help her best actress Oscar nomination for the same role.  Watch an overwhelmed Winslet backstage »



Winslet was nominated for SAG's lead actress in a movie for "Revolutionary Road," but lost to Streep.



The SAG Awards are watched closely by Oscar fans, but they're not always a guarantee of Oscar gold. Last year, for example, Julie Christie won the SAG's outstanding lead actress for her work in "Away From Her." At the Academy Awards, she was beaten by Marion Cotillard, who played French singer Edith Piaf in "La Vie en Rose."



Most of the SAG trophies handed out during the first half of Sunday night's show were for TV categories.



Paul Giamatti and Laura Linney  won for their roles in HBO's "John Adams." Giamatti got the trophy for best male actor in a TV movie or miniseries for his role as President John Adams, while Linney won the female actor award for her portrayal of first lady

***

(CNN) -- Five members of Liverpool's backroom staff have followed manager Rafael Benitez in committing their long-term futures to the Premier League title challengers.





Rafael Benitez's backroom staff have followed his example in signing new contracts with Liverpool.





Benitez signed a new contract with the club last week, following months of speculation, keeping him at Anfield until 2014.





Now the Spaniard's lead has now been followed by assistant manager Sammy Lee, first-team coach Mauricio Pellegrino, goalkeeping coach Xavi Valero, fitness coach Paco de Miguel and chief scout Eduardo Macia -- all of whom have agreed contract extensions of at least two years.





"I said when I signed my own deal recently that it was a priority to sort out the future of the technical staff," Benitez told PA Sport.





"We work extremely well as a team, and continuity is essential if we are to build on the progress we have made this season and move the club further forward. I am delighted we have been able to sort out the contracts," he added.





The news caps a remarkable month for the club, who have thrashed Manchester United and Aston Villa to re-enter the Premier League title race and also crushed Real Madrid 5-0 on aggregate to reach the quarterfinals of the Champions League.

***

(CNN) -- The announcement that Chicago, Illinois, will not host the 2016 Olympic Games took the hopeful wind out of many in the Windy City.



Dreams of hosting the 2016 Olympics were dashed for many Chicagoans. But for others, the news was welcome.



But for almost half of the city's dwellers, the International Olympic Committee's decision was winning news.



A spokeswoman for No Games Chicago, a grass-roots organization opposed to hosting the Olympics, said she was "relieved" by the vote Friday in Copenhagen, Denmark.



Chicago's Olympic fever, spotty as it was, broke abruptly when the city was the first of four final contenders to be knocked out of the running.



The prospective host cities had been whittled down to four finalists -- Chicago; Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; Tokyo, Japan; and Madrid, Spain. The bid went to Rio de Janeiro, making it the first South American city to host the Olympic Games.



Chicago had been seen as a front-runner in recent days, especially after it sent to Copenhagen America's biggest guns -- President Obama and his popular wife, Michelle -- for a last-minute sales pitch.



But a poll taken by the Chicago Tribune and CNN affiliate WGN revealed in early September that 45 percent of the city residents didn't want the Olympic Games. And 84 percent of Chicagoans objected to the idea of public money being used to support the effort.



Earlier this week, about 250 Olympic-bid protesters gathered in front of City Hall, WGN reported. A sign in the crowd read: "Have the audacity of nope."



Many who gathered for the bid slapdown were affiliated with No Games Chicago, which sent three delegates to Copenhagen to state their case.



After the vote, however, spokeswoman Francesca Rodriguez said No Games Chicago is "in no way taking any pleasure in this" and feels "sympathy" for those who are disappointed.



"In reality, Chicagoans who were for the Games and those who were against them were committed to the same goal: Working hard for what they thought would be best for the city of Chicago in the coming decades," she said.



"We're glad that the city won't now be burdened by the distraction of the Olympics at the expense of improving Chicago's schools, transportation, parks and the numerous other public policy initiatives on which the city needs to be focused."



Those who believe the Olympics can bring lasting change to a city -- beyond the spike in economic activity during the event -- are often misguided, suggested economist Rob Baade of Lake Forest College in Lake Forest, Illinois.



"There is no reason to expect that the Olympics, or any mega-event, is going to induce a sustainable boost in the economy," he said. "The cost overruns are pretty legendary. Costs are generally understated and the gains overstated."



One Web site set up to rally against bringing the Olympic Games to town relied as much on humor as it did reason. Its name: Chicagoans for Rio 2016.



The site showcased unflattering head-to-head comparisons, such as "Naked people dancing" vs. "Chubby people eating." The increasing budget deficit in Chicago was contrasted with a $0 total for Rio.



"If you're a Chicagoan, Rio's budget deficit does not matter," the site said.



"It would be exciting to host the Olympics here in Chicago. But you know what would be even better? Rio de Janeiro," the site announced. "Just let Rio host the 2016 Olympics. We don't mind. Honest."



Wish granted.

***

Washington (CNN) -- The stars were out Sunday night as the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts bestowed its prestigious Mark Twain Prize for American Humor on actor and comedian Will Ferrell.





The award, which was established in 1998, honors comedians who have shaped American society with their work, as Mark Twain once did.





Ferrell himself commented on the importance of the prize, telling CNN it's "the only legitimate award that recognizes comedy," and he was honored to receive it.





Fellow comedians Jack Black, Tim Meadows, Ed Asner, Paul Rudd, Andy Samberg, Conan O'Brien and Molly Shannon showered Ferrell with praise at the ceremony.





"When you see Will Ferrell on a marquis, he's going to give you 90 minutes to two hours of fascinating entertainment," said Asner, who worked with Ferrell in the movie "Elf."





In the movie, Will "was so steeped in his character that I had to believe in mine," Asner said.





"He's a blast. I mean, he's always coming up with new stuff," said actor Rudd, who co-stared with Ferrell in "Anchorman: The Legend of Ron Burgundy"





He's, "just fun to watch, and he's very good at keeping it together."





O'Brien took a different approach -- the backhanded compliment.





"None of us are here for Will," he said. "We're here because Will's very powerful. We fear Will. Let's get that straight, okay? I'm angry. And afraid. I'm here out of fear."





Also in attendance were senior administration officials, including White House Chief of Staff William Daley, Transportation Secretary Ray LaHood, Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius, and Office of Management and Budget Director Jacob Lew.





Past winners include Tina Fey, as well as Richard Pryor, Bob Newhart, Lorne Michaels, and Steve Martin.

***

(CNN) -- An Ohio inmate, convicted of killing and dismembering a 22-year-old woman in 1991, was executed Tuesday using a new, untested one-drug method of lethal injection, state officials said.





Kenneth Biros, 51, was pronounced dead at 11:47 a.m. at a prison in Lucasville, Ohio, the state attorney general's office said in a written statement.





His last words, according to Department of Rehabilitation and Correction spokeswoman Julie Walburn, were: "Sorry from the bottom of my heart. I want to thank all of my family and friends for my prayers and who supported and believed in me.





"My father, now I'm being paroled to heaven," Biros said, according to Walburn. "I will now spend all of my holidays with my lord and savior, Jesus Christ. Peace be with you all. Amen."





Biros' execution is the first in Ohio since September, when the governor and federal courts halted capital punishment in the state after a botched attempt to execute another prisoner, Romell Broom. The prison staff could not find a suitable vein for the injections.





The one-drug method had never been tried on a U.S. death row inmate. It relies on a single dose of sodium thiopental injected into a vein. A separate two-drug muscle injection was available as a backup, officials said. The one-drug method has been used to euthanize animals.





The same drug, sodium thiopental, at a much lower dosage, is the first ingredient in the three-drug method previously used in Ohio, as well as in all but one of the other 34 states that allow the death penalty.





Some capital punishment opponents claim the sodium thiopental, which renders the prisoner unconscious, can wear off too quickly, and that some prisoners would actually be awake and able to feel pain as the procedure continues.





Biros' execution was initially scheduled for 10 a.m., but preparations were delayed as officials waited for a ruling from the U.S. Supreme Court on Biros' request for a stay, Walburn said.





The high court without comment denied the request about 10 a.m., and "we were about an hour behind" in preparations, she said. The execution began around 11 a.m. Biros died about 10 minutes after the drugs began to flow, she said, but he was not officially pronounced dead until later.





Biros, 51, was convicted of killing Tami Engstrom near the town of Warren. He met the woman at a bar and offered to drive her home, and later admitted robbing and attempting to rape her.





Prosecutors said Biros dismembered Engstrom and spread her body parts around northeast Ohio and neighboring Pennsylvania. The crime was "particularly heinous, with 91 pre-mortem wounds," according to the clemency report. Biros claimed he acted in a fit of drunken rage.





He was involved in litigation challenging the three-drug method and received a stay of execution in 2007 because of his involvement in the suit, according to minutes of a November parole board meeting posted on the Ohio Department of Rehabilitation and Corrections' Web site.





His attorney, Timothy Sweeney, had also objected to the one-drug method, saying it was unconstitutional. Sweeney wrote in an appeal that use of the one-drug method would amount to "human experimentation, pure and simple."





But the 6th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals last month denied Biros' request for a stay, concluding that since Ohio had announced it would change its protocol and rely on the one-drug method, Biros' argument regarding the three-drug method was moot.





Biros' last meal was served about 7:45 p.m. Monday -- pizza with extra cheese, mushrooms, onions and green peppers, along with onion rings, deep-fried mushrooms, Doritos, french onion dip, blueberry ice cream, Dr Pepper and cherry pie, Walburn said.





During its meeting last month, members of the state parole board heard a prerecorded statement from Engstrom's mother, Mary Jane Heiss, according to the meeting minutes. Heiss said her health was not good but she was saving her strength to attend Biros

***

Vancouver, British Columbia (CNN) -- Thousands of Canadians turned the streets of Vancouver into rivers of red on Sunday in jubilant celebration of the country's Olympic gold-medal win in men's ice hockey.





Canada defeated the United States 3-2 in overtime, with national hero Sidney Crosby scoring the winning goal in the hard-fought game.





The win capped off a historic Winter Olympics for the host nation just hours before the closing ceremonies. The country took home a record 14 gold medals -- the most in Winter Olympics history.





Fans spilled out of the exits at Canada Hockey Place after the medal ceremony, "clanging cowbells and screaming like madmen," according to Sports Illustrated's Luke Winn.





"I'll remember this day for the rest of my life as will all Canadians who are here tonight," one fan at a Vancouver viewing told CNN affiliate CTV in Canada.





Watch fans celebrate in a sea of red and white





Police told liquor stores in Vancouver to close early at 2 p.m. -- about an hour before the game ended -- ahead of the celebrations. Lines of people were seen at one store 30 minutes before the game even started.





In Toronto, officials were forced to close down streets due to swelling masses of revelers waving Canadian flags and standing shoulder-to-shoulder in some of the city's main intersections, video showed. And in downtown Vancouver, people swamped the city's main Robson Square.





Strangers high-fived each other in the street and fans were seen jumping onto cars, hugging each other, singing the country's national anthem and chanting "Ole!" and "This is our game."





The celebrations were the culmination of a Winter Games that got off to a rocky start, with warmer-than-usual weather that forced delays in some early contests, and the death of Georgian luger Nodar Kumaritashvili during a training run hours before the opening ceremony.





The feeling of celebration and resiliency was being carried into the night's closing ceremonies. Canadian figure skater Joannie Rochette -- whose mother died of a heart attack just days before her bronze-medal-winning performances -- was set to carry the nation's flag before thousands in attendance at BC Place.





CNN's Steve Almasy contributed to this report.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- A 16 year-old Australian schoolgirl is hoping to achieve a sailing feat that is so tough it has brought many experienced men and women to the brink of death.



Sixteen-year-old Jessica Watson of Australia plans to sail solo around the world



Jessica Watson, of Mooloolaba, Queensland, plans to set out on a solo round-the-world sailing mission in November -- and hopes to become the youngest person to ever sail non-stop around the world alone.



But with the impending weeks of solitary confinement, freeze-dried foods, changing conditions and threat of injury, illness or death -- why would she want to do it?



Watson told CNN her inspiration had come from fellow Australian Kay Cottee, who became the first woman to sail the globe alone, without stopping; and German-born Australian Jesse Martin, who still holds the record as the youngest person to do it.



Martin achieved his feat in 1999 aged 18 (at the finish), and subsequently wrote a book titled "Lionheart: A Journey of the Human Spirit."



"I read Jesse's book and that was inspiring. If you had to put it down to one thing that encouraged me to do this that would be a good one," Watson said.



Since deciding she wanted to take on what she describes as the "Everest of the ocean" about four years ago, Watson has been doing all she can to gain the best preparation for the adventure.



She has already sailed "mock solo" across the Tasman Sea, which flows between Australia and New Zealand, at 15 and has been sailing since she was 8 years-old.



"I've been talking to people [who have done it] about it all, and I'll get in some good solo miles before I go," she said.



Despite the experience she has gained, Watson admits there are some aspects of the journey that remain unknown.



"There are definitely things I'm nervous about -- like the big waves and gear failure. But, it's amazing the detail of preparation we can get and what you can do with technology.



"Though, there's no telling how you'll handle yourself when you're out there for eight months until you're actually out there."



Watson's journey around the globe is part of what seems to be an increasingly popular trend among young sailors.



Seventeen year-old Briton, Mike Perham is currently part-way through his attempt to sail the world solo for charity.



Perham is at present stuck in Tasmania, Australia, with gear problems and faces the daunting task of sailing around Cape Horn during the winter season.



Still, he has come a long way when many people had raised concerns about the voyage before he departed.



On his daily blog, Perham writes about the challenges of being at sea alone, "The first few days at sea are always the worst -- the lack of sleep leaves me feeling drained all the time but I know I just need to keep pushing on, knowing that I'll soon acclimatize and that things are going to get better and better."



Another teenager -- 16 year-old Zac Sunderland, who is from California -- is also on a mission to become the youngest sailor to achieve the feat. Sunderland has also progressed from his departure point in California, through the Panama Canal, and into the Atlantic Ocean.



For Perham, Sunderland and Watson it was the high level of communications technology at the teenagers disposal as they sail that has convinced their parents to allow them to attempt their journeys. Would you allow your teenage daughter or son to sail solo around the world? Tell us below in the SoundOff box



On Sunderland's Web site his father, Laurence, said, "Although Zac is alone as he sails, he really has so much help.



There will always be people who will disagree with our decision to let Zac go on this trip. It was his idea and it is his desire to continue."



Watson said her parents had also

***

HONG KONG, China (CNN)  -- Bamboo, woven into the shape of human stomachs. Red, sky blue and orange pencil shavings glued onto a large canvas form a woman's traditional hair clip. A collage of magazine clippings, drawings and found materials depict Cambodia's tumultuous modern history.

Leang Seckon's "Prison Guard" depicts Duch, who is facing a genocide tribunal starting Tuesday.

These are a few of the offerings on hand in Hong Kong at one of the first large international exhibitions of artists from Cambodia. The work by 14 artists varies in practice-- video, photography, collage, wood shavings, paper, bamboo and painting-- as well as in themes, from reflecting on the Southeast Asian nation's genocidal Khmer Rouge regime to the emerging modern Cambodia, with traffic lights and all.

"Every artist in this show is referencing ancient tradition and recent history," said Phnom Penh-based curator Erin Gleeson, noting the wall-size depiction in folded paper of the serpent Naga (which in Cambodian culture represents the people's mythical birth) to a collage of 20th-century Cambodia and its six different regime changes.

"The show is looking at the present -- 'Forever Until Now' is the title -- and it is this lineage of the past, you see that in the show, and then you see artists that arrive at the present," she added.

The show opens Friday and runs through March 22 at 10 Chancery Lane Gallery. Gallery owner and director Katie de Tilly said she believed it was important the artists get international exposure.

" ... it's really at the beginning of their art emergence. Obviously, they've had a very hard history," she said. "This is really the beginning of contemporary Cambodians who are expressing very original ideas in their artworks and I think that that's what makes it very unique and to show to the rest of the world."

Cambodia, which lost an estimated one-quarter of its population or at least 1.7 million people -- including an estimated 90 percent of its artists -- under the 1970s Khmer Rouge regime, has a small but growing artistic community: there are some 50 practicing artists out of its 14 million people, Gleeson said.

The genocide and ensuing war, which only ended in the last decade or so, stifled the development of the arts in one of the world's poorest countries.

"The legacy of that is now in every facet of a developing society," said Gleeson, who noted the country had no art books when she arrived in 2002 on a fellowship to teach art history. "There's an absence of infrastructure for them, there's an absence of materials, there is no art store. ... they are quite inventive about mixing materials to make them of a higher quality or last longer, but in many cases they don't know archival techniques."

The harsh weather conditions -- a dusty, hot season and a rainy monsoon -- add to the trying work conditions.

"Everything's against them," she added. "Their parents in many cases are coming from a really disadvantaged background, as the majority of the country is economically."

Some of the art included in the show looks at the Cambodia of today, such as Leang Seckon's "Three Greens" -- an acrylic painting showing children in school uniform crossing a road with a yellow light, red light and three green lights, along with cows and roosters. The piece shows the changes in a country that recently got stop lights, with animals, people and traffic mingling on the main roads of the capital.

Sopheap Pich, a Cambodian-American whose family migrated to the U.S. in 1984, works with bamboo and rattan -- materials often used in Cambodian traditional farming and crafts -- to make sculptures.

His work, "Cycle 2," is the joining of the stomachs of an infant and an elderly person that for him brought up ideas of Cambodian traditional village life.

"You belong to each other, you help each other out," he said. "But also, if you look at the

***

PADANG, Indonesia (CNN) -- As many as 4,000 people could be buried under the rubble in the aftermath of the devastating earthquakes in Indonesia, United Nations officials said Saturday.





Indonesian soldiers crawl under the rubble of a collapsed building to search for victims.





Local disaster management officials put the death toll from the quakes at 540.





Earlier U.N. figures that put the death toll at 1,100 were just estimates, said El-Mostafa Benlamlih, a U.N. humanitarian coordinator.





A 7.6-magnitude quake struck Sumatra on Wednesday and a 6.6-magnitude earthquake hit Thursday morning in the same region.





Wednesday's quake reduced buildings to rubble in the city. People used hammers, chisels and bare hands to dig through debris for survivors and belongings.  Watch CNN's Arwa Damon report on search-and-rescue efforts »





Staff at a local hospital treated the injured outside the semi-collapsed building as bodies of the dead lay in makeshift morgues.





An area that now looks like a flattened mess of destruction was, just days ago, a group of three villages.





Officials believe 90 percent of the residents -- as many as a few hundred people -- were buried, just one piece of the devastation from two large earthquakes that struck Indonesia in as many days.





The stench of dead bodies fills the air.





Indonesia's health ministry and ministry of social affairs said Friday they believe thousands remain buried beneath rubble.





The West Sumatran capital, Padang, with about a million residents, is near the epicenter.





CNN's Arwa Damon spoke with a few dozen survivors from these villages in the area, most of whom only made it through because they weren't home during the quake. They remained huddled together in a tent, in shock over what had happened.





One older woman said eight of her family members were buried. She had been buried up to her chest and had to dig herself out.





Another survivor, a 27-year-old man, told CNN four of his family members were killed. His home used to be on top of a cliff in the area. Now, there is only mud.





Search and rescue teams are working with the military, but so far, only 25 bodies have been recovered.





With each passing day, the scope of the devastation grows.  Watch aftermath at house leveled by quake »





President Obama spoke with Indonesian President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono on Friday after trying several times to reach him, the White House said.





Obama received an update on the situation on the ground from Yudhoyono in the five-minute call.





The White House statement says Obama "offered, on behalf of the United States, to do everything we can to help alleviate the suffering and provide assistance to the relief operation."





The U.N.'s Holmes told reporters Thursday that hundreds are believed to be injured. "These numbers, I fear, will rise as more information becomes available," he added.





Telecommunications are difficult in the region, roads are cut off, and the hardest-hit area, including Padang, lacks power and other services, Holmes said. In addition, heavy rainfall has hindered search and rescue efforts.





Some have suggested the damage may be worse than that of a 6.3-magnitude quake centered in the central Java city of Yogyakarta in May 2006, Holmes said. That temblor killed more than 5,000 people and triggered fears of an eruption from a nearby volcano.





Many people wandered the streets of Padang stunned and dazed. Some searched the rubble for survivors.





Staff at a local hospital treated the injured outside the semi-collapsed building as bodies of the dead lay in makeshift morgues.





Several of the hospital's buildings were severely damaged. Damage in the town itself was spotty; some buildings remained intact near others in ruins.





"Aftershocks can be just as devastating as the initial quake," said Adjie Fachrurrazi, emergency response coordinator in Indonesia for the CARE aid organization, in a statement. "After an earthquake of this size, we know the immediate needs are going to be getting safe water, food and emergency supplies to the survivors. The question now is:

***

(CNN) -- A 14-year-old boy allegedly beaten at a boot camp in China for young Internet addicts was in critical condition Thursday, less than three weeks after a youth at a different camp died, Chinese state media reported.



People sit at a wireless cafe in Beijing, using their laptop computers.



Internet use has skyrocketed in China, especially among teens. And Chinese parents have turned to hundreds of training camps that offer to wean their children -- mostly teenagers -- from excessive Internet use.



There are at least 400 private rehabilitation clinics or camps in the country, according to a recent survey by the China Youth Internet Association, adding that China has 10 million teenage Web addicts.



But the Chinese Ministry of Health says none of the private rehab clinics are legally registered.



The parents of Pu Liang, the injured teen, had sent him to a camp called the Anti-traditional Education Training Center on August 4 near Chengdu, capital of the southwestern province of Sichuan, Chinese media reported.



Pu allegedly was beaten three times between August 4 and August 11. Police discovered the boy in solitary confinement last week and he was taken to a hospital, according to media reports.



His parents accused a counselor at the camp and Pu's peers of repeatedly hitting him, Chinese media said, adding that particular camp has been closed.



"He is suffering from water on the lungs and kidney failure," Pu's father, Pu Shiwei, told the publication China View on Wednesday. "All injuries were done by the people at the camp."



The training center denied that a counselor beat the youth, contending Pu was hit by other campers because he couldn't get along with them, China View reported.



Authorities in Zhongjiang county, where the camp is located, said they detained the counselor after a report of alleged abuse from the parents of another child.



The man who established the military-style camp, Wu Yongjing, admitted to the BBC that youngsters were sometimes subjected to "physical punishment."



"Physical punishment is an effective way to educate children -- as long as it can be controlled," he said in an online story Wednesday.



The injured youth's mother told Chinese media that her son "got addicted to online games and frequented Internet cafes ... at the end of last semester, my son said he didn't want to go to school."



The mother, Li Shubing, saw an ad for the training camp and hoped her son could be helped, she told China Daily. The parents signed a contract with the center and paid 5,000 yuan (about $730), she said.



In a separate incident, 15-year-old Deng Senshan died after his parents sent him to a summer training camp for his Internet addiction, according to Chinese news agency Xinhua. That camp was in south China's Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region.



Authorities detained several counselors and were investigating the incident. Injuries found on the body indicated the teen had been beaten, Xinhua reported.



China is in the process of classifying Internet addiction as a mental illness, according to China Tech News. Medical experts have called for laws and regulations to govern treatment.



Last month the government banned electro-shock therapy as treatment for Internet addiction after abuses were reported. Internet users claiming to have received the treatment wrote in blogs and forums about being tied down and subjected to shocks for 30 minutes at a time.



"The market of Internet addiction treatment in China is in a total mess due to lack of diagnostic standards and treatment guidelines," said Tao Ran, director of the country's first Internet addiction clinic at Beijing's Military General Hospital.



China started to pay attention to the prevention of addiction in 1994, when his clinic opened, Tao said.



Data from the Beijing Public Security Bureau indicate that about three-quarters of juvenile criminals in China say they are addicted to the Internet.



The proposed Diagnostic Criterion of Internet Addiction makes clear that the Internet-addicted should be treated in medical units with psychiatric departments, Tao said.



"Internet addiction is treatable. Through about

***

(CNN) -- Italian champions Inter Milan have unveiled new signing Samuel Eto'o, with the Cameroon striker immediately being forced to deny suggestions from the Italian media that he has ever had a problem with new coach Jose Mourinho.



Samuel Eto'o parades his new Inter Milan jersey after completing his move from Barcelona.



Eto'o, who completed his switch from Barcelona on Monda, denied he has issues with Portuguese coach Mourinho and insists he never insulted his team's style of play after a Champions League match between Barca and Chelsea.



"I never said those words that were attributed to me," he told a press conference. "There is also a tape which proves it and, in any case, that was after an intense game.



Top 20 summer transfer targets



"Now I am happy to be here, for me it is a great honor to play for a coach like Jose. It has been years that I have been trying to play under Mourinho and I have never managed it."



Mourinho also laughed off suggestions the pair do not see eye to eye, insisting they have very similar personalities. "I have met Samuel six times in three years, and I never cared to know if he really said something not very nice about me," said the Nerazzurri coach.



"Why? Because he is like me: after losing an important match he doesn't go home happy. The year after this game I wanted to take him to Chelsea, but I wasn't allowed to. I am very happy to have him with us and I'm not talking only as Jose Mourinho but on behalf of the whole squad.



Eto'o has signed a five-year contract with Inter as part of a swap deal that saw Zlatan Ibrahimovic move the other way.



Inter will also receive 45 million euros ($64m) but the 28-year-old, who only had a season left on his contract with Barca, has shrugged off suggestions this proves Ibrahimovic is the more highly rated of the two.



"Ibra is a great player but I am Samuel Eto'o and my past and my victories talk for me," said Eto'o. "I don't like parallels being drawn. "I believe the victories I have earned until now can contribute to giving my name the right value."



Eto'o scored 125 goals in 144 games for Barcelona, firing them to a string of titles, including three leagues, two Champions Leagues and a Copa del Rey success, in his five seasons with the club.



Eto'o has spent his entire career in Spain since leaving Cameroon in 1997, playing for Real Madrid, Leganes, Espanyol, Mallorca and Barcelona.



However, he expects he will adapt easily to the Serie A style. "It's true I have always played in Spain but I have great experience of international matches," continued Eto'o.



"Here in Serie A there are big players because great players are in teams where they know they will be able to win things. I am here because it is a very competitive league.



"It's true Ibra and Kaka have left Italy, but there are lots of great players in Italy and I am convinced I have made the best choice."

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Ready for your Super Bowl party? Sure, you have drinks, hot wings, maybe even a favorite jersey. But do you have an M-16, a Kevlar helmet and body armor?



Pittsburgh Steelers fan Sheresa Coleman will watch the Super Bowl from the USS Mahan in the Gulf of Aden.



Not everybody is watching the game from the comfort of the family den.



Hundreds of thousands of U.S. troops will be deployed in remote war zones, on lonely oceans and at overseas bases -- all far away from an NBC affiliate. So the military is going out of its way to make sure that many soldiers, Marines, airmen and sailors can watch Super Bowl XLIII live.



"Super Bowl day has really become a holiday, military-wise, over the last couple years," said Petty Officer 1st Class Grant Shannon.



Shannon is from a town about an hour north of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, but is on board the USS Mahan, a destroyer deployed to stop pirates working off the coast of Somalia.



When they finish their duties, sailors like Shannon can head to the ship's mess to watch the Pittsburgh Steelers take on the Arizona Cardinals. The same is true for soldiers, Marines and airmen in combat zones.



"We can broadcast to every forward operating base in Iraq and Afghanistan," said Andreas Friedrich, the deputy director of Armed Forces Radio and Television Services, which has been sending the Super Bowl to troops overseas since the first Super Bowl, broadcasting it live since 1981.  Watch how troops will be able to watch big game »



All told, about 1 million American military personnel and civilians overseas will be able to watch the big game.



Some of those watching will be benefiting from the same technology that makes Predator Unmanned Aerial Vehicle missions possible.



A global broadcast system will beam the game to ships and submarines far out in the Pacific Ocean. GBS is how pilots in the United States can watch and fly an unmanned vehicle over a battlefield halfway around the world, and then feed what they see to the battlefield commanders on the ground below.



Raytheon, the company that runs the system, will use one of its video channels to feed the game to several U.S. Navy submarines and ships in the Pacific. Tens of thousands of sailors will be able to see the game via GBS, which first broadcast a Super Bowl in 2003, according to Guy DuBois of Raytheon.



"It's a pretty amazing feeling, when you get to do that, to watch it on the ship and knowing that everybody else is back home having a good time, just like we will be," said Petty Officer 3rd Class Ryan Wright, a Cardinals fan from Arizona. Wright is on board the USS San Antonio, an amphibious transport dock that is part of the anti-piracy task force.



A Steelers fan on board the USS Mahan agrees.



"It would be nice to be home and watch the game in my hometown," said Seaman Sheresa Coleman of Pittsburgh. "But it's a great honor to support and defend the Constitution of the United States."



One thing Wright and the other overseas Super Bowl viewers will miss is the legendary Super Bowl commercials. Friedrich said the Armed Forces Radio and Television Services would have had to pay high fees for the rights to broadcast the Super Bowl commercials to an international audience.



Instead, the multimillion-dollar ads that some people consider the best part of the game will be pre-empted in favor of Department of Defense-produced ads and public service messages.



Still, even without seeing football-playing Clydesdales or movie-shilling monsters, those in uniform appreciate being part of America's unofficial midwinter holiday.



"We have lots of sailors and Marines on board who have followed the season," said Cmdr. Eric Cash, the commander of the USS San Antonio. "Any time we can enjoy some traditional American sports like the Super Bowl, it's always a great time for us, a good mental break and also a good time for people to get together and socialize."



Just

***

(CNN) -- A judge has ordered mediation in the case of a teen girl who says her family threatened to kill her for converting from Islam to Christianity.



Rifqa Bary, 17, ran away from her family in Columbus, Ohio, in July. She claims her father threatened to kill her.



The 17-year-old girl, Rifqa Bary, ran away from her family in Columbus, Ohio, in July and took refuge in the home of the Rev. Blake Lorenz with the Global Revolution Church in Orlando, Florida.



Bary's parents want her back home.



At a court hearing Thursday in Orlando, the girl's parents denied all the allegations against them.



Also at the hearing, Judge Daniel Dawson of the Orange County Juvenile Court ordered the girl and her parents to seek the mediation within 30 days. The judge had previously ruled that the girl will remain in Florida foster care until the allegations are resolved.



The parents, Mohamed and Aysha Bary, could not attend the hearing in person but listened through a telephone conference as their lawyer spoke for them. They denied they ever threatened to kill their daughter because she converted to Christianity.



Mohamed Bary told CNN he believes a lot of false information has been circulated about the case.



"We wouldn't do her harm," the father said, adding that he knew his daughter was involved with Christian organizations.



"I have no problem with her practicing any faith," he said. But Bary conceded he would have preferred that his daughter practice the Muslim faith first.



The teen had heard of pastor Lorenz and his church through a prayer group on Facebook. The girl's parents reported her missing to Columbus police, who found her two weeks later in Florida through cell phone records.



The teenager, in a sworn affidavit, claims her father, 47, was pressured by the mosque the family attends in Ohio to "deal with the situation." In the court filing, Rifqa Bary stated her father said, "If you have this Jesus in your heart, you are dead to me!" The teenager claims her father added, "I will kill you!"  Watch the teen talk about her fears »



Also at Thursday's hearing, the judge sealed a report on the girl from the Florida Department of Law Enforcement and issued a gag order for attorneys in the case.



At one point during the hearing, the girl's court-appointed guardian, Krista Bartholomew, told the court: "This is not a holy war but a case about a broken family."



Outside the courthouse after the hearing, a Muslim activist and several Christian activists exchanged words over the case.  Watch the heated exchanges »



Another hearing is scheduled for September 29 if the family is not able to resolve the conflict through mediation.

***

MOSCOW, Russia (CNN) -- A Ukrainian general has been arrested in connection with the murder of a journalist nearly nine years ago, the country's president said Wednesday.



Ukraine President Viktor Yushchenko has labeled Georhiy Gongadze's killing the country's most important case.



Gen. Alexei Pukach was detained Tuesday in connection with the killing of Georhiy Gongadze, who was abducted in September 2000 and later found decapitated.



The Gongadze killing is the country's most important criminal case, President Viktor Yushchenko said in a statement on his Web site.



"To me, it's a question of honor to resolve the murder of Georhiy Gongadze. It's a question of whether or not good or evil prevails," Yushchenko said.



Organizations ranging from the European Union to the Committee to Protect Journalists have demanded that Ukraine bring the journalist's killers to justice.



Pukach had been on the run for years before he was seized Tuesday in a joint operation by the Security Service and the prosecutor general's office, Yushchenko said. He has already been interrogated once and is cooperating with the investigation, the president added.



The Committee to Protect Journalists welcomed the arrest, it said in a statement to CNN.



"As the suspected organizer of the killing, Pukach could point the investigation to those who ordered the crime nine years ago," said Nina Ognianova, the organization's Europe and Central Asia Program Coordinator.



"Only with the masterminds behind bars would Ukrainian authorities be able to reverse the impunity in Gongadze's assassination," her statement said.



Three former police officers were convicted last year of killing Gongadze and given jail sentences of 12 to 13 years, the Committee to Protect Journalists said at the time.



There has long been suspicion that top Ukrainian government officials were involved in the murder.



"Gongadze, the pioneer editor of critical Internet newspaper Ukrayinska Pravda (Ukrainian Truth), had long angered authorities with his highly critical reports detailing corruption in (former President Leonid) Kuchma's administration," CPJ said last year, when the three men were sentenced.



Kuchma has long denied involvement in the killing.



Pukach was a high-ranking interior ministry official at the time Gongadze disappeared.



His former boss, Interior Minister Yuri Kravchenko, was found dead at his country house in March 2005, days before he was to be questioned by prosecutors over the killing of the journalist.



The Ukrainian security service, the SBU, suggested Kravchenko killed himself, and the dead man's successor quoted a suicide note, according to Russian media.



"Please forgive me, I've become a victim of political intrigues of President Kuchma and his people. I'm leaving you without a twinge of conscience. Farewell," then-Interior Minister Yuli Luzenko quoted the note as saying.



But Myroslava Gongadze, the slain journalist's widow, noted Kravchenko had two bullets in his head.



"I think it has to be investigated," she said of the death.



"He was the main player of my husband's murder ... he was the person who [took] the order and who gave the order," she told CNN at the time of Kravchenko's death.



Kuchma had been implicated in the murder by critics who cited secretly recorded audio tapes in which the president allegedly ordered his staff to get rid of the journalist. Kuchma vehemently denied those charges.

***

HONG KONG, China (CNN) -- Watching the news out of Mexico is causing a case of déjà vu for Dr. Lo Wing-Luk.





The sight of people wearing masks became common in Hong Kong after the SARS outbreak of 2003.





"Seeing the people in masks today reminds me of Hong Kong during SARS," said Lo, an epidemiology expert who was among those on the frontline during the outbreak of SARS in Hong Kong in 2003, which within three months infected 8,000 and killed nearly 800 in Hong Kong, China, Taiwan and Toronto.





Historically, Hong Kong has been center stage for recent infections that threatened to spiral across the world, such as SARS and Avian Influenza, which first struck and killed people here in 1997.





Southern China -- with the close proximity of its rural agriculture to population centers and globally connected transportation -- has been an ideal conduit for past animal diseases that spread to humans and then to the rest of the world.





But with the outbreak of swine flu in Mexico and the United States, Hong Kong suddenly finds the world looking to it for lessons on how to stop the spread of disease.





"Managing a (potential) pandemic can't be from the top down, it must be from the ground up," said Lo, a former Hong Kong legislator representing the medical community.





In the early days of SARS, cooperation was lax between Hong Kong health officials and public officials across the border in mainland China, where the live animal wet markets in Guangdong province is suspected in the virus' jump to humans.





"One of the most important lesson of SARS was the importance of good communication," says Dr. KY Yuen, head of the microbiology department of Hong Kong University, which found the first human cases of Avian Influenza in 1997 and first identified SARS in 2003.





"There were outbreaks in the middle to late November in Guangdong Province, but the first cases were reported in Hong Kong three months later," he said. "We could have reduced the impact (of SARS) if there had been better communication" between Hong Kong and mainland China health authorities.





The communication channels have improved between China and Hong Kong, health officials said, as well as better surveillance of the disease. Every visitor who comes through Hong Kong International Airport now is scanned by infrared monitors and immediately isolated if suffering from a fever or respiratory illness.





"Quarantine and isolation of people (suspected to be ill) is crucial now," Yuen said.





As the disease spreads, there is a conflict between the need for a quick response and the time required for appropriate scientific study -- which can result in some bad decisions, Yuen said. For example, in the case of SARS health experts wore full-body protection suits because of initial hunches the disease was being spread by airborne causes.





More people were exposed to the disease because of the harried medical staff's improper use of the cumbersome equipment. "It turned out globes, masks and hand washing were far more effective" than a breathing apparatus, Yuen said.





"Presumptions are dangerous," he added.





If Hong Kong is any example, governments who fail to meet the challenges of an outbreak will face rising public heat. In July 2003, half a million Hong Kong residents took to the streets to protest the government, in part because of frustrations over the response to the SARS outbreak, says Cecilia Chan, director of the Center of Behavioral Health at Hong Kong University -- adding to the woes of the already beleaguered administration of former Hong Kong Chief Executive Tung Chee Wah, who later stepped down in the middle of his second five-year appointment.

***

DETROIT, Michigan (CNN) -- It's a stimulus plan on sneakers.



The NCAA men's Final Four at Detroit's Ford Field could generate $30 million to $50 million from visitors.



The NCAA men's basketball Final Four couldn't come at a better time for the city of Detroit -- the hard-hit capital of the U.S. auto industry at the center of the state of Michigan's economic woes.



The 12-percent unemployment rate here is the highest in the nation, and with the Big Three automakers all needing multibillion-dollar government bailouts in an attempt to stay afloat, the future isn't much brighter, some say.



"We need some help," said Detroit resident Mark Franklin, who took his 5-year-old son to Friday's Hershey's College All-Star Game at Ford Field. "There are too many people out of work already. Even if you have a job, you know someone who doesn't."



Enter the Final Four and a quartet of powerhouse college basketball teams -- all seeking NCAA brass. Connecticut, Michigan State, North Carolina and Villanova have won a combined nine NCAA championships and reached 31 Final Fours.



But more important to the city are the visitors -- and the wallets -- that college basketball's marquee weekend will bring to Detroit.



City leaders expect 100,000 fans to visit -- staying in hotel rooms, renting cars and spending an anticipated $30 million to $50 million.



The participation of Michigan State adds icing on the cake.



The school's campus sits just 90 miles away, in East Lansing, giving the Spartans a home-floor advantage as they give locals some added pride on a special weekend.



MSU helped things along mightily by advancing to the finals Saturday, defeating Connecticut 82-73. In the national championship game, the Spartans will play North Carolina, 83-69 victors over Villanova later Saturday.



More than half the Michigan State players are from in-state and many have felt the impact of the region's economic woes.



"I have family that are unemployed right now," said sophomore guard Durrell Summers, who starred at Detroit's Redford Covenant High School. "[For the Final Four] to bring that kind of money in, hopefully it can help open up jobs for my family and for other families because some people got laid off for no reason." Watch Elaine Quijano's report on a GM dealer's perspective



Detroit's first Final Four is the latest in a series of big sporting events for the city.



The Pistons have hosted a pair of NBA Finals in suburban Auburn Hills, while the NHL's Red Wings have won two Stanley Cups at downtown Joe Louis Arena.



Baseball's Tigers have played in a World Series and its home, Comerica Park, hosted an MLB All-Star game. This weekend's host venue, Ford Field, was the site of Super Bowl XL and Oakland Hills Country Club was home to the 2004 Ryder Cup and the PGA Championship last August in nearby Bloomfield Hills.



This is the first year of a new stadium configuration for the Final Four, requiring host domes to use all permanent seating to meet a 70,000-seat minimum.



"You see people driving up just to take a picture of the Final Four sign on (Ford Field). It's something to be proud of," Franklin said. "Now we need city leaders to take advantage of it."

***

SAMSON, Alabama (CNN)  -- As the crime scene tape starts to come down in this small Southern town, the residents are leaning on one another for comfort and the strength to move on.



The shooter, Michael McLedon, killed his mother before killing others.



First Baptist Church, a few feet from the neighborhood where Michael McLendon, 28, opened fire Tuesday, welcomed members of this close community Wednesday night for a prayer service.



"It's what community is about, isn't it? Crying together. Holding each other," a pastor said.



It's hard for many to believe the shooting rampage could happen in this town of about 2,100 people.



Authorities said McLendon went to three towns, slaying 10 people. He started in his hometown of Kinston, killing his mother, before moving on to open fire in Samson and finally Geneva.



McLendon was once a police officer in Samson, the small town hit hardest by the deadliest crime in Alabama history, authorities said.



His nearly hourlong assault ended at the Reliable Metal Products plant in the last town, 24 miles from where it began and where police said McLendon engaged in a shootout before killing himself inside the building.



In the aftermath of the rampage, among those seeking comfort at First Baptist Church was Josh Mathews.



He was driving down the street around the time of the shootings. "Could've been anyone -- just missed the gunfire, could've been any of us," Mathews said.  Watch report from CNN's Brooke Baldwin »



After the shootings, he found out one of the victims was a friend. It will be hard to move on, he said. But "you have to. He was like the happiest dude in the world. He would've wanted us to move on and remember him for who he was."



High school baseball coach Chris Reid said he knew almost all the victims.



"Everybody knows everybody. Everybody's always been willing to go out of their way to help people in need around here, no matter what the case may be. It's just a small town where you consider your friends as family."



Reid was walking out of the Big-Little convenience store when he stopped to talk to CNN. A little more than 24 hours ago, the gas station was the site of one of killings.  Watch deputy talk about his loss »



Reid was at baseball practice when he heard the shots.



"They were one block from us, " Reid said, adding that while driving, he saw a man killed in the street. iReport.com: On the scene as officials investigate



"It really hasn't set in yet," he said. "It is still kind of a dream where you wait for it to not be real, to be over. But it's a fact, something we have to go through."



Inside the church service, Steve Sellers, a visiting pastor, spoke to several hundred in attendance, praying for God to give the community strength. Some sat in the pews and sobbed.



"I want to thank you, Lord, that in the coming days that this community walks through that process of healing, that there is a God who carries them through that valley," he said.



Sellers also thanked town leaders, medical personnel and local law enforcement while asking the question that's been on so many minds: "I don't know what set a young man off like that, but I, too, want to pray for his family. We also come, knowing Lord, you taught us to forgive those who trespass against us."  Watch how state copes with "shock and disbelief" »



While members of this tight-knit town may never fully understand how McLendon could've committed this crime, many find comfort in faith and friends.



As one pastor put it, "Thank God for this town."

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- One year after the collapse of banking stalwart Lehman Brothers, the administrator of its European business says the full impact on creditors may not be known until 2010.



One year ago cameras caught shocked Lehman Brothers' employees leaving the building with boxes.



Tony Lomas, a partner for PricewaterhouseCoopers, has been sorting through the financial remains of the banking giant's European division since last September, when it became clear the bank would file for bankruptcy.



He says administrators are still some months from finalizing the total amount owed to Lehman's creditors.



"That will come at some point, maybe in the course of calendar 2010," Lomas said. "But up until that point we won't know the quantum of claims are. We have very complex trading relationships with a very large proportion of our counterparties. And we've got six thousand or so live counterparties out there."  Watch the full interview with Tony Lomas »



Within a week of Lehman's collapse, Lomas sold Lehman's equity trading business to Nomura.



The deal saw about half of Lehman's 5,000 employees in Europe move over to the Japanese investment bank. The agreement didn't include Lehman's trading positions, the infrastructure, the intellectual property, or the building.



"One of the big reasons why we retained the infrastructure here was because we knew we were going to be dependent on it for many years to come because of the complexity of what we were unraveling," Lomas said.



Some 400 to 500 Lehman's staff still work in the London office for its administrators, poring through trading records and unwinding complex financial positions. "We expect a significant number of those people to be with us for a reasonably significant time to work through all this," Lomas said.



Among those who lost their jobs from Lehman Brothers, some such as former employee Caroline White, have turned their backs on the financial sector.



White has since forged a new career in fashion and plans to unveil her first piece on Tuesday night.



The former banker hasn't put her last career completely behind her. Her collection includes a laptop bag with the Lehman's logo.



"I themed it with a Lehman's theme because I think its quite appropriate. I wanted to show where I have come from, and where I am going," the designer said.



The future is less clear for the London-based administrators who say their job will not be done for several years.



"This could well take more than 10 years to resolve, all the issues," Lomas said. "By that time, it will outdate me."



He is confident creditors will receive some of their money. In the past year the administrators have recouped $9 billion dollars in cash, most of which has been invested in government-backed securities. "Our priority is to keep it safe and make sure we don't lose it," Lomas said.



One year on, he said the job hasn't become any easier.



"Reflecting back on the astonishment if you like of being appointed administrator here in the UK and contemplating what lay ahead of us, I don't think I underestimated or understated the complexity of the task. It has proved to be every bit of that."



"There remains a very significant amount of complex still work to do," he added.



CNN's Jim Boulden contributed to this report

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN) -- Michael Jackson's mother fired the lawyers helping her fight for control of her son's estate, but her new lawyer missed a key hearing where the judge gave more power to the men she is opposing.



Katherine Jackson, with Michael in 2005, is challenging the appointment of Michael's estate trustees.



Katherine Jackson replaced lawyers Burt Levitch and Londell McMillan with Adam Streisand, a lawyer known for his expertise in Los Angeles probate cases.



"The family came to a decision before they called me," Streisand said. "They felt they needed a different perspective and fresh look at how this case was being approached."



But Streisand arrived at court Thursday minutes after Los Angeles Superior Court Judge Mitchell Beckloff ended a hearing in which he granted a request from estate special administrators John Branca and John McClain for more authority to make deals on behalf of Jackson's estate.



"I want this estate to move forward and I want these creditors to be dealt with," Beckloff said. "And while we are proceeding in this posture, I want Mrs. Jackson to have information about what is going on and I don't want to be in court all the time."



The process of probate of Jackson's will, which named Branca and McClain as executors, has been slowed since soon after the pop star's June 25 death by numerous legal challenges filed by Katherine Jackson's lawyers, led by Levitch.



Howard Weitzman, lead lawyer for the estate's administrators, expressed optimism that the two sides would be able to work better toward a settlement with Streisand in charge.



The estate's administrators were able to make a series of deals expected to bring in at least $100 million to the estate this year, mostly through a documentary movie that premieres next week.



Katherine Jackson's legal team has asked that a member of the Jackson family "have a seat at the table" as a third executor.



They've also raised questions in sealed court papers about possible conflicts of interest that might prevent Branca and McClain from controlling the estate.



Streisand said the Jackson family was frustrated with the inability "to get this case going."



He indicated Katherine Jackson still planned to challenge Branca and McClain's control of her son's wealth.



Under the 2002 will, Michael Jackson's three children and his mother are the chief beneficiaries of his estate, while unnamed charities will share in 20 percent of the wealth.



Streisand said when he met with Katherine Jackson and the children to discuss the case, they were united.



He said Jackson patriarch Joe Jackson was not present at the meeting and he's never talked with him.



Joe Jackson appeared frustrated earlier this month when he attended his first hearing in the probate process, suggesting the lawyers should be more aggressive in court.



Streisand said the three Jackson children are doing "absolutely wonderful."

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN)  -- Dressed as Santa, Bruce Jeffrey Pardo walked up to his ex-in-laws' home in Covina, California, on Christmas Eve and knocked on the door.



Bruce Jeffrey Pardo was sought for a Christmas party shooting before taking his own life, police said.



An 8-year-old girl, elated to see Santa, ran toward the door.



That's when, police say, Pardo lifted a gun and shot her in the face.



Pardo, 45, with a gun in one hand and a wrapped present in the other, began shooting indiscriminately, police said at a news conference Thursday.



He sprayed the living room with bullets.  Watch police describe the child getting shot »



Nearly 25 friends and family members were at the home for an annual Christmas party.



Some ran, some took cover under furniture, some broke windows in an effort to escape -- one woman jumped from the second-story of the home, police said.



Neighbors heard gunfire and called 911 shortly before 11:30 p.m. Police said they arrived within three minutes to find the home engulfed in flames.



Police said Thursday afternoon that six bodies had been recovered. The Los Angeles County coroner's office later said two more bodies had been recovered. The names of the victims have not yet been released by authorities.



Police said they have not accounted for three people: Pardo's ex-mother-in-law, ex-father-in-law and ex-wife -- whom he recently divorced. The 8-year-old, whose injuries indicate the bullet went straight through her face, is recovering at a hospital in Los Angeles, police said.



"She has a very, very severe injury to her face. It's not life-threatening, but she's got a very tough road ahead of her," Lt. Pat Buchanan of the Covina Police Department said Thursday.



A 16-year-old with a gunshot wound and the woman who jumped out the window were also being treated at the hospital.



Police believe that after Pardo stopped shooting he unwrapped his gift -- a home-made device used to spread fire -- and used it to set the house ablaze.  Watch firefighters on the scene of the inferno »



Buchanan said the device was "something we have never seen before." Covina Police Chief Kim Raney described it as a pressurized tank attached to another tank filled with accelerant.



Police believe that after Pardo set fire to the home, he changed into his regular clothing, went to another relative's home in the nearby Sylmar area and committed suicide.



Authorities identified Pardo's body, said Buchanan.



Police have not released the identities of any of his alleged victims.



At the news conference Ed Winter, assistant chief Los Angeles County coroner, said the recovered bodies were "severely burned and charred," making it necessary to use dental and medical records, and X-rays to establish identities.



The intense fire caused the top floor of the two-story house to collapse onto the first floor, according to Winter.



Raney said Pardo's former in-laws regularly have a party Christmas Eve and that one neighbor always arrives dressed as Santa. This year, that neighbor was away, police said.



Police suggested marital problems as a possible motive for the attack and said they believe Pardo and his wife of one year finally settled a contentious divorce last week.



Authorities said Pardo's name was given to them by people who were at the party.



Police also said they recovered multiple weapons from inside the house.

***

New York (CNN) -- Staring down a smoking homemade bomb and dismantling it is dangerous enough. Doing it with news cameras rolling on a busy Saturday night in the middle of Times Square is something Det. Patrick LaScala of the New York Police Department swears never entered his mind.





Until the following day.





"You're home the next day, and you're really thinking about it. Then, you start to put the pieces together and you think, 'Wow,' " LaScala said in an exclusive interview.





LaScala was manipulating the police robot that laid the groundwork for one of his partners, Det. Raymond Clair.





"This was the first time that I went down on a vehicle, and I saw clocks and wires and gas and propane. I identified it as a bomb, and I had to look twice," Clair said.





After 13 years as a bomb tech, that night was the one Clair says he'll remember the most.





Clair and LaScala are part of New York's elite bomb squad, a unit whose size is a closely guarded secret.





CNN was given special access to the unit in order to find out what a more typical day can be like.





During one recent 16-hour shift, I watched the same five-man team who worked the bungled bomb plot in Times Square check their equipment, catch up on paperwork and make sure Dan-O, their explosives-sniffing dog, was raring to go. The K-9 is named for a member of the squad who died in the 9/11 attacks when one of the twin towers collapsed.





On a busy side street outside their Manhattan offices, neighbors watched them go through their paces with the robot.





"We think they're great," one man said.





Another passerby snapped a picture of the robot with her cell phone.





"Is that the robot that checks out bombs?" she asked. It was.





But robots, as sophisticated as they are, can only do so much. They're capable of blowing out windows, blasting a suspicious package to bits, photographing an object from several angles and sending those images to investigators. The squad doesn't want to publicize more specific details. Still, a human touch often can't be avoided.





With help, bomb techs first crawl into an 85-pound protective suit that covers their bodies from head to toe.





The feet nearly look like those of a platypus, the material is stiff and hot, and the chest plate is heavy. A helmet is cinched on around the neck, and an air hose keeps outside air flowing into the mask. Put on gloves, and it's hard to imagine that anyone in such bulky gear could maneuver and dismantle possible bomb components. But that's what they're trained to do.





"The more you do, and the more you get involved, the better you'll get when it's the real thing," Clair said.





Det. Greg Abbate also was there for the "real thing" in Times Square. He said his training kicked in.





"There's a strong bond between us. We go to a job, there's very little talk. Everyone knows what they have to do," he said.





Despite the immense dangers associated with the work, whenever the unit checks out a suspicious package, bomb technicians jockey for the opportunity to suit up.





"We actually have arguments over who's taking the job," added Abbate.





When CNN traveled with them on a call, it was Abbate's turn to wear the gear.





The bomb squad was called to check out a backpack found in a park near a police headquarters checkpoint.





The team sped to the scene with sirens screaming. Other units ringed the perimeter. X-rays were taken. Abbate moved in. This time, he determined that this time, there was nothing to it.





Sgt. John Ryan said it's necessary to assume the worst until the team moves in.





"Everything is a bomb until we say it's not a bomb, " said

***

LAS VEGAS, Nevada (CNN) -- An intense manhunt was under way Monday for Chester Stiles, a 37-year old man whom police say is a suspect in the videotaped rape of a 3-year-old girl four years ago.



Chester Arthur Stiles, 37, of Nevada is being sought as a suspect in the videotaped rape of a 3-year-old girl.



Also Monday, Stiles' former girlfriend told CNN she believes she put him in contact with the girl.



Tina Allen said she  is "disgusted" and "mortified" at her role in bringing them together.



Nye County Sheriff Tony De Meo said Friday the girl has been found and is safe. He said the child's mother was cooperating with authorities.



De Meo addressed Stiles directly: "Turn yourself in to your local law enforcement agency. Understand this: Law enforcement not only has a long arm but a long memory. You will not be forgotten by members of this agency or any other law enforcement agency."



Stiles' former girlfriend said she is stunned by the allegations.  Watch Allen describe her first impression of Stiles »



Allen said she and Stiles had been in an on-again, off-again relationship for 10 years and that he was good with her children.



"He said he'd been in the Navy and, you know, I was looking for a strong guy to represent to my sons what I thought they needed to be," Allen said.



Allen took Stiles to a crowded apartment where her son and daughter lived. Also living in the apartment were a family friend and her 3-year-old daughter, who allegedly was victimized by Stiles.



"I'm disgusted. I'm ashamed, embarrassed, mortified," Allen said. "I regret every, every step I ever took; I feel bad for the baby."



Todd Allen, Tina Allen's son, told CNN he recognized his old apartment from scenes in the video. He said his mother and Stiles spent time together there.



Todd Allen said nobody realized the child may have been abused.



"She's what you'd expect a little girl in elementary school to be like," he said.



He said he never witnessed Stiles physically assault anyone.



"But I have seen him verbally and mentally assault many people," Todd Allen told CNN.



Looking back, Tina Allen said there were some warning signs. She said Stiles hit her once but she didn't file a police report.



She said she blames herself. "How could I not know? Why couldn't I have recognized something? Why are all these people going through this torture now because of me?" Allen asked.



Allen ended her relationship with Stiles a few months ago. She said she believes it will be difficult for police to find him.



"He will hide out in mountains if that's what it takes, he will hide out in a crowd, he'll find somebody who hasn't heard anything and stay there," she said. "He has skills. He knows how to hunt, I mean hunt with a gun, a knife, a bow."



Allen said Stiles stopped by her house last week for a friendly visit before his name was linked to the videotape. She said his appearance had changed. She said his hair was longer and he had put on weight.



Stiles, a resident of Pahrump, Nevada, is a former animal trainer, authorities said. De Meo said the FBI also is seeking him in a separate matter involving state charges of sexual assault and lewdness with a minor under 14.



The man who claimed to have found the tape in the desert and held it for at least five months before handing it over to authorities turned himself in Sunday to Nye County officials.



Darren Tuck, a Nevada resident who allegedly showed the tape to others before giving it to police, faces a possible sentence of 10 years to life for exhibiting pornography and another one to six years for possession of child pornography, according to De Meo.



Tuck's attorney, Harry Kuehn,

***

(CNN) -- Somali government forces have seized control of a central town from an al Qaeda-linked Islamist militia, a spokesman for Somalia's president said Thursday.



Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has offered aid to Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed, Somalia's president.



"Bulo Burde is now under the control of government forces after our forces overran a stiff resistance at the entrance bridge of the town by Al Shabaab fighters," said Abdulkadir Mohamed Osman, communication director for Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed, Somalia's transitional president.



Despite the announcement, residents said heavy fighting continued Thursday and the town is still divided between pro-government forces and Al Shabaab fighters.



The ongoing exchange of heavy-weapon fire between the two sides has trapped people in the town, residents said.



"Everyone inside this house is scared because heavy shells are raining in the town," said one resident, Sahra Muse.



Bulo Burde is about 155 miles (250 kilometers) southeast of the Somali capital of Mogadishu.



The United States is supporting the Somali government's fight against the insurgents, including providing weapons to government forces. Al Shabaab is on the U.S. list of terror organizations because of its ties to Osama bin Laden's al Qaeda network.



The United States is concerned that Somalia's weak government could fall to the Islamist insurgency, as it did in 2006 before Ethiopian forces ousted the militants from power later that year.



Earlier this month, U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton met with Somalia's transitional president and vowed to continue U.S. support for his government.



"The United States and the international community must serve as an active partner in helping the TFG [transitional federal government] and the people of Somalia confront and ultimately move beyond the conflict and poverty that have gripped their country," Clinton said at a joint news conference with Ahmed at the U.S. Embassy in Nairobi, Kenya.



The United States announced in June that it is providing weapons and ammunition to help Ahmed's government fight the militants. The weapons shipments are in accordance with U.N. Security Council resolutions, which ban some arms shipments to Somalia, said State Department spokesman Ian Kelly.



Clinton warned that terrorist groups like Al Shabaab pose a threat to the broader international community.



"Certainly if Al Shabaab were to obtain a haven in Somalia, which could then attract al Qaeda and other terrorist actors, it would be a threat to the United States," she said.



There are growing concerns that Somalia could be the next base for al Qaeda as U.S. forces pound their positions in Afghanistan and Pakistan. CIA Director Leon Panetta recently said that the intelligence agency is keeping tabs on the region as a possible destination for fleeing al Qaeda operatives.



"Our concern right now is that likely safe havens are areas in the Horn of Africa, like Somalia and Yemen, that are countries that because of their political status can be attractive to al Qaeda in order to operate there," Panetta said in June.



Separately, the FBI is investigating what appears to be a massive recruiting effort by Al Shabaab in immigrant communities in the United States. More than a dozen young men of Somali descent have disappeared from the Minneapolis, Minnesota, area in recent months. At least three of them, including a suicide bomber, have been killed in Somalia.



Also, Australia recently announced the arrests of four men with ties to Al Shabaab who were suspected of planning a suicide attack on a military base in the southern state of Victoria.



President Ahmed is a former member of the Islamic Courts Union, which took part in the 2006 coup. His decision to renounce the bloody insurgency and try to establish peace in Somalia has put him at odds with Islamist hard-liners who are still battling for control of Somalia. It also paved the way for his election as president of Somalia's U.N.-backed transitional government in January.



Journalist Mohammed Amiin Adow contributed to this report.

***

Minneapolis (CNN) -- Jared Pettingill's parents wanted a safe place for their son to attend school where he wouldn't be harassed for being gay.





They found that place in the Minneapolis Public School district.





"It's just been really accepting in my experience," says Jared, a high school junior. He says he's "never really dealt with bullying issues" in middle school or high school.





"The amount of positive reaction to LGBT issues is really amazing."





Minneapolis Public School administrators admit that by no means has bullying been eradicated from their schools. However, they firmly believe that they are leading the way in creating a safe environment for all students.





In January, the school board unanimously passed a unique resolution instructing administrators to track bullying incidents related to the harassment of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender students. The measure also requires all staff to be trained on LGBT issues. It injects LGBT topics into the curriculum, which includes adding an LGBT component to sex ed. They will eventually add an elective high school course on LGBT history.





Just a few miles away, another Minneapolis-area school district has attracted national attention for its policy that deals with lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender students much differently.





Neutral or not?





The Anoka-Hennepin School District, just outside the Twin Cities, made headlines in recent years after seven students committed suicide between November 2009 and May 2011. Parents and friends say four of those students were either gay, perceived to be gay or questioning their sexuality. They say, at least two of them were bullied because of their sexuality.





The school district says there is no evidence that the suicides were linked to bullying. Nevertheless, it stirred public debate over the school's sexual orientation curriculum policy.





The district's curriculum policy, adopted in 2009, bars teachers from taking a position on homosexuality in the classroom and says such matters are best addressed outside of school. It's become known as the neutrality policy. Anoka-Hennepin, which encompasses the Twin Cities' northwestern suburbs and is the state's largest school district, is the only Minnesota school district known to have such a policy.





In July, gay rights advocates filed a federal lawsuit on behalf of a group of students challenging the neutrality policy. The Southern Poverty Law Center and the National Center for Lesbian Rights told CNN that the lawsuit is currently in mediation.





While the school district refrained from commenting on specifics in the lawsuit, it issued a statement in July noting that "Anoka-Hennepin has been recognized as a pro-active leader in the state of Minneosta on bullying prevention."





The school district is also in the middle of a federal investigation into "allegations of harassment and discrimination in the Anoka-Hennepin School District based on sex, including peer-on-peer harassment based on not conforming to gender stereotypes," according to a district memo.





Superintendent Dennis Carlson says the neutrality policy -- which has attracted just as many local supporters as it has critics to heated school board meetings -- is a reasonable response to a divided community.





"It's a diverse community," Carlson told CNN earlier this year, "and what we're trying to do, what I'm trying to do as a superintendent, is walk down the middle of the road."





The school district has a separate, comprehensive bullying prohibition policy, and Carlson said there is no link between the suicides and bullying.





"We have no evidence that bullying or harassment took place in any of those cases," the superintendent said.





Carlson emphasized students need to report bullying, and he acknowledged "gay students in our district struggle with bullying and harassment on a daily basis."





Damon Fietek, 16, knows that all too well. He says he was a target for bullies because his father, a middle school teacher in the Anoka-Hennepin school district, is gay.





Damon's story





Jefferson Fietek had adopted Damon just before he started high school. The bullying began immediately.





"It upsets me a great deal," says

***

HARARE, Zimbabwe (CNN) -- A child cries from hunger, but no tears come from her swollen eyes.

Zimbabwean clinics have been overwhelmed by the cholera epidemic, according to aid organizations.

Malnutrition has left this baby born in Zimbabwe fighting for her life. She is the face of an unfolding crisis in a country once known as Africa's bread basket.

Today a loaf of bread costs 35 million worthless Zimbabwean dollars, and people are forced to sift through garbage piles for any morsel of food. Others huddle for warmth around a fire burning inside the shell of a broken-down van.

All of these images were captured on video recently smuggled out of Zimbabwe by Solidarity Peace Trust, a South African human rights group.

Zimbabwe's government maintains that the situation is being exaggerated by the West in an effort to exert pressure on President Robert Mugabe to leave office.

But the World Health Organization (WHO) says the desperate situation has triggered a widening cholera outbreak that has killed 775 people and infected more than 15,000.

"You have to eat in the same place you sleep right next to the buckets, the same buckets that we used as toilets," one cholera patient says on the video. "There is no water to bathe."  Watch shocking footage of Zimbabwe's humanitarian crisis (Discretion advised) Â»

And little to eat. Women foraging for food in the bush find dry branches with only a few berries.

"This packet of juice will be my supper tonight," one woman says.

Zimbabwe's main opposition leader Morgan Tsvangirai -- who is still trying to form a unity government with Mugabe under a recent power-sharing deal -- said the situation can only be addressed once a "legitimate government" is in place.

"Once there is a legitimate government, it is up to that government to deal with the problems the country is facing, which are quite wide-ranging," Tsvangirai told CNN on Wednesday.

"But the immediate intervention of the health crisis has exacerbated the situation to the extent that it has now become an international crisis."

The WHO says the current cholera outbreak in Zimbabwe has a high fatality rate because sufferers are either not able to reach health centers in time or because health centers lack the capacity to treat the cases.  View image gallery of Zimbabwe cholera crisis Â»

"The epidemic is clearly on the increase," Dr. Eric Laroche, a WHO official in Harare, told CNN on Wednesday. "I think it's going to last for several months."

In addition to the WHO, the Red Cross has responded to the outbreak and is sending staff and medical supplies into Zimbabwe.

Zimbabwe's main hospitals have all but shut down and the small clinics equipped by international aid organizations are overcrowded and unable to cope with the thousands of cholera patients. Health workers inside Zimbabwe believe scores are dying at home.

Laroche said the WHO is receiving cooperation from the government, but the health care system is abysmal.

"The quality of the care, the supplies that come inside Zimbabwe, also need to be restored," Laroche said. "So there's a lot of work to do, because the health system is collapsing for the time being."

One Zimbabwean health care worker, who would not show his face on the video, said he fears the death toll will skyrocket.

"People are dying even at the health institution," he said. "It's beyond control. We are going to witness so many deaths in the coming weeks."

He expressed frustration that so many people are dying from cholera, a disease that "is both preventable and curable."

"Nobody should die from cholera," he said. "We are quite unfortunate."

Zimbabwe, already experiencing an economic crisis, was struck with the raging water-borne cholera in August. Health experts say the battle against the disease can only be won if Harare has adequate water-treating chemicals and disposes of refuse properly.

Zimbabwe's information minister Sikhanyiso Ndlovu said Tuesday that the country has enough

***

(CNN)  -- A Texas couple who were burned to death in the Texas wildfires Thursday had been packing their truck to evacuate their home but were unable to escape fast-moving flames, a relative told CNN Friday.

A house burns after wildfires raced through rural Montague County in Texas.

"I think they underestimated how fast it was moving," said Carol Quinn, the daughter-in-law of victim Matt Quinn. "I think this was very fast and very hot. ... It is an awful story."

Matt Quinn, 80, and his wife, Cathy, were two of the three confirmed fatalities in Thursday's fires. Matt Quinn was a former reporter for the Dallas-Fort Worth station WFAA-TV and had spent his life in journalism. The Quinns lived in rural Montague County.

The couple's son Chris, 30, was hospitalized in fair condition with second- and third-degree burns and was expected to recover, Carol Quinn said. Chris had gone to look for his cat as the family prepared to leave in advance of the fires.

"There were three of them. Chris went to get his cat and put the cat in the carrier," Carol Quinn, who lives in Orlando, Florida, told CNN. "When he came back, the truck was totally engulfed in flames.

"The flames were closing in, and he didn't know if Matt and Cathy were in the truck, and he took off running."

The family did not live in a mandatory evacuation area but faced gusty winds and a wall of flames 30 feet high, she said. She said they had called the sheriff's department shortly before their truck was engulfed.

Another person was killed just west of Dallas and Fort Worth in what's being called the Cement Mountain fire, the Texas Fire Service reported Friday afternoon.

Wildfires are also burning in Oklahoma. In Midwest City, one of the places hit hardest by the flames, fire officials said at least one of the fires appears to have been intentionally set -- although they stopped short of calling it arson.  See where the fires are burning »

"We'd like to make the distinction and understand that there's a difference between being intentional and having intent with malice," said city Fire Marshal Jerry Lojka. "So we haven't proved that there was malice, but we do know that the fire was intentionally set."

Winds that at times reached hurricane-force levels blew through towns and neighborhoods, fueling fires that burned some homes while sparing others.  Watch what is left of homes -- rubble »

More than 101,000 acres in Texas were burned, destroying 32 buildings, according to Bill Beebee of the Texas Forest Service.

About 140 structures in Oklahoma have been destroyed, most of them in south-central Oklahoma and Oklahoma County, according to the Department of Emergency Management. At least 49 people were injured.

Health officials said that with two exceptions, injuries from the fires were moderate or minor.

A motorist was severely injured after losing control of a vehicle on a smoky road. Also, a Lincoln County firefighter was in stable condition at the Integris Baptist Burn Center in Oklahoma City.

The fires burned all the way into Oklahoma City, and by Friday afternoon, firefighters were once again battling blazes that had flared up again within the city limits. iReport.com: Are wildfires affecting you?

Oklahoma Gov. Brad Henry declared a state of emergency for 31 counties. The state also was hit with severe weather. Henry's order marks a first step toward seeking federal assistance, if necessary, by allowing state agencies to make emergency purchases.

"We are doing everything we can to deliver resources to firefighters and first responders on the front lines. They have done an amazing job under very challenging conditions, and we owe them a great debt of gratitude. Their heroism has helped save lives and property," Henry said in a written statement.

"Our thoughts and prayers are with the scores of families and individuals who lost homes or businesses," he said.

Midwest City and the

***

(CNN) -- A Michigan man could face life in prison after he allegedly tortured and ultimately killed his girlfriend's 4-year-old son last week for wetting his pants, prosecutors say.





Brandon Joshua-Frederick Hayes, 24, "systematically beat" Dominick Calhoun, 4, "pummeling [him] with fists and kicking him" on his arms, legs and genitalia, Genesee County prosecutor David Leyton told CNN.





Hayes also apparently burned the boy in the course of the torture. "The knuckles across one hand were charred," Argentine Township police chief Dan Allen said.





"I've been doing this a long time, and this is the worst case of child abuse I've ever seen," the police chief said. "In all respects, he was tortured."





Prosecutors arraigned Hayes on Thursday on nine charges, including one count of first-degree premeditated murder, one count of first-degree child abuse and one count of torture, which by itself carries a possible life sentence.





"Little Dominick met his boogeyman, and that was defendant Hayes," Genesee County Sheriff Robert Pickell said at a news conference Thursday.





CNN was unable to reach someone who could speak on Hayes' behalf.





Hayes' motivation for his savage multiday attack on the boy was that the child "had wet his pants," Leyton said. "It had happened before."





Hayes also resented the child because his "biological father wouldn't pay child support," Leyton said.





Dominick's mother, Corrine Baker, was present for at least some of the beating and tried to shield the boy from Hayes' aggression, authorities said.





"She tried to lay on top of the child to guard the child against being beat any further, but she was beat in the process," according to the police chief.





The sequence of events that led to the discovery of the abuse began when Baker's sister and several acquaintances came to the apartment to buy drugs from Hayes, according to Allen. After seeing Dominick's condition, the sister alerted the boy's paternal grandfather, who in turn contacted authorities.





When emergency responders entered the apartment on the afternoon of April 11, Dominick was "barely alive." EMS transferred him to Hurley Hospital in Flint, where he was pronounced brain dead.





The boy was taken off life support the following morning.





Dominick's mother's whereabouts and actions through all portions of the torture session remain somewhat hazy. The county prosecutor said his office is "still investigating her involvement in all this."





"She's also culpable for putting him in the dangerous position in the first place," he added.





Baker was taken into custody on Sunday but released later. Attempts to reach her at her home Thursday evening were unsuccessful.





The town police chief said Baker and her son had been brought to the attention of Genesee County Department of Child Services on several occasions. The agency did not respond to CNN's requests for comment Thursday.





It was not immediately clear whether Baker's involvement with the child services agency predated her relationship with Hayes. The police chief said he believed Baker and Hayes had been together for about six months.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Princess Diana's relationships with two Muslim men provoked an outburst from her mother, who called her daughter "a whore", Paul Burrell, the princess's former butler, told an inquest Monday.



Diana once referred to her former butler Paul Burrell as "my rock."



Burrell, who returned to Britain from his home in Florida to give evidence, was the first star witness of the London inquest, now in its fourth month.



His role as confidant to Diana, who died in a Paris car crash on August 31, 1997, along with her boyfriend Dodi Fayed and hotel security chief Henri Paul, meant his testimony was eagerly anticipated.



Burrell, whom the late princess once called "my rock," cast doubt on whether Diana was ready to marry Fayed. According to Burrell, the princess was still "holding a candle" for former boyfriend and heart surgeon Hasnat Khan -- who she called "her soulmate" -- when she started dating Fayed "on the rebound."



Burrell told the inquest that Diana asked him to listen in on a conversation in June 1997 with her mother, Frances Shand Kydd, who died in 2004 and who was critical of her relationship with Muslim men.  "She called the princess a 'whore' and she said that she was messing around with 'effing Muslim men' and she was 'disgraceful' and said some very nasty things," Burrell said. He agreed that, as a result of such calls Diana, decided not to talk to her mother again.



The inquest, which began in October and is expected to last another two or three months, aims to uncover the facts surrounding the deaths of the Princess and Dodi and determine their cause of death -- whether by accident or otherwise.



Asked earlier in the day if he believed that Fayed was "the one," Burrell said "no, I did not have that impression." He also cast doubt on claims that Fayed and Diana were engaged or on the cusp of engagement, saying: "I find that difficult to believe."



Asked to explain himself, Burrell said: "Because this was only a 30-day relationship and the princess had just finished a long-term relationship with someone (Khan) she cared deeply about. I knew that because I was there and I saw it."



Diana's 18-month relationship with Khan ended around the same time she started seeing Fayed in July 1997. Burrell said Diana had asked him at one point to investigate how a private wedding with Khan might take place, given that Khan is Muslim.  Watch report on claims about Diana's marriage plans. »



Khan had not proposed to the princess, Burrell said, adding that Khan was "the man she loved more than any other." He said he spoke to Diana about the possibility that Fayed would give her a ring shortly before her death.



Burrell said he suggested to the princess that she wear it on the fourth finger of her right hand, rather than the left, as is customary with engagement rings. "I need marriage like a bad rash," Burrell claimed Diana told him.



Last month at the inquest Lady Annabel Goldsmith, a friend of Diana, said the princess had remarked that she needed another marriage "like a rash on my face."



Burrell also indicated that the ring was not an engagement ring, as the Fayed family has maintained. Fayed family spokesman Michael Cole testified last week that Dodi's father, Mohamed Al Fayed, was certain the couple had planned to marry.



Lawyers at the inquest asked Burrell whether he knew whether a special announcement had been planned for the Monday following the fatal car crash. There has been speculation the couple planned to announce special news, such as an engagement.



But Burrell said he knew nothing of such a plan. He said he had actually looked at Diana's schedule for that day and found only mundane items, and nothing to indicate she planned a special announcement.



Burrell also told the inquest he did not believe Prince Philip, Queen Elizabeth's, husband was involved in

***

SILVER SPRING, Maryland (CNN) -- As Marilyn Seitz helps customers find just the right size, she wonders how much longer before she's forced to close her doors.





Maryland thrift store manager Marilyn Seitz says the new rules have the potential to put the store out of business.





The Pennyworth Thrift Store in Silver Spring, Maryland, isn't suffering from the struggling economy. Secondhand stores across the country are more in demand than ever as many people are desperate to save money. Instead, Seitz is worried her business may become an unintended casualty of an attempt to protect children.





After a wave of highly publicized tainted-toy recalls last year, Congress passed the Consumer Product Safety Improvement Act. Then-President George Bush signed the bill in August, and new federal restrictions on lead and other harmful substances take effect Tuesday.





The new rules ban lead content beyond minute levels of 600 parts per million in any product for children 12 and younger. The law not only makes it illegal to manufacture lead-laced products, but it also makes it illegal to sell them no matter when the products were made -- and stores found breaking the law could face fines of up to $100,000 per violation.





"It would just be virtually impossible for me to feel safe that my toys meet the guidelines," Seitz said. "I feel confident that these are safe toys, but anything carries a risk. Since I can be held criminally and financially responsible if I sell a toy that is on the recall list or a toy that tests for lead, I just have to wipe out all my toys."  Watch why thrift stores fear new rules will force them out of business »





Now Seitz is going to throw away or give away her entire inventory of children's items, fearing this latest attempt at protecting kids will force the Pennyworth Thrift Store and thousands of others out of business.





The ban also applies to children's clothes and books. The National Association of Resale and Thrift Shops say tens of thousands of secondhand stores across the country are at risk.





Adele Meyer, the association's executive director, said some owners are preparing to shutter their stores out of fear.





"This has gotten so serious, and it is so frightening, because we serve consumers that sometimes have no other way to clothe their children," Meyer said. "It was a law that was well-intentioned that has unintended consequences, that is hurting the manufacturing industry, the retailers, and the secondary market."





The Consumer Product Safety Commission, the government agency tasked with implementing the sweeping law, seems to agree. CPSC spokesman Joe Martyak acknowledges the new rules are complex and confusing.





"With the economy the way it is right now, we all are concerned about safety, but we don't want to unnecessarily be impacting jobs and businesses," Martyak said. He said the CPSC is trying to set guidelines to help manufacturers, retailers and thrift stores better understand what is safe and what is not.





"What we've been trying to do is to point out categories that we feel and our scientists feel that are safe, that really are almost practically lead-free," Martyak said. "We have no reason to believe that there's a risk involved with them."





Those categories include products made of certain natural materials, such as wood, cotton or wool; ordinary children's books printed after 1985; dyed or undyed textiles, not including leather, vinyl or PVC; and non-metallic thread and trim used in children's apparel and other fabric products, such as baby blankets. However, Martyak says even these guidelines cause confusion.





"If you have a pair of pants that has two buttons, a zipper, and an applique on it, we can say our understanding is the fabric itself doesn't have lead and you're OK," he said. "But as far as those other pieces that are on the pants, that's where the problem is, because you'd have to have that tested or know some other way that it's not over the lead limit.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- A U.S. company is offering a rare chance to holiday on a mega-yacht once used by a Hollywood star and her husband -- and thanks to the recession it's actually affordable.



The 100-foot Katania normally would attract an additional $49,500 charter fee for a week's use.



The 100-foot Katania was chartered by Hollywood star Hilary Swank and her husband, Chad Lowe.



Seattle, Washington-based mega-yacht rental business CEO Expeditions usually charges around $100,000 a week to charter their 100-plus-foot yachts, but they have introduced a deal waiving the charter fees -- meaning guests will only need to pay for the running of the vessel.



The move to make such vessels more affordable comes as the recession continues to put pressure on the luxury holiday and mega-yacht industries.



Although the costs of crew and luxury food aren't extremely cheap, it is expected this move will open up the recession-strained market to many more potential holiday-makers.



The Katania now costs less than $3,000 per day. Normally it would attract an additional $49,500 charter fee for a week's use.



At the $2,950-per-day special rate, four people can stay on the Katania -- but with the maximum six on board ($450 extra per person) the cost per person is a slightly better $642.



The price includes full crew, premium wines, gourmet food prepared by a private chef, amenities such as kayaks, hot tub, fishing/crabbing/shrimping equipment, and even a 30-foot whaler for guest use.



According to the company, Swank said of her charter holiday: "We had an absolutely enchanted time aboard the Katania. A more beautiful yacht does not exist."



There is one small catch with the deal -- the boat is based in the San Juan islands off the coast of Washington and British Columbia, and any cruises to other destinations will attract an additional charge to cover fuel costs.



The company's owner, Bruce Milne, released a statement saying the deal was largely a result of the impact of the recession.



"Travel is down, agents and brokers need deals, so rather than just a few full-price charters, we decided to stay busy, put more people to work, and help island tourism by doing charters at cost.



"Since we started chartering 10 years ago, we have been looking for a chance to provide our 'Expeditions to the Extraordinary' in the San Juan Islands at a price any luxury traveler can afford -- this recession provides that opportunity," he said.



Tim Wiltshire, director and sales broker at international yacht company Burgess Yachts, said the charter market isn't a complete disaster, so he was surprised to see such a discount.



"I wouldn't have expected to see that," he said. "We are seeing discounts on average of about 25 percent. Although some people are trying interesting gimmicks to inspire new business."



Wiltshire said CEO Expedition's fleet isn't among the biggest or most luxurious on the market, and this deal appears to be clever marketing stunt.



His opinion is that other larger vessels still warrant their greater price tags.

***

ISLAMABAD, Pakistan (CNN) -- Pakistani government officials announced Monday an agreement with the Taliban to allow strict Islamic law, or sharia, to be implemented in parts of North West Frontier Province.

Delegation members of pro-Taliban leader Soofi Mohammad at a meeting in Peshawar Monday.

It marks a major concession by the Pakistani government in its attempt to hold off Taliban militants who have terrorized the region with beheadings, kidnappings, and the destruction of girls' schools.

The government will recognize sharia for the entire Malakand Division, which includes the Swat district -- a two-hour drive from Pakistan's capital, Islamabad -- the chief minister of North West Frontier Province Amir Haider Hoti announced Monday in a news conference. Islamic law is already being practiced in the area, where the Taliban have control.

Hoti said the people of the region want sharia which will fill the "vacuum" left by a lack of access to Pakistan's judicial system. He said he hoped it would bring peace to the region, where Pakistani forces have battled militants aligned with the Taliban.

"Those who chose to take the path of violence because of this decision, I appeal to all of them to work for the sake of peace now," Hoti said.

"There is no accounting for the sacrifice of all the people of Swat and the Malakand division. How many children have been orphaned? How many parents have lost their children? How many young people have been martyred? In my mind, I don't think that anyone can take this any more."  Watch Pakistan's foreign minister discuss negotiating with the Taliban Â»

He also stressed that the recognition of Islamic law in the region "isn't something that hasn't happened before." He said previous agreements have been made regarding sharia, but were never implemented. He also said that the Islamic law will not go against basic civil liberties, although he did not explain how the government would make sure that provision would be upheld.  Watch the implications of the concessions to the Taliban Â»

Sharia is defined as Islamic law but is interpreted with wide differences depending on the various sects of both Sunni and Shia Islam.

So far, the Pakistani Taliban's interpretation of sharia has included banning girls from school, forcing women inside and outlawing forms of entertainment.

The agreement comes amid negotiations between Pakistani provincial officials and Taliban representatives, led by Sufi Mohammed. The Taliban on Sunday declared a 10-day cease-fire in Swat Valley, which Taliban spokesman Muslim Khan said was a gesture of good will towards the government.

The Taliban's control of Swat is believed to be the deepest advance by militants into Pakistan's settled areas -- meaning areas outside its federally administered tribal region along the border with Afghanistan.

The negotiations in North West Frontier Province are the latest attempt by Pakistan's civilian government -- which took power last year -- to achieve peace through diplomacy in areas where Taliban and al Qaeda leaders are believed to have free rein.

But analysts as well as critics within the establishment have warned that Pakistan's previous dealings with the Taliban have only given the fundamentalist Islamic militia time to regroup and gain more ground.

Khadim Hussain, a professor Bahria University in Islamabad who studies Pakistani politics, said the government has effectively surrendered the areas to the Taliban, thereby setting the stage for two contradictory, parallel states in North West Frontier Province.

"If you leave them like that and you give ... a semblance of peace in a particular area, what does that mean?" Hussain said. "It means you're capitulating. It means you're surrendering the state to them. It means your submitting the state authority to them because they are running a parallel state."

He said the government's decision amounts to a marriage of convenience made under duress.

Swat has been overrun by forces loyal to Maulana Fazlullah's banned hardline Islamic group, Tehreek Nifaz-e-Shariat Mohammadi (TNSM) which has allied itself with Taliban fighters. TNSM was once led by Sufi Mohammed, Fazlullah's father-in-law who is leading the latest negotiations. Sufi Mohammed was released from

***

Kabul, Afghanistan (CNN) -- Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said Wednesday -- the eve of Afghan President Hamid Karzai's inauguration for a second term -- that now is a "critical moment" for Afghanistan, because Karzai has a "clear window" to demonstrate what kind of government he will lead.



Speaking to staff members at the U.S. Embassy, Clinton said there is a careful and thoughtful review of U.S. policy going on "because we know this is a turning point."



"We want to be a strong partner to people of Afghanistan," she said, "and to the government."



Clinton met with embassy staff before meeting with U.S. Ambassador Karl Eikenberry and Gen. Stanley McChrystal, the commander of U.S. forces in Afghanistan. Afterward, she had dinner with Karzai.



The two, flanked by their senior aides, met at a second-floor reception room at Karzai's palace. They spoke about Clinton's travel schedule and about the planning for Karzai's Thursday inauguration.



They also spoke about the difficulty in accommodating all the Afghans who want to attend the ceremony. The government expects about 800 people to attend in all; some will have to stand.



Clinton's attendance at the inauguration will show U.S. support for Karzai's government after an election that was tainted by fraudulent balloting.



Karzai is under intense international pressure to clean up corruption within his government, and Clinton was to deliver a tough message on the need to show results, a senior U.S. official tells CNN.



The senior U.S. official, who is not authorized to speak publicly about details of Clinton's meeting with Karzai, said the Obama administration already is discussing with the Karzai government specific "benchmarks" that will require Afghan ministries to be certified as "open and transparent" if they are to receive direct payments from the U.S. government.



If ministries are not certified as open and transparent, they can continue to receive technical assistance, but not direct U.S. funding, the official says. If the assessments determine that the ministry needs additional specific technical assistance to be certified, the U.S. will provide it.



Clinton's first visit to Afghanistan as secretary of state comes as President Obama is deciding whether to send up to 40,000 more troops to Afghanistan, as requested by McChrystal.



A major factor in Obama's decision on how many troops to send to Afghanistan centers on the Afghan government's ability to partner with the United States to fight the Taliban.



In the past several weeks, Eikenberry has sent two cables to Washington expressing reservations about troop increases amid lingering concerns about Karzai and the uncertainty about the government he will put in place.



On Sunday, Clinton said she had "made it clear" that the United States won't provide civilian aid to Afghanistan's government agencies without an effective certification process that shows the money will be spent on its intended purposes.



"We believe that President Karzai and his government can do better," Clinton said on the ABC broadcast "This Week," adding that Obama's administration was "looking for tangible evidence" that the Karzai administration would be more responsive to the needs of the Afghan people.



She cited the need for the Karzai government to crack down on fraud and "demonstrate there's not impunity for those who are corrupt."



The senior U.S. official says the United States has certified departments in the Ministries of Public Health, Communications and Finance to receive direct U.S. government assistance.



During the next three months, he says, it will assess the Ministries of Education; Agriculture, Irrigation, and Livestock; and Rural Rehabilitation and Development. Two assessments will be carried out -- financial and procurement -- at each ministry. If those assessments determine that the procurement, financial, and expenditure systems are adequate, the U.S. will certify them as having the capacity to accept direct assistance.



The Afghan government already has announced it is creating a commission that will investigate allegations of corruption. It also says it will create a tribunal in the Justice Ministry that will prosecute corruption cases that the commission has investigated.



This U.S. official says the United States is not trying to "hector, lecture or look over the

***

(CNN) -- Generations of standup comedians never saw this coming.



John Heffron is one of an increasing number of comedians joining Twitter.



To succeed in the industry these days, you don't just need to be good on stage and screen. You also have to nail the art of sending out mini-messages to Twitter "followers."



But if your humor is based on storytelling, persona and, you know, the way you say stuff, how can you get hilarious in 140 characters or less?



For the pros, it's a challenge and an opportunity.



CNN's Josh Levs spoke with two successful standup comics who are diving into the Twitterverse. John Heffron is a winner of "Last Comic Standing." Craig Shoemaker won the award for funniest comedy routine on XM Satellite Radio.  Watch Heffron and Shoemaker mix it up »



And we want to hear from you. Send the funniest tweets you've ever seen to Levs via Twitter (@joshlevscnn) or post them on Facebook.



The following is an edited version of the interview.



Craig Shoemaker: I'm on the information super-cul-de-sac. I mean, I'm not so great at this; I'm learning. And I have no friends. I had more friends at my house yesterday for dinner than I have on Twitter. And (Heffron) is the king.



CNN: How did you build up your fan base, John? How did you build up this number of followers on Twitter?



John Heffron: I try to be funny; I try to be entertaining; I try to do stuff that hopefully gets re-twitted. Is that the word? Sure.



CNN: All right, let's take a look at some of your popular tweets here. You have a section called the original last tweets. And you have one here: "Guy who always gets killed on Star Trek. Last tweet: 'Got my uniform. The rest of the landing party wearing a different color. Weird!' "



And then my favorite one: "Married man's last tweet: 'About to go into the champagne room, wish me luck.' "



Heffron: Those are the things that end up, people start passing around and then that's what gets people to go, "Who is this guy?"



CNN: And Craig, is this what you're chasing? The same idea, those one-liners that get tossed out?



Shoemaker: Yeah, I'm a storyteller, so it's not so great for me. I'm still working on this under-140 characters thing.



CNN: I did pull out one of yours that I liked too. You wrote, "Up late in my Pittsburgh hotel, just read a USA today article about how Twitter is no good for intimacy. No worries. I'm alone."



Shoemaker: I don't know if anybody's laughing at the jokes. I tweeted that last night. We'll see how that goes.



CNN: Is that part of what's hard about Twitter? When you're doing this, you don't have that kind of instant feedback. You know, if you're doing standup somewhere, you've got the laughter. How do you know? It's like doing this in an echo chamber.



Shoemaker: It's the replies. To me, I judge by the replies.



Heffron: I've had zero replies. So apparently, I got to work on my tweeting. The whole thing is, when you write, though, it's different. It doesn't have the nuance or things like that. Like I put something about my ex-wife that I got divorced and "tonight's show is a benefit show and all proceeds go to my ex-wife." And people are writing back, "Oh, I feel so sorry for you," and I go, "No, it's a joke."



Shoemaker: Yeah. Criss Angel was on my flight, so I tweeted "Criss Angel is on our flight

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- With strong sales and equally powerful praise, the July issue of Italian Vogue can be judged a resounding success.



Chanel Iman is one of several models of color featured in the "Black Issue" of Italian Vogue.



Dubbed the "Black Issue," the magazine celebrates models of color from the past and present, including Donyale Luna, Liya Kebede, Naomi Campbell, Iman and Chanel Iman.



Within 72 hours, the magazine sold out in the United States and Great Britain. Blog posts and e-mails about the beauty and historical significance of the issue began to flow -- and industry insiders were equally pleased.



Praising renowned photographer Steven Meisel, who shot most of the issue's fashion pictures, The New York Times fashion critic Cathy Horyn gushed, "I think they are some of the best he's done. ... They are crazily, softly beautiful, plainly the work of someone who knows women and fashion."  See what all the fuss is about »



Another 40,000 copies of the "Black Issue" were recently reprinted to meet the still strong demand.



But will the all the hoopla translate into tangible change for black models in the fashion industry? Will more color be seen on the runway and in magazines? Many observers have their fingers crossed.



"All the agents were happy about the issue because it gives us hope that other people will catch on and decide that it's OK to use more black girls," said Carlos Ojeda, an agent at New York Models. "It's OK to have more than just one, and she doesn't have to always be Naomi."



"Italian Vogue is very influential around the world on an artistic level," said Constance White, style director at eBay. "That is the book that all the art directors, the photographers, any fashion editor looking for inspiration turns to ... and always has. It has always been the trendsetter, so hopefully people will look at it and say using black models is both relevant and right and will start doing it too."



Bethann Hardison, a legendary model agent-manager, said she has noticed a shift in the industry since she began holding town hall meetings last September to address the lack of diversity in fashion. The packed-to-the-rafters events quickly became the talk of the industry, and Hardison is widely credited with sparking the current movement.



"I started seeing more black models on the runway back in February," she said, pointing to the shows of designers like Diane Von Furstenberg and Michael Kors as examples. "I have already seen change, and I know that I will continue to see change."



Not all are nearly as optimistic, and fear the diversity issue will become as passe as the skinny-model debate of a few years ago.



"I hate to sound cynical, but by January, I feel like it will be back to business as usual," Ojeda said. "I want to be hopeful and positive, but a part of me does not want to get my hopes up."



"Let's see if Italian Vogue is going to be able to live up to the standards that they've now set," added one prominent New York-based stylist. "You can't have an issue with all black girls, pat yourself on the back and say 'that's it for the year.' "



Hardison is working hard to make sure that doesn't happen. She's already scheduled another town hall meeting for September, and she's also planning a mixer to introduce fledgling models of color to industry players.



"We just have to keep the bar high," Hardison said, "and keep showing beautiful women and pictures."



Lola Ogunnaike is the entertainment correspondent for CNN's American Morning.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Power-driven wheelchairs are costing Medicare and its beneficiaries nearly four times what suppliers pay for them, and competitive bidding could have reduced those costs, according to an inspector general's report released Wednesday.





Competitive bidding would have cut costs on a standard power wheelchair by nearly $1,000, the report says.





A standard power wheelchair costs the federal health insurance program for seniors an average of $4,018 to lease, compared with $1,048 for suppliers to buy, the Department of Health and Human Services' internal watchdog reported.





"Medicare and its beneficiaries paid suppliers an average of $2,970 beyond the supplier's acquisition cost to perform an average of five services and cover general business costs," the report found.





The difference was not as dramatic for more advanced wheelchairs used for physical rehabilitation patients, but at an average lease of $11,507, those chairs still cost Medicare about twice as much as the $5,880 paid by suppliers, the report found.





More than 173,000 Medicare beneficiaries received power wheelchairs in the first half of 2007, at a cost of about $686 million, the report said. The cost could have been reduced considerably had Congress not delayed a planned system of competitive bidding for what Medicare classifies as "durable medical equipment," such as wheelchairs and oxygen tanks, the report said.





Competitive bidding would have cut Medicare's average cost of a standard power wheelchair by nearly $1,000, the inspector general found.





"Medicare and beneficiary payments under the Competitive Bidding Acquisition Program would have decreased by an average of 26 percent across all included categories of [durable medical equipment], saving up to an estimated $1 billion annually," the report found. "However, Congress delayed the program and exempted complex rehabilitation power wheelchairs from future competitive bidding."





Medicare's annual budget for 2008 was $444 billion. In January, it cut its payments to suppliers by 9.5 percent to make up for what it thought competitive bidding would have saved taxpayers, according to the report.





In July, a CNN investigation found that a patient and taxpayers were billed about $1,200 over four years for a nonmotorized chair, while a nearly identical chair could be bought from the same supplier for $349.





The issue has become controversial as the Obama administration tries to overhaul the U.S. health care system and rein in the cost of Medicare.





Administration officials want to require competitive bids for items such as wheelchairs. But the American Association for Homecare, which represents many in the durable equipment industry, said the bidding program would reduce patient choice, limit access to home medical care and drive up Medicare costs by requiring more hospital stays.

***

ISTANBUL, Turkey (CNN) -- Regular programming has just been interrupted by a news conference. A slender black man in a suit steps up to a podium, flanked by American flags and a White House logo.

Michael Lamar was laid off in January but has a new job as a Barack Obama look-alike.

"I wish I could announce such an economic package," he says, "but there is a bank in Turkey that did it. It is Garanti. I wish we had Garanti in America."

Don't be fooled. This is a commercial on Turkish TV. The actor is a 44-year-old Barack Obama look-alike from Whitehall, Pennsylvania, named Michael Lamar. And he is shilling for a Turkish bank.

In the month before the real Barack Obama is to visit Turkey, this ad campaign went out all across the country on television and on billboards, using the iconic, Warholian image of the American president to sell low-interest loans.

The "Mad Men" behind the concept say their Obama look-alike was the perfect guy to sell what they described as Garanti Bank's own economic stimulus package.

"We probably wouldn't be doing this commercial if it was the previous president," said Can Celikbilek, a copy writer at the advertising company, Alametifarika. "But in the case of Obama, he does represent hope, not only for the States but for the whole world."

For Obama look-alike actor Lamar, there was some irony about getting flown to Turkey to star in a commercial for a bank. He is a recent casualty of the global economic crisis.

"I was laid off in January of this year from JP Morgan Chase Bank in the U.S.," Lamar said, in a telephone interview from Pennsylvania. "After 18 years in the company, I was just laid off. One of the cutbacks. I'm currently unemployed right now."

Or, was unemployed.

Lamar's striking resemblance to the American president has suddenly offered the former software analyst a possible new career for supporting his wife and child.

"I'm available full-time now," Lamar said. "I'm going to see where this leads me."

Lamar is now being represented by a casting agency in Los Angeles that specializes in celebrity look-alikes.

Since he discovered his new "talent," he has traveled to the Netherlands to appear in a commercial for a liquor chain and to Paris, where an activist organization brought him in to meet lawmakers at the National Assembly, as part of a campaign to raise awareness about racism and racial profiling in France.

"This was very exciting for me, a true privilege!" Lamar said.

During his brief visit to Turkey, locals did double-takes when they saw Lamar walk past.

"Even in the studio, the crew [members] were like, 'Oh! Is that Obama?" said Celikbilek of Alametifarika advertising.

Using the image of an American president to promote anything in Turkey is a remarkable reversal.

U.S. approval ratings in Turkey plunged to 9 percent, according to a 2007 Pew Research poll, making America less popular in Turkey then almost anywhere else in the world, even though the two countries are NATO allies.

There was widespread anger among Turks at the war in neighboring Iraq. But the election of Barack Obama appears to have dramatically improved perceptions of America.

"Bush was a dictator who attacked other countries," said Abdurrahman Ozdemir, who sells cigarettes from a small stall on the street. "But we love Obama ... because he does not want to go to war with other countries."

"We started to love and like America because of Obama," said a 33-year-old woman named Begum Arinc. "I don't want to see people dying. I don't want to see any war. That's why I want to believe in Obama."

***

(CNN) -- When you finish one video game in a series and begin the next, you're basically forced to start from scratch without carrying over any of your accomplishments from the previous game.





But the popular "Mass Effect" sci-fi action trilogy aims to change that -- by allowing players to complete one game and transfer their character to the next one in the series. It is an ambitious project that involves nearly 35,000 lines of dialogue.





"We wanted to create the biggest story we could tell," said Casey Hudson, BioWare's project director for "Mass Effect 2" and executive producer of the "Mass Effect" franchise.





The just-released "Mass Effect 2" picks up the story as the lead character, named Shepard, has been brought back to life after a devastating attack by an invading race of machines bent on eliminating organic life. The action takes place shortly after the events of the first "Mass Effect," which was set in the year 2183 in the Milky Way galaxy.





In a rare twist, players who played the first "Mass Effect" game are being given the opportunity to import their characters into the new game along with all their rewards, romances and consequences.





Hudson said his team tried to create a fictional universe that players could explore over long periods of time to "have an epic experience."





By carrying over the data from the original "Mass Effect," Hudson's team tried to show the consequences of characters' choices. But by accounting for so many variables in the first games, Bioware was faced with a daunting task going forward.





"We used tech skills we developed going back to 'Baldur's Gate' [in 1998]," Hudson explained. "Writing for 'ME2' was the hardest thing we've ever done."





"Mass Effect 2" has 15 to 20 percent more dialogue and 30 percent more key decisions -- choices that affect the game's outcome -- than the first game, said Hudson, who believes the voice acting in the new game is more movie-like than the first one.





"It took several months of voice work, and often we would bring back an actor to get the right inflections for the character and the scene," he said. "There are hundreds of characters in the game that needed voices."





Although "Mass Effect 2" is being billed as a dark second chapter in the trilogy, there are laugh-out-loud moments of dialogue. Playing the game reveals that even its tense moments are given a softer edge with unexpected comic exchanges between characters.





For example, in one scene, Shepard tries to persuade a character not to follow orders that could lead to a "suicide mission." Without missing a beat, Shepard's squad mates look at each other as one says, "We can ignore suicidal orders? Why wasn't I told about that?"





"Mass Effect 2" also offers players the opportunity to interrupt a conversation and create a whole new path. During a scene when another character is talking, icons will appear to let you change the conversation with a Paragon move (good) or Renegade move (bad).





Side plots tie into the main story more than in the first game, so even these chat-interrupting choices could have an impact later on.





"Things can happen in conversation," Hudson said when asked about the interrupt feature. "It makes the conversation feel alive."





Work has already begun to complete the final chapter of the "Mass Effect" trilogy. And gamers shouldn't assume that Shepard makes it to the end of "Mass Effect 3."





Hudson said Shepard can die a final death if the player makes wrong choices or inspires bad loyalty from his crew.





"We made it so you'll still get a satisfying ending, but yes, Shepard can actually die," he said.

***

(CNN) -- Some of the strongest support for health care cooperatives' place in the national effort to reform the nation's health care system comes from those who experience a co-op's care every day: doctors and patients.



Co-op patient Norman Nistler says he didn't even realize he was a part of a health care co-op.



Co-ops are non-profit organizations, so any money that is earned goes back to be used on patients and other costs. Patients also elect a governing board, which is in stark contrast to operations under private health insurance plan.



Proponents point to two co-ops as evidence they are an alternative in the health care reform debate: HealthPartners in Minneapolis, Minnesota, and Group Health Cooperative in Seattle, Washington.



HealthPartners has been in business for half a century and served more than a million people in Minnesota and Wisconsin. Some decades-long members said they didn't know they were with a co-op.



"I watch a lot of it on television now. There's a lot of talking about co-ops, but I didn't realize this was a co-op," said patient Norman Nistler.



The co-op was able to save millions, officials note, by switching to generic drugs and cutting tobacco use among its members by double the Minnesota state average because doctors help patients to quit.



Darla Andrews, a patient at the co-op, said she and her doctor have easy access to her records. "It's all digital, so it works out good for me. It's more convenient."



Dr. Eric Seaver, who works at Group Health.



"We can communicate with patients through secure e-mail for routine questions or concerns that in the private world physicians often aren't able or won't do because there's just no motivation to do that. There's no reimbursement. ... Here with Group Health's model, it's all about providing patients the care that they need when they need it in a form that works best for them."



Group Health lists Microsoft and Starbucks as organizations that use its system.



"I have great contact with the doctors," said Group Health member Dave Jacobs. "I'm treated like a person, not a number."



"My care has been absolutely exceptional. And that's because I believe I'm going to a private medical facility, dealing with doctors one-on-one and not a bureaucrat," he said.



"Part of the great value in that structure is that our patients are actively engaged, not just in the organization and governance but actively engaged in finding ways to engage themselves in their care itself," said Scott Armstrong, president and CEO of Group Health Cooperative. "We all know that an engaged patient leads to a better health outcome. So much of health care is actually the responsibility of us as individuals."



Aaron Katz, of the University of Washington Health Services, says the group health model could be viable nationally, but only if there are tougher restrictions on insurance companies. The reason co-ops are successful, he says, is because they employ their own doctors, specialists, pharmacies and can reduce the amount of tests and procedures that drive up costs.



Seaver says his co-op emphasizes evidence-based medicine and making decisions in patient care based upon "the best evidence that we have available for what's effective and what is ineffective."



"I think what we're finding in this model is doing the right thing for the patient is the best thing not just for the patient but also for the system as a whole," he said.



"I feel like I'm able to practice medicine the way I had envisioned back in medical school."



Working at Group Health "has been a breath of fresh air for my career," he said.



CNN's Dana Bash, Ed Hornick, Lesa Jansen, Chris Welch and Patrick Oppmann contributed to this report.