KHARTOUM, Sudan (CNN) -- A Sudanese court found a British teacher guilty of insulting religion and sentenced her to 15 days in prison Thursday for allowing a teddy bear to be named "Mohammed," British authorities and her lawyer reported.

An undated amateur photo of Gillian Gibbons, who has been found guilty of insulting religion.

Gillian Gibbons also faces deportation from Sudan after her prison term, her lawyer told CNN.

He said that he was "very disappointed" with the verdict and that Gibbons planned to appeal.

Gibbons was not convicted of two other charges brought against her -- inciting hatred and showing contempt for religious beliefs, her lawyer said.

Gibbons, 54, was arrested Sunday after she asked her class of 7-year-olds in Khartoum to name the stuffed animal as part of a school project, the British Foreign Office said. She had faced charges under Article 125 of Sudan's constitution, the law relating to insulting religion and inciting hatred.

Although there is no ban in the Quran on images of Allah or the Prophet Mohammed, Islam's founder, likenesses are considered highly offensive by Muslims.  Watch latest developments in the case. »

Appearing somber and dazed, Gibbons arrived at the central courthouse in Khartoum for her closed hearing early Thursday. A staff member from the British Embassy in Khartoum and defense lawyers attended the hearing with her.

The courthouse was heavily guarded by police, who kept journalists -- and, for a while, even one of her attorneys -- away.

Gibbons could have faced a sentence of 40 lashes, a fine, or a jail term of up to a year, according to the Foreign Office, which expressed Britain's dissatisfaction with the verdict.

"We are extremely disappointed that the charges against Gillian Gibbons were not dismissed," Foreign Secretary David Miliband said in a statement issued shortly after the verdict was announced.

"As I said this morning, our clear view is that this is an innocent misunderstanding by a dedicated teacher. Our priority now is to ensure Ms. Gibbons' welfare, and we will continue to provide consular assistance to her. I have called in the Sudanese ambassador, Omer Siddig, this evening to explain the decision and discuss next steps."  Watch a report on reactions to the verdict »

The Foreign Office said Gibbons would be given credit for the four days since her arrest, meaning that the she has 11 days remaining on her sentence.

Earlier, Miliband had met with Siddig, who was summoned to the Foreign Office in London.

"I explained to him that we were very concerned by the case. We believe that this was an innocent misunderstanding," Miliband said in a statement released Thursday after the meeting.

"The Sudanese ambassador undertook to ensure our concerns were relayed to Khartoum at the highest level. He also said he would reflect back to Khartoum the real respect for the Islamic religion in this country," the statement added.

On the first floor of the courthouse, around 25 police linked arms and forced journalists and British officials away from the court entrance. Police detained some journalists, and confiscated a camera belonging to a freelance CNN cameraman.

Four vans filled with riot police were waiting outside the courthouse, but there were no signs of street disturbances or protests. Staff from Gibbons' school, including Robert Boulos, the head of Unity High School, were present. The staff members refused to comment on their colleague's predicament.

On Wednesday, Boulos said he was "horrified" when he found out that the complaint about the naming of the bear came from a member of his own staff -- not from a parent, as originally thought. Defense counsel later confirmed that the complaint came from Sarah Khawad, a secretary at the school.

Gibbons has been working at the school -- popular with wealthy Sudanese and expatriates -- since August, after leaving her position as deputy head teacher at a primary school in Liverpool, England, this summer, Boulos said.

He said Gibbons asked the children to pick their favorite name for the new class mascot, which she was using to aid lessons about animals and their

***

(CNN) -- One person was killed and four critically injured Tuesday in a series of highway pileups triggered by a dense dust storm on Interstate 10 in central Arizona, a state law enforcement official said.





The dust storm moved through the Pichacho Peak area, about 40 miles north of Tucson, at about 12:15 p.m. (3:15 p.m. ET) and caused "minimal visibility" on a stretch of Interstate 10 there, said Bart Graves, a spokesman for the Arizona Department of Public Safety.





"We have two chain reaction crashes in the westbound lanes," Graves said. "All involve commercial vehicles and passenger cars. There is one confirmed fatality and two additional victims with life-threatening injuries."





Graves said 16 vehicles were involved in the chain reaction accidents at Pichacho Peak.





"We closed the eastbound lanes to allow emergency responders access to the scene," he said. "Due to the poor visibility, all patients were transported by ground ambulance to Tucson area hospitals."





"The dust continues to cause a major hindrance to DPS officers and other rescue personnel," Graves said.





Another pileup, this one involving eight vehicles, occurred about an hour and a half later, 20 miles to the south on I-10, Graves said.





Two people were critically injured in that incident, which occurred on the eastbound lanes of I-10.





Graves said he could not estimate when the interstate would reopen in either direction.





CNN's Tina Burnside contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- A recent scientific expedition in Colombia's mountainous Darien region has unearthed 10 new species of amphibians, an environmental organization said.

A new species of salamander was one of the exciting discoveries in Colombia's Darien region.

Scientists with Conservation International on Monday announced the discovery of 10 new species in what's being referred to as a safe haven for frogs located in the west of the country on the border with Panama.

The discovery of 10 amphibians, which are believed to be new to science, was the result of a three-week survey of the area, the group said.

The new species were discovered as part of a CI program aimed at assessing the ecological health of a given area. Scientists identified nearly 60 species of amphibians, 20 reptiles and 120 species of birds, the group said in a prepared statement.

The discoveries come as global extinction rates continue to rise. Experts with Conservation International argue that the discovery is particularly significant since amphibians serve as an accurate gauge of an area's ecological health.

Amphibians can act as an early warning sign of pollution such as acid rain due to their porous, absorbent skin. The sensitivity of these species to low level environmental threats can also act as a barometer for human health.

Conservation International says the discovery offered renewed optimism.

"The high number of new amphibian species found is a sign of hope, even with the serious threat of extinction that this animal group faces in many other regions of the country and the world, " says Jose Vicente Rodriguez Mahecha, Scientific Director of CI-Colombia, who was part of the team that discovered the new species.

The region is, however, not immune to modern threats. According to Conservation International, between 25 percent to 30 percent of the natural vegetation in the Darien area is currently being deforested.

For the scientists, the hope now is that the discoveries will renew efforts to conserve the region and manage its rich biodiversity.

***

MEXICO CITY, Mexico (CNN)  -- Mexican police have arrested a "highly dangerous" U.S. citizen wanted on weapons charges, the Michoacan state attorney's office said.



Robert Hamlin Wainwright, 66, was arrested in tMexico at the request of the U.S. Marshal's Office.



Robert Hamlin Wainwright, 66, was arrested in the city of Zamora at the request of the U.S. Marshal's Office in Tucson, Arizona, the Mexican authorities said. He faces deportation.



A January 27 notice by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency said Wainwright, who has a prior felony conviction, was being investigated by the Indiana Environmental Task Force when firearms and ammunition were found at his home and business. He was tried and found guilty of firearms violations and was awaiting sentencing when he fled to Mexico, the EPA said.



Wainwright, a convicted child molester, also faces charges of discharging a pollutant into Indiana waters.



Mexican officials also announced Tuesday the arrest last month of a Canadian citizen on child pornography charges.



According to the federal Secretariat of Public Security, Arthur Leland Sayler operated 36 child pornography Web sites in the United States and Mexico.



Officials said they confiscated 29 DVDs that could house about 4 million photographs, 25 disc drives, two flash cards, nine floppy disks, 96 CD-ROMS, mobile telephone SIM cards and two Web servers.

***

(CNN) -- After a weekend of rumors, it's finally official: Heidi Klum and Seal are now the proud parents of a baby girl, Klum's representative confirmed.



Heidi Klum met Seal in 2004, and the couple married a year later.



The "Project Runway" host gave birth Friday night. Klum and Seal named their new bundle Lou Sulola Samuel.



The couple, who married in 2005, have been busy babymaking ever since. Lou Sulola is the youngest of four: Henri, 4, Johan, 2 and Leni, 5, whom Klum had from a previous relationship.



"It's difficult to imagine loving another child as much as you love your existing children," Seal said of the birth in a statement Tuesday. "Anyone who has a family will tell you this. Where will one find that extra love? If you love your existing children with all of your heart, how then can one possibly find more heart with which to love another?"



The answer to that question, the Grammy-winning singer said, "came in the form of our fourth child and second daughter.



"Lou Sulola Samuel was born, and from the moment she looked into both of our eyes, it was endless love at first sight. She is beautiful beyond words, and we are happy that she chose us to watch her grow over the coming years," he said.

***

BAGHDAD, Iraq (CNN)  -- The trial of an Iraqi journalist charged with throwing his shoes at U.S. President George Bush has been postponed, Iraq's Council of Ministers and one of the journalist's lawyers said Tuesday.



Amman protesters support Muntazer al-Zaidi, the Iraqi journalist held for throwing his shoes at President Bush.



Muntadhir Al-Zaidi was due to go on trial Wednesday, but the Criminal Court postponed it pending an appeal filed by his lawyers with the Federal Court of Appeal, a spokesman for the Supreme Judicial Council, Abdul Sattar Bayrakdar, said.



Dhiya al-Saadi, who leads Al-Zaidi's 25-member legal team, confirmed the postponement.



Al-Zaidi threw both of his shoes at Bush two weeks ago during a news conference with Iraqi Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki in Baghdad.



Neither shoe hit the president, and others in the room quickly knocked Al-Zaidi to the ground before security officials arrested him.



Many Iraqis hail Al-Zaidi, who faces a prison term if convicted, as a hero. More than 1,000 lawyers have volunteered to defend him, al-Saadi said.



The lawyers' appeal asked the Federal Court to change Al-Zaidi's case from assaulting Bush to insulting him. If Al-Zaidi is convicted of the former, he faces a maximum of 15 years in prison, al-Saadi said.



The lawyers are trying to persuade the appeals court that Al-Zaidi did not want to harm Bush by throwing the shoes, but simply wanted to insult him. By tradition, throwing a shoe is the most insulting act in the Arab world.



Al-Saadi said he met with his client several days ago but was having difficulty meeting with him again. He did not give the reason he was not allowed to see Al-Zaidi but said many lawyers have trouble meeting with detainees in Iraqi or U.S. custody.



It will take at least two weeks for the court to set a new date for Al-Zaidi's trial, legal expert Tariz Harab said.



CNN's Mohammed Tawfeeq contributed to this report.

***

Khartoum, Sudan (CNN) -- A major Darfur rebel leader and some of his top commanders have been killed, a Sudanese army spokesman announced on state-run radio Sunday.





"Our armed forces were able to destroy the renegade Khalil Ibrahim, who died along with members of (his group's) leadership that was with him," said Alswarmi Khalid, the army's spokesperson.





Khalid said Ibrahim and members of his group were surrounded and killed in the Wad Banda area -- along the border between North Darfur state and North Kordofan state -- as they attempted to escape to South Sudan.





Fighting between Darfur rebels and the Sudanese army broke out days ago in North Kordofan, as rebels announced an assault on Khartoum.





Ibrahim was the leader of the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM), considered the most powerful Darfur rebel group. The JEM had refused to join the Doha Darfur peace document, signed between the Sudanese government and another rebel group, the Liberation and Justice Movement, this year.





A statement posted on JEM's website confirmed Ibrahim's death, but told a different narrative of events.





"JEM announces the martyrdom of its chair and head of its armed forces and offers its condolences to all Sudanese people," the statement read.





The JEM said Ibrahim was attacked from air by an unknown plane that hit with "with accuracy unusual for the regime's army's fighters which led to his martyrdom ... which points to the involvement of and a conspiracy by some in the regional and international circles with Khartoum's genocidal regime."





The rebel group reconfirmed its commitment to remove the government from power.

***

(CNN) -- Asian champions Al Sadd have qualified for the semifinals of the Club World Cup after beating African champions Esperance of Tunisia 2-1 in Toyota, Japan, in a match marred by crowd trouble.





Esperance fans repeatedly clashed with police and stewards, with one supporter also running onto the pitch before being dragged to the ground, after their side had two goals disallowed for offside, and penalty appeals rejected, in an enthraling match.





Al Sadd's victory, the fifth successive time the Asian champions have beaten their African equivalent in the tournament, means the Qatari side have secured a dream last four clash with European champions Barcelona on Thursday.





Al Sadd went ahead in the 33rd minute when Khalfan Al Khalfan headed home a rebound after goalkeeper Moez Ben Cherifia failed to deal properly with Abdul Kader Keita's long-range drive.





And they doubeld their advantage four minutes after the break when Lee Jung-Soo headed a free-kick across goal for captain Abdullah Koni to knock in from close range.





Both teams were making their debut in the competition, and Esperance gave themselves hope on the hour mark when Ousama Darragi headed home a set-piece.





But, helped by a couple of contentious decisions, Al Sadd held on and will now pit their wits against tournament favorites Barcelona.





Meanwhile, in the other fixture played on Sunday, Japanese champions Kashiwa Reysol beat CONCACAF champions Monterrey of Mexico on penalties, after their match had ended 1-1.





Ryohei Hayashi netted the winning spot-kick to see Kashiwa through 4-3 on penalties and seal a date with South American champions Santos of Brazil in the other semifinal on Wednesday.

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN) -- Thirty-eight years ago, Joseph McGinty Nichol was a boy in Kalamazoo, Michigan, playing with toy robots.



Many of the robots in "Terminator Salvation" are real machines, which increased realism, the cast says.



Today "McG," as he is better known, builds and blows up real robots.



The prominent filmmaker is the driving force behind one of the season's summer blockbusters, "Terminator Salvation," which is filled with very expensive and very explosive robots. The choice to use real robots when possible, instead of CGI (computer generated images), was deliberate, McG said.



According to the director and the film's stars, the decision to use real machines was a testament to the growing sophistication of the moviegoing public, whom they believe can "feel" the difference between actors standing in front of a green screen versus actors interacting with the real thing.



It was also done in honor of the legendary special effects supervisor, four-time Oscar winner Stan Winston ("Jurassic Park," the other "Terminator" films), who passed away during filming last year.  Watch the robots in action »



The director and three of his cast members -- Christian Bale, Bryce Dallas Howard and Anton Yelchin -- took a time out with CNN to explain why gravity and singed eyebrows both played a role in "Terminator Salvation."



Bryce Dallas Howard: That was something that was really important to McG ...  when an audience member sees this film, that they can actually feel what's occurring.



I think that audiences are very savvy now. We can feel when something is CGI and that's no disrespect to CGI -- we couldn't do this movie without it -- but, whenever possible, in the tradition of Sam Winston, he wanted to build the robots. So a lot of what you see is real.



McG: And if you drop something, we've spent our whole lives watching physics in play, and if you say, just have the CGI do that, people can tell something's off, and it releases you from being involved in the picture. So, we built all the robots, we built all the sets, we blew them up for real, a great many of us lost our eyebrows!



Christian Bale: It was kind of comical at times because something that's meant to be so intimidating was actually surrounded by five guys with these kind of puppet rods I had to blank out or I would start laughing. But, the end result is something really formidable and you know, really iconic in movie history.



Anton Yelchin: Now I'm obsessed with the robots! I'm so [annoyed] that this guy or whoever it is that's in charge of it wouldn't let me have one!

***

PARIS, France -- Goals from Juninho and Sidney Govou gave Lyon a 2-0 home win over Valenciennes and enabled the six-time champions to stay four points ahead at the top of the French league.



Juninho opened the scoring for Lyon five minutes before the break.



Brazilian midfielder Juninho nudged in a Karim Benzema cross five minutes before the break and Govou lobbed in the second three minutes from time.



Lyon, who are at home to German champions VfB Stuttgart in the Champions League group stage on Wednesday, have 31 points from 13 matches.



Second-placed Nancy celebrated their 40th anniversary with a 1-0 win over Girondins Bordeaux.



Nancy, who have a game in hand, scored in the 29th minute when midfielder Chris Malonga headed in a cross from Youssouf Hadji.



Bordeaux stay fourth with 22 points from 13 games after their first away defeat of the season.



Third-placed Stade Rennes slumped to a 1-0 home defeat against Monaco, who had only picked up a point from their six previous league outings.



Frederic Piquionne headed home from a Nene corner kick for the visitors two minutes into the second half.



Troubled Paris St Germain clinched a 2-1 victory at Racing Strasbourg thanks to a Rodrigo own goal and 20-year-old midfielder Loris Arnaud's effort after 19 minutes.



Olympique Marseille were held to an embarrassing goalless draw by Lorient and remain third from bottom.



Coach Eric Gerets said:"The public have a right to be unhappy as the level of play in the second half wasn't worthy of Marseille.



"Taking the match as a whole you can have a harsh judgement. We made a few chances in the first half but we had a problem constructing moves from the back.



"In the second half we should have lost the match with the counter-attacks.



"We have to look at ourselves in the mirror, fight and work." E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- The pilot and co-pilot aboard a FedEx cargo plane were killed when the plane burst into flames Monday while landing at Tokyo's Narita airport in Japan, airport and hospital officials said.



Smoke rises from a FedEx cargo plane that crash landed on the tarmac of the Narita International Airport, Tokyo.



Both crew members were American men, an official at Narita Red Cross Hospital told CNN.



Video from the landing showed the plane bouncing at least twice on the runway and veering left as it turned on its side before bursting into flames. The fire destroyed the aircraft, which was identified by FedEx as a McDonnell Douglas MD-11.



Japan's Ministry of Transport said it was the first fatal crash at Narita, which opened in 1978.



Strong winds may have played a role in the crash, said Masaru Fujisaki, an airport official.



FedEx Express Flight 80 took off from Guangzhou, China, and crashed at Narita about 7 a.m. Monday (6 p.m. Sunday ET), said FedEx spokesman Matt Ceniceros.  Watch more about the cargo plane accident »



According to observations at the airport, wind gusts were reported to be between 30 to 50 mph around the time if the crash.



Japan's Kyodo news agency reported that Narita firefighters had worked through the flaming wreckage to try to rescue two people believed to be the crew.



The news agency said the cargo plane was landing on Runway A, the longer of the two runways at Narita, a major international airport.



The National Transportation Safety Board in Washington said Sunday night it was sending a team to Japan to assist in the investigation of the crash.



CNN's Kyung Lah in Tokyo contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- This month, Just Imagine focused on the future of nature and the ways in which it can inspire solutions to some of the greatest challenges facing humanity today.



A digital representation of the human genome.



Yet as scientists gain a greater understanding of biological processes, they're also learning how to manipulate them, including the very essence of what makes us human -- our DNA.



Biotechnology advances are already helping scientists find groundbreaking ways to create personalized medicine, detect illnesses and eradicate disease.



And this, according to futurist Ray Kurzweil, is only the beginning. In the future, humans will be able to reverse the aging process, replace dying organs with younger ones grown from an individual's own DNA and even genetically engineer unborn children, he said.



But some, like the UK-based group Human Genetics Alert, worry the ability to reprogram our biochemistry could lead mankind into unknown territory with dangerous ramifications for the future, including genetic discrimination and even a redefinition of what it means to be human.



We want to hear your views. To what extent should we be able to alter our genetic makeup? Should there be a limit? And how should it be determined exactly what that limit is?



Post your comments in the Sound Off box below. We'll publish the best.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- U.S., Turkish and Iraqi leaders all held talks Monday about Kurdish rebels using northern Iraq as a launchpad for cross-border attacks into Turkey.



Turkish troops patrol near the border with Iraq on Monday.



President Bush chatted by phone with Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, while separately two senior Iraq national government figures met with the head of the country's Kurdish region.



The diplomatic moves came after Turkish warplanes pounded Kurdish separatist targets in northern Iraq on Saturday and Sunday as well as last week.



Bush and Erdogan talked about the dangers of the Kurdish separatist rebels along the Turkish-Iraqi border, the White House confirmed.



National Security Council spokesman Gordon Johndroe said they discussed their common efforts to fight terrorism, and the importance of the United States, Turkey and Iraq working together to confront the Kurdistan Workers' Party, or PKK.



Bush has vowed to help Turkey fight PKK rebels.



The PKK has spent two decades fighting for autonomy for Kurds in southeastern Turkey, with some of its attacks launched from inside northern Iraq. The United States and European Union consider the group a terrorist organization.



Last week, Turkey's ambassador to the United States, Nabi Sensoy, said his country's maneuvers against Kurdish militant targets in northern Iraq were based on intelligence provided by the United States.



In the Kurdish Iraq city of Sulaimaniya, Iraqi President Jalal Talabani, who is Kurdish, and Vice President Tariq al-Hashimi, who is Sunni Arab, met with Kurdish Regional Government President Massoud Barzani.



Iraqi Kurdish officials, while critical of the PKK, have denounced the Turkish bombing campaign. Last week, Barzani snubbed visiting U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice in protest of the attacks.



"We have vehemently condemned the bombardment. The bombing targeted safe and secure areas and innocent people. Several people were either killed or wounded," Barzani said on Monday at a press conference with the others.



"We held consultations with President Jalal Talabani and we will continue our consultations with other concerned parties to put an end to these aggressions and put to an end the shelling of villages."



The three Iraqi officials also dealt with national unity. They signed a "memorandum of understanding" to deepen relations further with their three parties: Talabani's Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, Barzani's Kurdistan Democratic Party and al-Hashimi's Iraqi Islamic Party, a Sunni Arab entity. E-mail to a friend



CNN's Kathleen Koch, Talia Kayali and Mohammed Tawfeeq contributed to this report

***

(CNN) -- A Texas woman accused of killing her toddler daughter and dumping the body in Galveston Bay has been found guilty of murder by a jury in Galveston, Texas.



Kimberly Dawn Trenor received a life sentence without possibility of parole in the murder of her daughter.



Kimberly Dawn Trenor, 20, showed no emotion as the verdict was read late Monday. Trenor had pleaded guilty to tampering with evidence in the case, but pleaded not guilty to the capital murder charge.



She received a life sentence without the possibility of parole.



The body of Trenor's daughter, Riley Ann Sawyers, was found in October 2007 in a large blue plastic container on an uninhabited island in Galveston Bay.



Two-year-old Riley Ann's case drew national attention after a fisherman found her body. Authorities didn't know her identity, and police dubbed her "Baby Grace."



After authorities distributed composite sketches of the girl nationwide, Sheryl Sawyers, the girl's paternal grandmother, contacted police from her Ohio home to say the drawing resembled her granddaughter. DNA testing confirmed the child's identity.



According to an affidavit, Trenor told police Riley had been beaten and thrown across a room and that her head was held under water before she died on July 24, 2007.



Another piece of evidence shown to the jury during the trial was a page of Trenor's journal where she talked of beating the child, according to CNN affiliate KTRK.



"I just kept hitting her with the belt again and again. I don't know how long, but I remember her trying to get away and me knocking her back down," the journal said.



Trenor's husband, Royce Clyde Zeigler II, 25, also faces capital murder and evidence tampering charges, but is being tried separately.



A court date has not been set in that case.

***

(CNN) -- Baseball Hall of Famer Bob Feller died Wednesday night in Cleveland, Ohio, of acute leukemia, according to a statement from the Cleveland Indians. He was 92.





Feller was diagnosed with acute myeloid leukemia in August and underwent surgery at the Cleveland Clinic to implant a pacemaker in October. In mid-November, Feller was hospitalized with pneumonia.





The major leaguer was an icon for Indians fans.





"We in Cleveland have been blessed to have had him with us these many years," said Indians owner Larry Dolan. "To say he will be missed is such an understatement."





Feller spent 18 years in a Cleveland Indians uniform. He started 484 games, winning 266 of them. Feller had a lifetime ERA of 3.25, threw three no-hitters, including the only Opening Day no-hitter in Major League Baseball history, on April 16, 1940. In 1946, he pitched 36 complete games.





"Since 1936 he has been with us. For 75 years he has been a contributing citizen, a model for all athletes, and friend of thousands," Dolan said. "As so it shall be in the larger sense, Bob will be with us always. Not at Opening Day, not at Fantasy Camp, not in the Press Box, but in our hearts."





Indians manager Manny Acta said Feller was a special person.





"There has never been a great one with such an affiliation to his original franchise," Acta said. "When you think Cleveland Indians, you think Bob Feller and vice-versa. He was a genuine patriot and a big-time Hall of Famer. Boy, he loved the Indians and we all loved him back."

***

(CNN) -- An Alaska lottery held to raise money for a group that helps sexual abuse victims had a surprise winner: a convicted sex offender.



Alec Ahsoak in an undated photograph.



Alec Ahsoak, who according to the state sex offender registry was convicted in 1993 and 2000 for sexual abuse of a minor, came forward Saturday with the winning ticket for the $500,000 Lucky Time Pull Tabs jackpot.



Proceeds of the lottery help Standing Together Against Rape in Anchorage, a nonprofit group that offers support to sexual assault victims among other services.



"It's not how we had envisioned the story going," Nancy Haag, the group's executive director, told CNN Radio.



Alaska has the highest per capita number of rape cases in the United States, according to FBI statistics.



"With a ranking that high, it's ironic that the person who wins is a convicted sex offender," Haag added.



Ahsoak's past was first revealed by KTUU-TV in Anchorage on Sunday. His attorney, Lance Wells, did not immediately return a call Monday from CNN.



Efforts to reach lottery organizer Abe Spicola, who owns Lucky Times Pull Tabs, were unsuccessful late Monday. But Spicola told the Anchorage Daily News that Ahsoak "was going to buy a house and said he was going to donate part of it to God, and, you know, charity."



CNN's Samira J. Simone and April Willliams contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- President Barack Obama made a previously unannounced visit Thursday to the Massachusetts Emergency Management Agency, which is dealing with widespread flooding in the region.





Obama made the stop after a speech on health care reform in Portland, Maine, and before two fundraising appearances in Boston.





At the emergency agency's facility, Obama met with Massachusetts Gov. Deval Patrick, a fellow Democrat and political ally, as well as local officials and workers combating flooding from recent storms. He spoke with workers coordinating the response to the flooding, saying at one point: "Sounds like at least with some sunshine and sandbags, we can hope for the best."





Family needs boat to get to front door





Later, he began his remarks at the fundraising events by thanking the government workers involved in the flood relief effort.





"It is worth reminding people at a time when folks who work in government don't get enough credit (that) when times are tough, when trouble arises, there are all kinds of civil servants out there who work 24/7," Obama said.





Patrick has declared a state of emergency and activated the National Guard.





The worst flooding has occurred in neighboring Rhode Island, where more than 10,000 people were without power and officials said long-term recovery could take months.





See first-hand stories from the flood zone





A rainstorm soaked Northeastern states Tuesday, worsening the effects of a major storm that struck two weeks ago.





Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano will visit Rhode Island on Friday to inspect flood damage and meet with state and local leaders to discuss response and recovery efforts.





In Connecticut, Gov. Jodi Rell said a state of emergency put in place for the earlier storm remains in effect.





The Massachusetts Emergency Management Agency is the state agency responsible for coordinating federal, state, local, voluntary and private resources during emergencies and disasters in the state.

***

(CNN) -- Jesper Parnevik admitted that he had "lost all respect" for fellow golfer Tiger Woods following revelations about the world number one's private life.



Woods apologized on his official Web site for "transgressions" and "personal sins and failings" on the same day that a gossip magazine published a story alleging that Woods had an affair with a 24-year-old New York cocktail waitress.



Former European Ryder Cup star Parnevik, 44, and his wife introduced fellow Swede Elin Nordegren to her future husband.



"It's always sad, and especially sad because me and my wife were at fault hooking her up with him and we probably thought he is a better guy than he is," Parnevik said.



"I would probably apologize to her and when you're a world-class athlete you probably should think a bit more before you do stuff.



"I haven't really talked to Tiger yet so I don't want to say too much but my heart goes out to her.



"There's nothing I regret saying and I stand by everything. He's lost all my respect, I mean, all the respect I had for the guy is gone, that's pretty much all I can say."



The rumors emerged after Woods, 33, was found bleeding and semi-conscious after his car hit a tree and fire hydrant outside his Florida home.



He was charged with careless driving, which carries a $164 fine and four points on his driving record.

***

(CNN) -- Suspected Islamic insurgents fired mortar rounds at a plane carrying Somalia's transitional president, but no one -- including Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed -- was harmed, a presidential spokesman said.



Somali President Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed, pictured late last month during a visit to France.



The attack happened while the plane was about to take off from Mogadishu's airport Sunday around 11 a.m. local time, spokesman Hussien Mohammed Huubsireb said.



"Al-Shaabab has actually tried to harm to president, but thank God nobody was hurt," Huubsireb said.



Al-Shaabab is an Islamic militia that is trying to seize control of Somalia. It is a splinter group of the Islamic Courts Union, which ousted Somalia's transitional government in 2006. The ICU was deposed in December of that year following Ethiopia's military invasion.



Bloody battles between Al-Shaabab and the Ethiopian-backed government forces in Mogadishu have forced residents to flee the capital.



More than 40,000 displaced civilians have taken shelter in dozens of makeshift settlements west of Mogadishu, described by the United Nations as "precarious conditions."



Sunday's mortar attack is the second assassination attempt on Ahmed. The president survived a car bombing in September 2006 outside Somalia's parliament in Baidoa that killed at least eight others.



Somalia's Prime Minister Ali Mohamed Gedi has been more frequently targeted by the Islamic insurgents seeking to destabilize the government.



Somalia has been mired in chaos since 1991, when warlords overthrew dictator Mohamed Siad Barre and sparked brutal clan infighting. Somalia's current transitional government is trying to maintain control of the capital, with the help of the better-equipped Ethiopian forces.



But the presence of the Ethiopians has united various Islamic militant groups in Somalia, including Al-Shaabab, who are trying to oust the Ethiopian forces and gain control of Mogadishu.



The United States classified Al-Shaabab as a terrorist organization in March, partly because of what Washington says is the group's close ties to Osama bin Laden's al Qaeda militant group.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN)  -- The United States ambassador to Afghanistan, William Wood, said Friday that changes in communications with Afghan military forces have been made in the aftermath of a disputed U.S. air raid on an Afghan village.

Civilians are overcome with emotion outside a home destroyed by a U.S. airstrike in Afghanistan.

And despite Afghanistan's outrage over the loss of life, he said, the incident has not undermined the nations' relationship.

The Afghanistan government has said that as many as 90 civilians -- including many children -- were killed in the August 22 air attack on a village in the Shindand district of Western Afghanistan. The United States had said that only seven civilians died, along with dozens of insurgents.

A number of investigations into the incident are under way, including a "senior level" review by the United States.

"People who are reviewing our findings have been in Afghanistan for a while, and I don't know when they will complete their review," Wood said at the State Department late Friday.

"There is no American involved who doesn't feel a personal sense of pain and regret any time any civilian casualty occurs," he said. "Speaking as an official of the American government, I can say there is no one who works harder than the United States does to minimize such casualties.

"I know as a matter of absolute certainty of operations that have been canceled precisely because there was a risk of civilian casualties," he added.

"I think there is no question there has been what one Afghan official referred to as 'sort of a bumpy time' over this issue in the last few weeks. I think that it has never threatened the underlying relationship of confidence between our two countries and between our peoples or between our military and the people of Afghanistan.

"That said, we are certainly committed to taking the steps necessary to ensure that such casualties are reduced to the absolute minimum and to working closely, even more closely, with the Afghan government to successfully carry out the military mission."

The ambassador said the United States has made changes in communication between the U.S. and Afghan forces.

"Steps are already not simply under way but have been taken to improve coordination," he said.

U.S. and Afghanistan officials have just completed a new round in what is called the United States-Afghanistan Strategic Partnership.

A joint U.S.-Afghanistan statement released Thursday referred to the attack.

"The United States delegation expressed regret over the loss of any innocent civilian lives incurred during security operations," the statement said. "In response to concerns expressed by the government of Afghanistan, the United States is conducting a senior level review and assessment of the August 22 Shindand operation. In addition, both sides recognize the need for establishing a mutually agreed-upon framework and mechanism to minimize civilian casualties and to maintain the strong support of the Afghan people in fighting terrorism."

***

(CNN) -- Football superstar, celebrity, fashion icon, multimillion-dollar heartthrob. Now, David Beckham is headed for the Hollywood Hills as he takes his game to U.S. Major League Soccer.

CNN looks at how Bekham fulfilled his dream of playing for Manchester United, and his time playing for England.

The world's famous footballer has begun a five-year contract with the Los Angeles Galaxy team, and on Friday Beckham will meet the press and reveal his new shirt number.

This week, we take an in depth look at the life and times of Beckham, as CNN's very own "Becks," Becky Anderson, sets out to examine what makes the man tick -- as footballer, fashion icon and global phenomenon.

It's a long way from the streets of east London to the Hollywood Hills and Becky charts Beckham's incredible rise to football stardom, a journey that has seen his skills grace the greatest stages in world soccer.

She goes in pursuit of the current hottest property on the sports/celebrity circuit in the U.S. and along the way explores exactly what's behind the man with the golden boot.

CNN will look back at the life of Beckham, the wonderfully talented youngster who fulfilled his dream of playing for Manchester United, his marriage to pop star Victoria, and the trials and tribulations of playing for England.

We'll look at the highs (scoring against Greece), the lows (being sent off during the World Cup), the Man. U departure for the Galacticos of Madrid -- and now the Home Depot stadium in L.A.

We'll ask how Beckham and his family will adapt to life in Los Angeles -- the people, the places to see and be seen and the celebrity endorsement.

Beckham is no stranger to exposure. He has teamed with Reggie Bush in an Adidas commercial, is the face of Motorola, is the face on a PlayStation game and doesn't need fashion tips as he has his own international clothing line. But what does the star couple need to do to become an accepted part of Tinseltown's glitterati?

The road to major league football in the U.S.A. is a well-worn route for some of the world's greatest players. We talk to some of the former greats who came before him and examine what impact these overseas stars had on U.S. soccer and look at what is different now.

We also get a rare glimpse inside the David Beckham academy in L.A, find out what drives the kids and who are their heroes. The perception that in the U.S.A. soccer is a "game for girls" after the teenage years is changing. More and more young kids are choosing the European game over the traditional U.S. sports. E-mail to a friend

***

Beijing, China (CNN) -- Five more defendants were sentenced to death for their roles in summer riots that killed around 200 people in western China, officials said Thursday.



The five sentenced to death were among 22 defendants that went on trial this week by the Intermediate People's Court of Urumqi, according to a local government statement.



Along with the five people to be executed, another five were sentenced to death but the execution will be postponed for two years, the statement said.



The others received sentences ranging from 10 years in prison to life in prison.



This group is part of dozens of people who have put on trial for the alleged role in the violent ethnic clashes in China's Xinjiang autonomous region that broke out this summer.



More than 20 people have received death sentences after being convicted of crimes related to the unrest.



The riots in July were prompted by long-simmering resentment between minority Uyghurs and majority Han Chinese. The Uyghurs are mostly Muslims in Xinjiang. Some Islamists refer to the region as East Turkistan.



Around 200 people were believed to have been killed in the riots. The unrest continued in August when Uyghurs were accused of attacking Han Chinese with syringes filled with different substances.



In September, China sent 7,000 security personnel to Urumqi to ease tensions after Han Chinese protested the syringe attacks.



China's constitution guarantees ethnic minorities equal rights. However, minority groups such as the Uyghurs say the Han discriminate and ethnic tensions run deep.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Oasis frontman Liam Gallagher on Saturday denied that he is the man shown pointing at the Google Street View camera as it drove past his local pub in London last summer.



Liam Gallagher says the figure captured on Google Earth outside a pub in London is not him.



"Just saw google earth apparently that's meant to be me, who ... wears legwarmers with reeboks?? Not this kid!! LG," he wrote on Twitter.



Though available for a while in the United States, Google Street View only launched in Britain last week. As in America, the launch in Britain prompted people all over the country to try to find themselves or spot funny images and famous faces on the service.



Gallagher was apparently spotted outside The Queens pub in Camden, in north London, a place he's known to frequent.



The picture shows a man dressed in a dark T-shirt and long shorts sitting at an outdoor table. He points at the camera, obviously having seen the Google car and its Street View camera drive by.



The service blurs people's faces so it is hard to confirm whether it is Gallagher.



Though the man isn't wearing legwarmers, Gallagher is apparently talking about the man's ankle-high shoes and thick black socks.

***

LOS ANGELES (CNN) -- Dolores Hope, the widow of actor-comedian Bob Hope, died of natural causes at her Los Angeles home Monday, her family said. She was 102.





"I had such a huge admiration for both of them," actress Julie Newmar said. "The quality it takes to get just one year older, says a lot about that fact that she lived to 102. What a glorious woman and life!"





Although she put her singing career on hold after her marriage to Hope, Dolores Hope was active as a philanthropist, involved in her own causes as well as her husband's.





Military troops entertained by her husband's USO shows knew Dolores Hope because she would usually close the shows with a rendition of "Silent Night," according to a biography provided by her family.





"She was the First Lady of the USO," Carol Channing said. "They didn't come any more patriotic, caring or talented than Dolores."





Her last USO show performance came at age 84, when she sang "White Christmas" to Operation Desert Storm troops from the back of a truck in the Saudi desert.





She restarted her singing career at the age of 83 by recording several albums. She performed with Rosemary Clooney at Rainbow and Stars in New York for several weeks.





Born in Harlem in New York on May 27, 1909, Dolores DeFina was a singer at Manhattan's Vogue Club when she met Bob Hope in 1933. It was "love at first song," the biography quotes Bob Hope as saying.





The couple married the next year and later adopted four children.





The couple moved in the late 1930s from New York to California, where he pursued a movie and radio career.





Bob Hope was 100 when he died July 27, 2003.





"Dolores once said that their longevity could be credited to laughter and they certainly had a lot of that in their lives," said actress Alison Arngrim.





The family will hold a private funeral at burial at the Bob Hope Memorial Garden, San Fernando Mission, California, where her husband was interred.

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- Two additional suspects in the strangulation of an 89-year-old Holocaust survivor were arrested Friday, the Manhattan district attorney's office said.



Felix Brinkmann dances at a 2008 birthday party. "He was not the kind of guy who had enemies," his son says.



Aljulah Cutts, 27, and his brother Hasib, 30, were taken into custody in Manhattan in connection with the death last week of Guido Felix Brinkmann, the district attorney's office said.



A spokeswoman declined to specify what, if any, connection the men are suspected to have had to the victim or to a woman previously arrested in the case.



Police also would not say what charges the two might face.



The woman, Angela Murray, 30, of the Bronx, was arraigned Sunday on one count of murder in the second degree and three counts of robbery in the case.



Brinkmann was found dead in the bedroom of his apartment July 30, his hands tied behind his back, police said. A safe was missing from the apartment, and his car had been stolen.



Brinkmann, a native of Latvia, was held in the Mauthausen, Ebensee and Auschwitz camps during World War II.



After the war, he and his wife, who also survived Auschwitz, came to America.



In 1971, Brinkmann co-founded Adam's Apple disco in Manhattan, and later was the real estate manager of a mixed-use building in the Bronx, according to his son, Rick Brinkman, who uses a different spelling for his last name.



Brinkmann's wife died last year.



CNN's Jason Kessler and Chris Kokenes contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- A group claiming to be the Indonesian arm of the al Qaeda terrorist network is purportedly taking responsibility for a pair of deadly bombs that exploded within minutes of each other at two luxury hotels in Jakarta.



The JW Marriott in Jakarta, Indonesia, which was bombed July 17, is guarded Wednesday.



The July 17 blasts at Jakarta's JW Marriott and Ritz-Carlton hotels killed nine people, including at least two presumed suicide bombers, and wounded more than 50.



On Wednesday, Noordin M. Top -- the suspected leader of a small splinter group of the militant Jemaah Islamiyah, which has ties to al Qaeda -- purportedly issued statements claiming responsibility for the attacks on behalf of "al Qaeda in Indonesia." Top purportedly signed the statements posted on radical Islamist Web sites as the head of al Qaeda in Indonesia.



CNN could not independently authenticate the statements.



One of the statements says the Ritz-Carlton attack was carried out by "one of our mujahedeen warriors against the American lackeys and stooges visiting the hotel."



"God has given us a blessing for us to find a way to attack the biggest hotel that America owns in the Indonesian capital of Jakarta -- the Ritz-Carlton, where security was very tight making it very difficult to initiate the attack that we did," the statement says.



The statement mentions members of Britain's Manchester United soccer team, which had been scheduled to check into the Ritz-Carlton on July 19 but canceled its trip after the bombing.



"Those players are Christians and therefore do not deserve Muslims' money and respect," the statement says.



The other statement addressed the Marriott attack. It claims that the target in that bombing was Americans with ties to the Indonesian Chamber of Commerce and Industries, known as Kadin.



Police say a third bomb had been planted in an 18th floor room of the Marriott two days before the other two bombs exploded. The unexploded bomb -- which was timed to detonate on the upper floor before the first blast tore through the Marriott's lobby area at 7:47 a.m. -- was found and defused, police said.

***

(PEOPLE.com) -- Michelle Duggar, star of TLC's "18 Kids and Counting," was rushed to an Arkansas hospital over the weekend -- but her pregnancy with Baby No. 19, not due until spring, wasn't the reason for her dash to the doctor.





"This weekend, Michelle Duggar was admitted to an Arkansas hospital due to gallbladder issues," said a network rep.





"The pain from a gallstone was generating some contractions. Just to be safe, she was airlifted a Little Rock, Arkansas, hospital, so that in the unlikely event that she had to be delivered early, she would be close to a NICU center," the representative said. "Though there were some fears that the baby was in trouble initially, it soon was discovered to be solely the gallstone causing the discomfort. Michelle is resting comfortably, and the baby is doing fine."





For now, Michelle and Jim Bob Duggar's brood of 18 kids will have to get by without Mom at home.





"Doctors want to observe Michelle in the hospital for the next couple of days," said the rep, "but it would appear that the pain medication they have given her for the gallstone has worked, and there is no need for immediate surgery. The hope is that any necessary surgery can be delayed until after she delivers."





The physician attending Duggar, Dr. Curtis Lowery of the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, told PEOPLE, "We have every reason at present to expect that mother and baby will proceed with a healthy pregnancy. Mrs. Duggar is in good spirits and feeling much better."





© 2010 People and Time Inc. All rights reserved.

***

(CNN)  -- Four-time defending champion Rafael Nadal slid to an astonishing 6-2 6-7 6-4 7-6 defeat to Sweden's Robin Soderling at the French Open on Sunday.



Soderling savors his unlikely triumph against Nadal in the French Open fourth round.



Soderling, the 23rd seed, was a rank outsider against the world number one who had never lost a match on the clay at Roland Garros and was a short-priced favorite to win a record fifth straight title.



But Soderling never looked back after breezing through the first set of their fourth round match and closed out victory as Nadal sent a volley wide after bravely saving a matchpoint in the fourth set tiebreak.



The Spaniard tried to look on the positives after his shock defeat.



"It's not a tragedy, losing here in Paris," he told the official tournament Web site www.rolandgarros.com



"It had to happen one day, and this is an excellent season for me.



"Of course it's a bit sad, but I have to overcome this as quickly as possible. No one remembers defeats on the long run. People remember victories. So I have to move forward and try and prepare the best I can."



King of clay Nadal had compiled a 31-match winning streak at the French Open and was attempting to win the second grand slam of the year after beating world number two Roger Federer in the final of the Australian Open.



Soderling took advantage of a strong serve and big forehands to give Nadal a torrid time in front of a stunned crowd on the Philippe Chatrier court.



Defeat for Nadal opens up his side of the draw with world number three Andy Murray a possible beneficiary.



Murray, who was seeded to meet Nadal in the semifinals, beat Marin Cilic of Croatia 7-5 7-6 6-1 in their earlier fourth round match.



He will play Fernando Gonzalez of Chile for a place in the semifinals.



Gonzalez beat Victor Hanescu of Romania 6-2 6-4 6-2 in their fourth round match.



Soderling will next play Nikolay Davydenko of Russia as the 10th seed beat  eighth-ranked Fernando Verdasco of Spain 6-2 6-2 6-4.in the final last 16 match of a dramatic day.

***

(CNN) -- Third seed Roger Federer returned to winning ways after a 10-month title drought with a convincing straight sets victory over Japan's Kei Nishikori in the Swiss Indoors championship in Basel.





Former world number one Federer delighted his home fans by powering to a 6-1 6-3 success, his fifth in the last six Basel events.





The triumph also ended a relatively barren 2011 for Federer, whose only other ATP Tour title this season came in January's Qatar Open in Doha.





Nishikori, who had stunned world number one Novak Djokovic in the semifinals, had no answer to 30-year-old Federer, who was reaching his first final since losing to Rafael Nadal in the French Open at Roland Garros in June.





Federer, who was securing his 68th career title, told reporters: "It's great to win at home once again. It was a perfect match for me and now I have big hopes for Paris and London this month."





Federer continued: "I've known, ever since I hit with him as a teenager, that Kei could have a good future. He has had some injuries but he's playing well now. It was a good match and I'm very happy for the win."





Nishikori added: "I tried to fight, but Roger would not let me into the match. I'm very glad to have played the final, it has always been one of my goals to play Roger."





Meanwhile, Spain's Marcel Granollers defeated Argentina's Juan Monaco 6-2 4-6 7-6 (7/3) to win the Valencia Open on Sunday.





It was the 25-year-old's third career title and second this year following his victory over compatriot Fernando Verdasco in the Gstaad final in July.

***

(WIRED) -- Microsoft released an Xbox Live app for iOS devices on Wednesday, bringing features of Microsoft's gaming service to Apple devices for the first time.





My Xbox Live lets users edit their 3-D avatars, chat with Xbox Live friends and revel in their achievements. You can also check out more information about the newest apps and games on Xbox, as well as gaming tips and breaking news.





Windows Phone users have had Xbox Live services packaged into their mobile experience for a while now, but now iOS users can get a piece of the action. And whether they like it or not, iOS users who download the app are also getting a screen similar to a Windows Phone-style user interface.





The iPhone app features the horizontal bar across the bottom of the screen that houses the same sort of circular icons you'd find in a Windows Phone 7 app. Also included: a clever browser-based demo that lets you virtually explore the UI of a Windows Phone from your Android or iPhone handset.





While you may already be on a phone of a different OS, it has potential to lure potential defectors over to Microsoft's mobile platform.





It's been a good week for Microsoft. On Tuesday, the company unveiled the details of its upcoming Windows Store for Windows 8, the newest version of the world's most popular desktop platform.





And on Monday, the company announced that the Xbox was getting a user interface refresh, with dozens of new content channels and the addition of a Windows Phone app you can use to control your Xbox. Microsoft's iOS apps are now icing on top of the cake.





Now when are we going to get those Microsoft Office apps on the iPad?





My Xbox Live is available free for download on the iPhone and iPad in the App Store.





Subscribe to WIRED magazine for less than $1 an issue and get a FREE GIFT! Click here!

***

(CNN) -- The bone fragment found near the California home where Jaycee Dugard is said to have been confined for 18 years is "probably human," a sheriff's spokesman said Tuesday.





Jaycee Dugard was locked in a shed tucked under a blue tarp in her alleged captor's backyard.





Investigators said they found the bone last week on a neighbor's property in an area that Dugard's accused captor and rapist, Philip Garrido, had access to.





The fragment, which was analyzed by an outside expert, will go on to the state DNA lab for testing, Jimmy Lee, director of Public Affairs for the Contra Costa County's Sheriff's Office said in an e-mail.





"The expert has determined that the bone fragment found in the backyard of Garrido's neighbor is probably human," Lee said.





"We will be requesting the state to see if it can develop a DNA profile on the fragment. It should be noted that it is not uncommon to find Native American remains in Contra Costa County," he said.





Garrido and his wife, Nancy, have pleaded not guilty to 29 felony charges, including rape and kidnapping, stemming from Dugard's disappearance when she was 11 years old.





Investigators believe Garrido kidnapped Dugard in 1991 in South Lake Tahoe, California, fathered two daughters with her and held her captive in a well-hidden compound behind his home in Antioch.





After the Garridos were arrested in August, investigators used cadaver dogs to search the couple's ramshackle home and the surrounding rural property for possible connections to unsolved crimes.





Police in Hayward, California, are trying to determine whether Garrido is linked to the 1988 kidnapping of Michaela Garecht, Hayward Police Lt. Chris Orrey said last week.





Garecht and Dugard were of similar age and appearance, both were abducted in daylight and a sketch of a suspect resembled Garrido, Orrey said.





In Dublin, California, investigators said last week they were looking into whether Garrido was connected to the 1989 disappearance of Ilene Misheloff, who was 13 when she was abducted.





Garrido was convicted of kidnapping and raping Katie Callaway Hall in 1976. He was released from prison after serving 10 years of a 50-year sentence. He was labeled a sex offender and put on lifetime parole.





CNN's Dan Simon contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Tom Cruise expounds on his beliefs in Scientology in a 2004 video that made its way onto the Internet this week.



Tom Cruise appears with his wife, Katie Holmes, at a movie premiere earlier this month.



"I think it's a privilege to call yourself a Scientologist, and it's something you have to earn," Cruise says at the beginning of the video.



Cruise says he's "driven ... by the opportunity to really help, for the first time, change people's lives. I'm absolutely, uncompromisingly dedicated to that."



The video was shown at a 2004 Scientology ceremony honoring Cruise for his humanitarian work. Church of Scientology officials said it can be viewed at any of its churches, but it created a stir this week when what the church calls a pirated and edited version appeared on YouTube.



The video has since been taken off YouTube, but an interview portion remained available on the celebrity Web site gawker.com on Thursday.  Watch snippets of Cruise video »



"The Cruise Indoctrination Video Scientology Tried To Suppress" is the title of gawker.com's presentation.



"You have to watch this video," the site says. "It shows Tom Cruise, with all the wide-eyed fervor that he brings to the promotion of a movie, making the argument for Scientology," which it calls "the bizarre 20th-century religion.  Watch "Showbiz Tonight" discussion of Cruise video »



Cruise talks over a repetitive guitar-riff soundtrack, and appears to be answering questions, though an interviewer is not seen or heard.



A second part of the video, made available to CNN by the publisher of a new unauthorized biography of Cruise, shows Cruise accepting Scientology's Freedom Medal of Valor award and exchanging military-like salutes with Scientology chairman David Miscavige to audience applause. The publisher denies leaking other parts of the video to the Web.



In the video by the publisher, Cruise also salutes a portrait of L. Ron Hubbard, cited on the church's Web site as the founder of "the only major religion founded in the 20th century."



Hubbard's biography cites his accomplishments as everything from mariner and horticulturalist to author and humanitarian.



In the video, Cruise puts emphasis on the latter role.



A Scientologist "has the ability to create new realities and improve conditions," Cruise says.



On its Web site, the Church of Scientology highlights its humanitarian work, from anti-drug campaigns in places from Minnesota to Taiwan to teacher training in India.



The Web site defines Scientology as "the study of truth." Cruise embraces that in the video.



"If you're a Scientologist, ... you see things the way they are," Cruise says.



He also says he finds peace in the religion.



"The more you know as a Scientologist, you don't become overwhelmed by it," according to Cruise.



The unauthorized biography of Cruise is by author Andrew Morton. A Cruise spokesperson and the Church of Scientology have disputed the book, saying Morton did not seek their comment.



"Accuracy and truth were not on Morton's agenda," according to a church statement.



Morton denies that and says Cruise, who he calls "a towering figure on the international scene," and his faith are worthy of scrutiny.



"Tom Cruise has done remarkable work for his faith over the past few years," Morton said. "If it wasn't for him the Church of Scientology would be a shadow of what it is today." E-mail to a friend



CNN's Brad Lendon, David Mattingly and Don Lemon contributed to this report.

***

(CNN)  -- Accused enemy combatant Ali al-Marri was served with an arrest warrant Tuesday and transferred out of U.S. military custody for the first time since 2003, according to the U.S. Justice Department.



Ali Saleh Kahlah al-Marri was a student at Bradley University in Illinois when he was arrested in 2001.



Al-Marri's initial court appearance is scheduled for Tuesday. Defense Secretary Robert Gates released the Qatari man to the U.S. Marshals Service in preparation for the hearing.



On Friday, the U.S. Supreme Court granted the Obama administration's request to dismiss al-Marri's challenge of the president's unilateral authority to detain him indefinitely and without charges.



The high court ruled that al-Marri's case was rendered moot by a decision to indict him on federal conspiracy charges.



The court's ruling means there is no resolution of the larger constitutional issue of the president's power to detain people accused of terrorism and other crimes in the United States.



The decision by the Obama administration to criminally charge al-Marri after he spent seven years in custody -- more than five years in virtual isolation in a Navy brig in Charleston, South Carolina -- is the latest twist in the ongoing legal saga of the only remaining "enemy combatant" held in the United States.



Al-Marri had been accused of being an al Qaeda "sleeper agent," but until the indictment had never been charged with a criminal or terrorism-related offense.



The 43-year-old man will be sent at some point to Peoria, Illinois, to face a criminal trial.



President Obama last month ordered a prompt and thorough review of the "factual and legal basis" for the continued detention of al-Marri. He subsequently issued a presidential memorandum ordering Gates to facilitate al-Marri's transfer, saying it was "in the interest of the United States."



Since his initial arrest on credit card fraud charges in December 2001, al-Marri -- a legal resident of the United States -- had remained in "virtual isolation in the brig," his attorneys said. They were suing the government to improve his jail conditions and were challenging the constitutionality of his detention.



The Pentagon asserts al-Marri had trained at a terror camp in Afghanistan, met al Qaeda leaders Osama bin Laden and Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, and "volunteered for a martyr mission," according to a government filing with the Supreme Court.

***

Tokyo, Japan (CNN) -- Four American teenagers, all children of U.S. military personnel, have been arrested on charges of attempted murder after a woman was knocked off her motorbike with rope strung across two poles, Japanese police said.



The four suspects -- two 15-year-old boys, a 17-year-old girl and an 18-year-old man -- were taken into custody on Saturday, the Tokyo Metropolitan Police Department said.



They are accused of causing a severe head injury to a 23-year-old restaurant employee by stringing a rope between poles across a road.



U.S. Forces Japan was informed of the August incident in late October, a public information officer said. There was no clear explanation for the delay in the handover of the suspects to police, other than it involved rules between Washington and Tokyo covering U.S. forces and their dependents in Japan.



The U.S. military presence and its impact on Japanese residents have been a thorny issue over the years.



Most recently, residents of the Japanese island of Okinawa, where the U.S. maintains a large military presence, have blamed American troops for crime and noise.



In 2008, a 14-year-old Okinawa girl alleged that a Marine had raped her. The prosecutor released the Marine after the girl decided not to pursue charges. In 1995, a 12-year-old girl was gang-raped by three servicemen. A Japanese court convicted all three men.



Both incidents caused a furor in Japan. Then-Prime Minister Yasuo Fukuda called the 2008 incident "unforgivable ... It has happened over and over again in the past and I take it as a grave case."



It is unclear what, if any, role the military can take in the case. The 1960 Status of Forces Agreement between the United States and Japan gives Japan jurisdiction over "the members of the United States armed forces, the civilian component, and their dependents" in cases of offenses committed in Japan and punishable under Japanese law.



The agreement also says the United States must cooperate in investigating such offenses.



CNN's Kyung Lah and Yoko Wakatsuki contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- New sprint sensation Christophe Lemaitre became the first Frenchman to win three gold medals at a major athletics event on Sunday as his country finished second in the table behind Russia at the European Championships.





Lemaitre, the first white man to break the 10-second barrier over 100 meters last month, helped his 4x100m relay team to triumph in Barcelona and add to the 20-year-old's double in the individual sprints.





Martial Mbandjock, who had earlier won two bronzes behind his teammate, snatched victory on the final leg as Italy were beaten back into second with Germany third.





France's women's 4x100m team finished second behind shock winners Ukraine, who set the fastest time this year of 42.29 seconds.





Poland denied the favored Russians a medal, but their larger neighbors won both the men's and women's 4x400m relay events as they finished with a total of 10 golds and 24 podium placings -- six more than France.





Distance double for Britain's Farah





Mahiedine Mekhissi-Benabbad and Bouabdallah Tahri gave France a 1-2 in the men's 3000m steeplechase as Spain's Jose Luis Blanco took bronze.





The hosts ended the competition in sixth place with two golds and eight medals overall after Nuria Fernandez and Natalia Rodriguez finished first and second in the women's 1,500m ahead of third-placed French runner Hind Dehiba, while Russian favorite Anna Alminova was back in sixth.





Alemitu Bekele denied Turkey teammate Elvan Abeylegesse a 5,000m-10,000m double after passing the tiring former world record-holder on the home straight in the shorter distance, with Portugal's Sara Moreira third.





Sprint double for Lemaitre





In the women's high jump, Croatia's two-time world champion Blanka Vlasic won with a late leap of 2.03m to head off Sweden's Emma Green and Germany's Ariane Friedrich.





Germany's Christian Reif won the men's long jump with this year's leading mark of 8.47m to comfortably beat France's Kafetien Gomis and Britain's Chris Tomlinson.





The British team finished third overall with six golds and 19 medals in total, a record for the team, after also taking silver in the men's 4x400m and bronze in the women's event.





Lemaitre claims 100m gold in Barcelona





Poland's Piotr Malachowski won the men's discus from Germany's Robert Harting and Robert Fazekas of Hungary, while Switzerland finally won a medal after Victor Rothlin won the men's marathon in a time of two hours and 15.31 minutes to comfortably head off Spain's Chema Martinez and Russia's Dmitriy Safronov.





This is the last time that the event will be held every four years, with the next staging in Finland to start a biennial cycle -- ending just 26 days before the start of the 2012 Olympics in London.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Oasis front man Noel Gallagher has quit the rock group after a fallout with his bandmate brother, he announced late Friday.



"It's with some sadness and great relief to tell you that I quit Oasis tonight," Noel Gallagher said in a brief statement on the band's Web site. "People will write and say what they like, but I simply could not go on working with Liam a day longer."



Noel Gallagher is the band's lead guitarist and songwriter, and Liam Gallagher is the lead singer.



The band is currently on a European tour for its album, "Dig Out Your Soul." Noel Gallagher apologized to fans who had bought tickets for upcoming gigs in France, Germany and Italy.



Oasis had to cancel its headlining performance at the V Festival in Britain over the weekend because Liam Gallagher said he was sick and couldn't sing.



He later apologized for the cancellation and quashed rumors that it was the band's last-ever British gig.



Disputes between the brothers have been in the public eye in the past, but never before has one of the brothers gone so far as to leave the band.



Oasis shot to stardom with its 1994 album, "Definitely Maybe," which contained the band's first major hit, "Supersonic."



The follow-up, "(What's the Story) Morning Glory?" produced one of group's most famous tracks, "Wonderwall."



The Manchester band was one of the pioneers of the Britpop movement of the early '90s, along with British band Blur.

***

(WIRED) -- Say hello to your latest personal navigation device: a netbook. Dell plans to introduce a GPS and Wi-Fi card that can be integrated into the company's netbooks to turn them into gizmos that can offer turn-by-turn direction as well as any Garmin or TomTom.



Dell will introduce a GPS and Wi-Fi card that can be added to its netbooks to offer turn-by-turn direction.



"Smartphones already have GPS capabilities," says Alan Sicher, senior wireless product manager at Dell. "We are now bringing it to netbooks so the devices know where you are and can help you where you want to go."



Customers will have the option to buy the $69 card called the Wireless 700 when ordering their Dell Mini 10 netbook.



Dell's move comes at a time when navigation devices makers are looking beyond the traditional standalone GPS gadget and are offering their software on other devices.



Last month, TomTom announced that its turn-by-turn directions app would be available on the iPhone. TomTom will also offer accessories such as a car mounting dock and power charger. Meanwhile, Dell is hoping to capitalize on the explosive sales of netbooks.



Dell netbooks with the integrated GPS cards will allow consumers to pop open a netbook and get directions and also also make their netbook location aware. For instance, buyers can geo-tag photos on Flickr or check weather information customized to their current location. The Wireless 700 card combines Broadcom's GPS technology and Skyhook Wireless' Wi-Fi positioning solutions.



As for the navigation software, it offers 2D and 3D map views, save addresses for a trip and route optimization-- pretty much all the things that a standard GPS devices does.



Netbooks are petite devices. Still, it is difficult to imagine consumers carrying it around as a GPS navigation device or using it their car to find their way around--especially when smaller-sized cellphones could do the job.



Sicher says Dell's GPS-capable netbooks will come in handy for international travelers. "If you are traveling to Europe roaming costs can be pretty pricey for your cellphone," he says.



The GPS netbooks could also be handy in areas where cellphone coverage is weak, says Sicher. But there's fine print to the turn-by-turn directions navigation software on the netbook. Though it will be free for buyers of the card and the netbook, the maps will be updated yearly and customers could be charged for the updates.



Dell plans to offer accessories such as car charger and a dock for the netbooks, but they won't be available until later this month. The GPS cards will be available starting July 7.



Subscribe to WIRED magazine for less than $1 an issue and get a FREE GIFT! Click here!

***

Washington (CNN) -- The head of the U.S. Department of Energy's Loan Program Office has resigned amid a fiscal firestorm over the bankruptcy of a company that received a $535 million federal loan, DOE Secretary Steven Chu said.





The loan program's executive director, Jonathan Silver, was planning to leave his post and return to the private sector this fall, Chu said in a written statement.





Silver informed Chu of his intentions in July, "shortly after the fiscal year 2011 budget was completed by Congress and it became clear that no significant new funds were included for the loan program," the energy secretary said.





However, two House Republicans looking into the bankruptcy of the solar energy company Solyndra linked the resignation to the loan.





Approved in May 2010, the loan allowed the company to build a factory in Fremont, California, to produce state-of-the-art solar panels.





The company filed for bankruptcy in August, laying off 1,100 workers.





Silver testified last month before a House subcommittee about the DOE's handling of the loan, which has been at the center of a fierce political debate over the amount of government subsidies issued to new businesses.





On Thursday, Republican Reps. Fred Upton of Michigan and Cliff Stearns of Florida said Silver's decision "does not solve the problem."





"American taxpayers are already on the hook for the half-billion-dollar Solyndra bust -- what other shoes does this administration expect to drop?" the representatives said in a joint statement that went on to criticize President Barack Obama's handling of the issue.





Upton is chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Committee. Stearns heads up the Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee, which conducted the September hearings in which Silver testified.





Self-described as the "The Financing Force Behind a Clean Energy Economy," the program "is currently supporting 28 projects with a total loan amount of $16 billion," Chu said in the written statement.





CNN has confirmed that Silver will serve as a fellow at Third Way, a centrist think tank in Washington that focuses on the economy, energy, national security and domestic policy.





CNN's Kevin Bohn, Diana Ozemebhoya and Ashley Killough contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- A major investor in convicted swindler Bernie Madoff's Ponzi scheme drowned in his swimming pool in Florida after a heart attack, his attorney said Monday. The medical examiner's office confirmed the report.



Jeffry Picower, 67, was found unconscious in his pool shortly after noon Sunday at his Palm Beach,  Florida,, home by his wife, Palm Beach police said. He was pronounced dead at Good Samaritan Hospital.



Picower's attorney, William Zabel, told CNN that Picower drowned after suffering a massive heart attack. Sue Jaffe, spokeswoman for the Palm Beach County medical examiner, confirmed those details.



In September, Forbes magazine ranked Picower No. 371 among the 400 richest Americans, with a net worth of $1 billion.



In March, Madoff was convicted of operating a Ponzi scheme and defrauding thousands of investors. He was sentenced to 150 years in prison after pleading guilty to 11 felony counts of fraud, money laundering and perjury. Prosecutors have said it was the largest investor fraud ever committed by a single person, totaling billions in losses to investors.



When the Picower Foundation of Palm Beach announced it was shutting down early this year because of Madoff losses, it initially appeared that the prominent philanthropist had been an unfortunate victim of Madoff's Ponzi scheme. Picower's 2007 tax return had valued his foundation's portfolio at $955 million.



However, in May, court filings by Madoff trustee Irving Picard changed the picture. The trustee's complaint claimed that Picower had been a key beneficiary of Madoff's Ponzi scheme for more than 20 years, and "knew or should have known that [he] was profiting from fraud because of the implausibly high rates of return" on his accounts.



Those "anomalous and astronomical rates of return" -- as high as 500 percent in one year and 950 percent in another year -- "were neither credible nor consistent with legitimate trading activity, and should have caused any reasonable investor ... to inquire further," the court filings said, referring to Picower as "a sophisticated investor, accountant and lawyer."



Citing backdated account filings and other bogus paperwork, the complaint contends that "Picower and the other defendants also knew or should have known that they were reaping the benefits of manipulated purported returns, false documents and fictitious profit."



The Picowers recently told The New York Times that the publicity and controversy surrounding their connection to Bernie Madoff had been a great source of heartache.



"We always have been private people, and having all this play out in the media has taken a big toll on our health," the couple wrote in response to questions posed by reporters.



"We feel stunned, betrayed, angry, sickened, devastated," they said, and were only able to draw strength and consolation "from each other and from the knowledge that we did nothing wrong."

***

(CNN) -- Manchester City misfit Robinho made a winning second debut for Santos as he scored the decisive goal in a 2-1 victory against Brazilian rivals Sao Paulo on Sunday.





The Brazil forward has returned home in a loan deal in order to boost his hopes of playing at the World Cup finals in South Africa in June, having struggled to win a first-team place with his English club this season.





The 26-year-old, who cost big-spending City a club-record $52.4 million when he agreed to leave Spanish giants Real Madrid in a shock deal right at the end of the August 2008 transfer window, started his career with Santos eight years ago.





He came off the bench 12 minutes into the second half at Sao Paulo's Morumbi ground, and netted the winner with just five minutes to play with a clever backheel at the near post from Wesley's cross.





The victory lifted Santos to the top of the Sao Paulo state Campeonato Paulista Championship above their opponents.





Teenage striker Neymar went to the top of the league's goalscoring charts after putting Santos ahead with a penalty seven minutes before halftime after Arouca was fouled by Miranda, his seventh strike this season.





Roger leveled the score 10 minutes after Robinho came on with a header from Marcelino Paraiba's cross, but the City star settled the outcome in the 85th minute as he caught out goalkeeper Rogerio Ceni with his improvised finish.





Brazil's nationwide league begins in May, with Santos finishing 12th of 20 teams last season, 18 points behind champions Flamengo.

***

LAGOS, Nigeria (CNN) -- Nigeria has set its sights on making multibillion-dollar oil deals with China amid peace moves with militants.





Hundreds of militants have laid down their weapons in exchange for a pardon and a job.





Lawmakers in the west African country -- one of the world's top producers of oil -- are crafting new money-making changes for its state oil corporation, as officials negotiate multibillion-dollar oil deals with China. At the same time, the government is brokering peace with bandits whose attacks have cost the oil industry millions.





Nigeria's minister for state of petroleum, Odein Ajumogobia, talked this month about the developments.





The changes aimed at the Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation will address allegations of corruption and mismanagement, he said.





"Some of the excesses we've seen in the industry are as a result of the lack of regulation," Ajumogobia said. "We are going to make sure that the petroleum directorate, for example, where the minister will reside, is going to be manned by professionals who understand the industry and have the experience."





Nigeria welcomes China's recent interest in investing in Nigeria's oil industry, Ajumogobia added. The state-run China Daily reported in September that the China National Offshore Oil Corporation was negotiating with Nigeria over a $30 billion oil deal.





The talks are part of China's oil-buying binge this year. Its government-controlled oil companies have closed or floated a slew of deals all over the world, including billion-dollar deals with Russian oil company Rosneft and Brazil's Petrobras.





The Nigerian minister offered few details about negotiations with China.





"There is no deal yet," he said. "We all know the appetite of the Chinese for energy -- a huge population and so on -- and they're looking for oil and Nigeria has a lot of it."





Oil bandits have plagued Nigeria for years, attacking pipelines and cutting production by over 1 million barrels of oil a day. But many of those attacks might end, thanks to a cease-fire with the militant group MEND, or the Movement for the Emancipation of the Niger Delta. The truce was negotiated in the summer and was extended in September.





MEND has demanded a fairer distribution of oil wealth in the Niger Delta and wants oil revenue reinvested in the region, instead of enriching those whom the militants consider corrupt politicians.





Last week, the group said it was calling off the truce, but there have not been renewed attacks.





Nigeria hopes to leverage the fragile peace to reap big dollars from its oil industry, Ajumogobia said.

***

(CNN) -- Whether you're looking for a laid-back evening or want to party the night away, there are plenty of bars and clubs in Malmo to keep you entertained.

Slagthuset is Scandinavia's biggest nightclub.

Many nights start out in Lilla Torg, which boasts a wide array of restaurants and lounges. Sip cocktails at Victors -- if the weather's good, grab your drinks and head to the outdoor terrace. An equally popular hangout is nearby Moosehead, which has a more casual-woodsy vibe. Be sure to order the moose meat burger.

A vibrant club scene exists in Malmo, which is home to Slagthuset (Jorgen Kocksgatan 7A) -- the largest nightclub in Scandinavia. Young dancers spread out over three dance floors at the club located behind Central Station. As its name suggests, Club Prive (Malmborgsgatan 7) draws an exclusive crowd.

To chill in style, head to Torso Twisted (Vastra Varvsgatan 44) in the hip Western Harbor district. The restaurant serves gastronomic delights, and at night the lounge is decidedly cool. Indulge in one of the lavish cocktails or sample from the impressive wine list.

You can also find the trendy set partying the evening away at Hipp (Kalendegatan 12). You can hang out in the restaurant or two bars or head straight to the pulsating nightclub.

Satisfy your thirst for beer at Tva Krogare (Storgatan 35). The pub dishes up traditional Swedish fare and you'll likely find locals playing a game of darts. For a taste of British in Malmo, try The Bishop's Arms (Norra Vallgatan 62). Located inside the Hotel Savoy, it serves staples like fish and chips and has a wide assortment of beers available.

If parties begin in Lilla Torg, they tend to end in Mollevangen. The bohemian neighborhood is dotted with bars that stay open well into the night. Prices in this area aren't as cheap as they once were but are still lower than compared to what you'll find in the city center.

Local musicians hang out at hip Tempo Bar and Kok (Sodra Skolgatan 30). For something a little different, try Chokladfabriken (Bergsgatan 33), a club housed in an old chocolate factory that plays mostly hip hop, funk and soul.

Malmo's passion for music makes it a great place to take in live performances. Kulturbolaget (Bergsgatan 18), one of the best venues for live acts, is a veritable Swedish institution. The club puts on about 220 rock concerts annually. Inkonst (Bergsgatan 29), a so-called culture house, puts on shows and club evenings. Jazz enthusiasts get into their groove at Jeriko (Spangatan 38), named such because it's housed in a former church.

....................  Malmo City Guide:

Where to stay | What to see | Where to be seen | Where to eat | Where to shop

Do you agree with our Malmo picks? Share your comments and suggestions in the SoundOff box below.

***

(CNN) -- Oakland Raiders owner Al Davis, who had a storied career in professional football as a coach, commissioner and owner, died Saturday, the team said. He was 82.





In a brief post on their website, the Raiders said a statement would be issued later in the day.





The cause of death was not immediately released.





Much of Davis' career was spent in Oakland, where he first arrived as a coach in 1963 -- tasked with turning around a team that was picked to be at the bottom of the standings. The results were almost immediate, finishing 10-4 that season, and Davis was selected as coach of the year.





At 33, he was both the coach and general manager of the Raiders, the website said, making him the youngest person to hold that dual position.





His career started in 1950 as a line coach at Adelphi College in New York, the Raiders website said.





He also coached at The Citadel, Southern California and for the then-Los Angeles Chargers before going to the Raiders.





According to the Raiders website, by the time he arrived in Oakland, Davis had already been labeled a "young coaching genius" by Sports Illustrated.





As commissioner of the American Football League in 1966, he played a role in the merger of that league with the National Football League.





Davis' story, the Raiders website said, "is a standard that no one in the history of professional football can match for winning and excellence."





He was inducted into the Football Hall of Fame in 1992.





"Al Davis's passion for football and his influence on the game were extraordinary," NFL Commissioner Roger Goodell said on his Twitter account. "The respect he commanded was evident in the way that people listened carefully every time he spoke. He is a true legend of the game whose impact and legacy will forever be part of the NFL."





New Orleans Saints owner Tom Benson also shared his sympathy on the news of Davis' death.





"Al Davis was one of the most innovative and dynamic pioneers in the history of the National Football League. He was passionate about his team and about the game of professional football and he personified the legacy of the Raiders," he said.

***

(CNN) -- Ten people were killed Tuesday when a gunman rampaged through a Finnish college, police officials said.



Officials say Matti Juhani Saari began firing in a classroom at the college before shooting himself. Over the course of 90 minutes, Saari fired a few shots at police, Finnish broadcaster YLE said.



Jukka Forsberg, a maintenance worker at the school, told YLE that the gunman was wearing a ski mask and walked into the building with a large bag. About 150 students were on campus Kauhajoki city's School of Hospitality in southwestern Finland.



Forsberg said, "I heard several dozen rounds of shots. In other words, it was an automatic pistol. I saw some female students who were wailing and moaning, and one managed to escape out the back door."



Smoke billowed from a building on campus, but officials could not immediately say what caused the fire.  Watch pictures from the scene »



Tapio Varmola, who was visiting the school at the time, told CNN he was in a building about two blocks away when the shootings occurred.



After the shootings, he said, he heard students shouting. Police came about 10 minutes after they were called, Varmola said.



"It took two hours to get this situation ended," he said.



Saari, 22, died Tuesday afternoon from a self-inflicted gunshot wound to the head at Tampere University Hospital, said medical director Matti Lehto. At least one other person suffered serious injuries in the shooting, he added.



Police had interviewed and released Saari on Monday after he posted violent videos on YouTube, authorities said.



As Saari did not directly threaten anyone in the videos, there were no grounds for further action, national police Commissioner Mikko Paatero told YLE.



Authorities learned about the videos Friday but could not reach Saari until Monday, Paatero told YLE. Police also searched his home, YLE reported.



Four videos of a man firing a pistol at a shooting range were posted by a "Mr. Saari" from Kauhajoki, where the college is based, according to his YouTube profile.



The profile also included a video tribute to the Columbine High School shooters, Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold, at the top of the man's favorites list.



The videos were posted over a three-week period this month. None was posted in the last week.  Watch more about the YouTube videos »



The account was suspended within hours of the shooting, which began about 11 a.m. local time (0800 GMT).



MTV-3's Foreign Editor Risto Puolimatka told CNN that Saari was also issued with a temporary gun license last month. It was the gunman's first license, Puolimatka said.



Finnish President Tarja Halonen expressed her condolences from the United Nations, where she is attending the annual General Assembly.



She also commented on the YouTube videos.



"We, parents and elderly people, have a little bit of feeling about the Internet," she said at an impromptu TV interview. "It's like a strange planet for us. But it's not so. It's part of our world, so we have to step in."



She praised efforts by police, who she said "were already on board" by interviewing Saari. Authorities hoped that was enough to take care of any threat, but "now we see that it was not," she said.



The school taught late teens and young adults, Jarkko Sipila of MTV 3 told CNN. "It's more or less like an agricultural or professional school where people teach how to make food or how to cook in big kitchen, in industrial kitchens," he said.



Kauhajoki, with a population of about 15,000, is about 290km (180 miles) from the capital, Helsinki.



The incident comes almost a year after another school shooting left nine people, including the gunman, dead in the Finnish town of Tuusala.



Before that shooting, the gunman, 18-year-old student Pekka-Eric Auvinen, posted a video on YouTube titled "Jokela High School Massacre 11/7/2007," identifying the date and location of

***

(CNN) -- Torrential rainfall unleashed flooding and spawned a rare tornado warning in California on Tuesday as a series of storms moved through, with more expected Wednesday and Thursday.





Weather-related problems also affected Northern California, where Fresno's Yosemite International Airport lost the ability to send passengers through security because of a power outage.





Landings and takeoffs were not affected, because a backup system kicked in, said Vikkie Calderon, airport spokeswoman. However, the backup system for the lobby did not kick in.





Airlines were remotely checking passengers in Tuesday afternoon, but the outage prevented security screenings until power was restored, Calderon said. By midafternoon, security screenings had resumed.





In Southern California, a possible tornado was reported in Huntington Beach by the Orange County emergency manager, the National Weather Service reported. Boats in the nearby harbor and some buildings in the area were damaged, and a vehicle was flipped.





As of Tuesday afternoon, about 50 people were in the process of being evacuated from homes in the San Pedro area of Los Angeles because of severe flooding, according to Los Angeles Police Department Officer Gregory Baek. About 20 vehicle rescues took place in the same area, he said.





Video from CNN affiliate KCAL showed flooding in Long Beach, where a boater was using a raft to navigate flooded streets lined by cars with water up over their headlights.





Watch and read KCAL's reports





A rare tornado warning was issued Tuesday afternoon for southeastern Orange County, including the cities of Mission Viejo and San Clemente, and northwestern San Diego County, including the cities of Oceanside and Carlsbad. The National Weather Service said radar indicated a severe thunderstorm capable of producing a tornado.





A 93 mph wind gust was reported by lifeguards at the Newport Beach pier, the weather service said. Gusts of 72 mph and 73 mph were also measured.





Are you there? Send us your stories and images.





Piers in Orange County were closed because of high surf, according to the Orange County Fire Authority. There were some reports of damage and flooding, but no known injuries, officials said.





Forecasters warned the rainfall could trigger slides in recent burn areas and also warned about damaging winds. Some areas received as much as 3 inches of rain on Monday and could see an additional 2 inches Tuesday, the weather service said. Even stronger storms, with heavy rain and powerful winds, are forecast to hit the region Wednesday and Thursday.





Wind and rain prompted power outages Monday in Southern California, according to Southern California Edison.





CNN's Sara Pratley, Chad Myers, Rosalina Nieves and Lynn Lamanivong contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Ten days later and despite an $11,000 reward, police have not found a missing 5-year old Arizona girl.





Jahessye Shockley wandered out of her Glendale, Arizona home on October 11, unnoticed by her older siblings who were supposed to be watching her. Her mother called police after returning home from an errand.





In the first three days after the girl went missing, Glendale police wrapped up a grid search of her neighborhood and moved into the second phase of their investigation where they are following up on tips they receive from the public.





Family members have begged for information on Jahessye's whereabouts.





"Please bring my baby back... Her safe return is all I want," Jahessye 's mother, Jerice Hunter, said last week. "She belongs to this family... She's somebody's child. Mine. Please bring my child home."





Shirley Johnson, the girl's grandmother, said she is wondering why the national media hasn't spread the word on the case.





"I want the national media to pick it up... I won't stop til they do. I don't know why it's not national now," Shirley Johnson, Jahessye's worried grandmother, told CNN affiliate KPHO Thursday. "They have the ability to make sure someone from across the nation knows what's going on."





Jahessye 's case has been mentioned in the Washington Post and the Huffington Post in recent days. But it has not received much national television coverage compared to cases like Baby Lisa, the 11-month-old missing Missouri girl. That case has received daily national news coverage and has been featured on the cover of People magazine.





Retired police officer and child advocate Paul Penzone told KPHO that he noticed the lack of national media coverage.





"I don't know what's missing or why, but in our community this is a big deal," said Penzone. "Continued coverage absolutely is critical. The eyes of the community are going to be biggest tool for law enforcement if this little girl is somewhere where she can be seen and recovered."





On the day she disappeared Jahessye was left home with her 13-, 9- and 6-year-old siblings, police said. The children have been interviewed separately by experts and have maintained that they do not know what happened to her, Glendale police Sgt. Brent Coombs has said.





Ann $11,000 reward has been offered in the case.





Jahessye is described as a black female about 3 feet 5-inches tall, 55 pounds with black hair in a ponytail and brown eyes. She was last seen wearing a white t-shirt, blue jean shorts and pink sandals.





Anyone with information about Jahessye's disappearance is asked to call the Glendale Police Department at 623-930-HELP (4357).

***

(CNN)  -- Another body was found in the same 92-acre parcel west of Albuquerque, New Mexico, where the remains of 10 other people have been discovered, police said Thursday.

An Albuquerque, New Mexico, police forensics team member digs at the burial site.

The latest discovery was made Tuesday, and the remains were recovered Wednesday, Albuquerque police spokesman John Walsh said. Like the others, it was sent to the New Mexico Office of the Medical Investigator, he said.

A woman walking her dog found the first bodies earlier this month on the property, which had been graded in preparation for development. The graves are on about 10 acres, police spokeswoman Nadine Hamby said earlier, but that area keeps expanding.

So far, 11 bodies have been found, including those of a first-trimester fetus with those of a pregnant woman.

Police believe the bodies were buried sometime in the earlier part of the decade, Walsh said Thursday.

Authorities have identified two of the remains, Walsh said. Body No. 8 belongs to Gina Valdez, who was born in 1982, he said. Valdez was pregnant, and the remains of her fetus were with her.

Albuquerque Police Chief Ray Schultz told reporters that Valdez had a prior criminal history that included arrests for prostitution and drug charges, according to CNN affiliate KRQE-TV.

Earlier, police had identified another set of remains as belonging to Victoria Chavez, a prostitute and drug user who was last seen in 2003 and reported missing in 2004.

Authorities are investigating how the two women's paths may have crossed, Walsh said.

Valdez's father, Dan Valdez, told KRQE she was 22 when he reported her missing four years ago. Despite her rough lifestyle, he said, "she was my daughter and didn't deserve to be buried in the desert."

Hamby said earlier there is housing south and east of the vacant land. After rain caused flooding, surrounding neighbors complained to the developer, who made culverts to divert the water, apparently bringing the first remains to the surface.

***

BUENOS AIRES, Argentina (CNN) -- Smoke blanketed the Argentine capital Friday as brush fires apparently set deliberately consumed thousands of acres in the provinces of Buenos Aires and Entre Ríos.



A haze surrounds the Palermo neighborhood of the Argentine capital early Thursday.



The smoke, from about 300 fires, is blamed for at least two fatal traffic accidents this week that left eight people dead.



Sections of major highways and the Buenos Aires port, among the busiest in the world, have been closed. Incoming flights to the city's domestic airport, Jorge Newbery Airpark, have been diverted.



The Argentine government has blamed farmers looking to clear their land for crops and grazing for the fires, which are estimated to cover 173,000 acres (70,000 hectares).



"This is the largest fire of this kind that we've ever seen," Argentine Interior Minister Florencio Randazzo said Thursday.



Randazzo called the situation a "disaster."



As of Friday morning, little progress had been made extinguishing the blazes.



No rain is predicted for the next few days, but the National Meteorological Service predicts that the winds will change direction soon, dispersing the smoke.



On Friday morning, the National Roads Administration closed sections of the heavily traveled Panamericana Highway, which leads in and out of Buenos Aires. Spokesman Ernesto Arriaga said "visibility is 5 meters" (about 16 feet) in some sections of the highway.



"Covering highways with smoke just to clear a field of weeds is unforgivable," Cabinet Chief Alberto Fernandez told Radio Diez. "It's incredibly irresponsible."



Hospitals have reported an increase in visitors complaining of breathing problems, sore throats and burning eyes in the past three days.



Citing a high level of carbon monoxide in the air, officials have encouraged people not to exercise outside.



Schools in Pilar, a city in the province of Buenos Aires, were closed Friday because of the gray, thick air.



The smoke has obscured views of some of the capital's landmarks, such the Obelisco monument and the government house, Casa Rosada, and people were seen walking on the city streets covering their faces with clothes.



This month, Argentina's farmers suspended a three-week strike over a new government export tax on commodities.



The bitter lockout left grocery shelves empty and caused major friction between President Cristina Fernandez de Kirchner's government and Argentina's large agricultural sector. E-mail to a friend



Journalist Brian Byrnes contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- With Congress on its August recess, lawmakers are back in their home districts to meet with their constituents.



Voters are confronting lawmakers with tough questions on health care at town hall meetings across the country.



Across the country, members of Congress are holding town hall meetings where voters are encouraged to voice any questions or concerns about what's happening on Capitol Hill.



Health care reform has dominated the conversation at the meetings. President Obama has called on Congress to pass legislation this year, but lawmakers are hearing from their constituents that they want more specifics on what reform will mean for them.



In addition to taking questions, lawmakers are trying to set the record straight and put an end to the spread of misinformation.



Many town hall meetings are open to anyone. If you're interested in attending one, you're not alone. More than 70 percent of people say they are either very likely or somewhat likely to attend a town hall on health care, according to a recent CNN/Opinion Research Corp. survey.



To find a meeting near you, determine who your senators and representatives are. You can find this information on the House and Senate Web sites.



Some lawmakers have information about their town hall meetings clearly listed on their Web sites. Democratic Rep. Jared Polis of Colorado, for example, has an "events" section detailing the time and location of his upcoming meetings.



Democratic Sen. Russ Feingold of Wisconsin has a section called "listening sessions." It links to a map that shows where the meetings are by county.



Republican Rep. Steve King of Iowa lists his August meetings under the "latest headlines" section of his Web site.



Not all of the lawmakers keep their Web sites up to date, and some don't have their town hall meetings listed online.



If that's the case, you also can call your senator or representative's office to get more information on upcoming events.



It's a good idea to call their office to confirm the time and location, even if the details are online. Meetings are often rescheduled or relocated, and it never hurts to double-check. Find out what time the doors open, and ask whether registration is required.



You can also keep track of your senators and representatives on Twitter. Some lawmakers send messages about their upcoming events. Tweetcongress.org has a list of members of Congress who use Twitter.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN)  -- Beginning Saturday, many air travelers will be asked their birth dates and genders when making airline reservations.



The new travel rules are the latest "visible" expansion of the Secure Flight program.



It's the latest "publicly visible" expansion of Secure Flight, a program that transfers responsibility for checking air passengers' identities from the airlines to the federal government, the Transportation Security Administration said.



The change keeps the agency on track to assume responsibility for ID checks on all domestic flights by early next year, according to the TSA.



Currently, the airlines check passenger identifications against lists of suspected terrorists. But the 9/11 Commission said the job was better suited for the federal government, which compiles the "terror watch lists." Government control increases security, according to the TSA, while reducing the number of instances in which innocent people are mistakenly confused with possible terrorists having similar or identical names.



In May, the federal government began the first public phase of "Secure Flight" when four small airlines began asking passengers to provide their names, as the names appeared on the government-issued IDs they would be traveling with, when making reservations.



Since then, additional airlines have begun asking for full names, TSA spokeswoman Sterling Payne said, though she declined to say how many airlines are participating for security reasons.



The new change requires travelers to provide three pieces of information when making reservations: the passenger's full name as it appears on the government-issued ID they will be using, their birth date and their gender. The airline will transmit that information to the TSA, which will compare it to a "no-fly" list of people prohibited from flying or a list of "selectees" who can fly after they pass additional physical screening.



If passengers are not asked for this addition information, they should not be concerned, as it will not affect  their travel, the agency said.



Early efforts to create the Secure Flight program were beset by problems, including program delays and complaints of privacy breaches. Finally, in 2006, after the TSA spent more than $130 million and four years on the system, then-TSA Director Kip Hawley ordered a complete overhaul of the program and dropped plans to check passengers' names against commercial databases, one of the most contentious features of the program.



"Secure Flight is a key tool in confirming that someone identified as a 'No Fly' does not receive a boarding pass," TSA acting Administrator Gale Rossides said in a statement Wednesday. "Secure Flight will make travel safer and easier for passengers."



The TSA says it plans to vet 100 percent of passengers on all domestic commercial flights by early next year and 100 percent of passengers on all international commercial flights by the end of 2010.

***

(CNN) -- Former rugby superstar Jonah Lomu has revealed that he is poised to make a shock playing comeback at the age of 34 with French third-division club Marseille Vitrolles.



Jonah Lomu pictured in action for New Zealand's All Blacks during the 1999 World Cup in France.



The giant New Zealander, who became a global name after an electrifying series of performances on the wing for the All Blacks at the 1995 World Cup, retired in 2007 after a succession of injuries hampered his attempt to return following a kidney transplant.



He played 63 internationals, the last of them in 2002, but was never able to regain his previous dominance even after regaining full health.



"Marseille Vitrolles is on the point of finalizing the transfer of the greatest legend in world rugby," said statement on the club's Web site.



Lomu, who is featuring in a new worldwide advertising campaign for sportswear manufacturer adidas called "Nothing Is Impossible", was also quoted as confirming his desire to return to the playing field.



"I took a sabbatical year to be at my pregnant partner's side and to fully enjoy this important moment in any man's life," he said on the Web site.



"Everyone thought I had ended my playing career, but that was wrong. I still feel the desire to play and it will be me alone who decides when to call it a day.



"My ambition is to help a club like Marseille join the group of top clubs in France."



Lomu was first diagnosed with nephrotic syndrome, a rare and serious kidney disorder, at the end of 1996.



He successfully returned to the game after treatment, but in May 2003 he was put on dialysis three times a week due to deterioration in his kidney function, with the treatment's side effects leaving him with severe nerve damage in his feet and legs.



Lomu faced life in a wheelchair if a kidney transplant was not performed, so underwent the operation.



He signed a two-year contract with New Zealand province North Harbour in 2005, and also played for Welsh club Cardiff Blues during the southern hemisphere's off-season.



However, he was unable to achieve his goal of being selected in the All Blacks squad for the 2007 World Cup in France, having suffered a shoulder injury.



Lomu agreed to play in a charity match in England last year, but withdrew after injuring his ankle in training.

***

(CNN) -- California Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger has signed a bill commemorating Harvey Milk, the first openly gay politician elected to public office in the state, a spokesman for the governor said Monday.



Stuart Milk, nephew of Harvey Milk, sits next to a photo of the gay rights activist in March.



"He really saw this signing as a way to honor the gay community in California," spokesman Aaron McLear told CNN in a telephone interview.



Schwarzenegger vetoed a similar bill last year, saying he believed Milk should be recognized at the local level.



But since then, "Milk has become much more of a symbol of the gay community," McLear said, citing the eponymous movie starring Sean Penn, Milk's posthumous receipt of the Presidential Medal of Freedom and his induction into the California Hall of Fame.



Milk served briefly as San Francisco's supervisor before he and Mayor George Moscone were assassinated in 1978 by Dan White, a city supervisor who had recently resigned but wanted his job back.



Under the measure, the governor each year would proclaim May 22 -- Milk's birthday -- as a day of significance across the state.



The bill was one of 704 signed Sunday -- most of them near the midnight deadline -- by Schwarzenegger, said spokesman Aaron McLear.



The legislation passed the state Senate in May and the state Assembly last month.



The legislation has been divisive, with the governor's office receiving more than 100,000 phone calls and e-mails, most of them in opposition, spokeswoman Andrea McCarthy said last month.



But she added that most of the Twitter posts the governor received were in favor of the bill.



Schwarzenegger vetoed a similar bill last year, saying he believed Milk should be recognized at the local level.



Milk was a "unique" historical figure who led a civil rights movement and then was "assassinated in his public office for being who he was," State Sen. Mark Leno, a Democrat, told CNN last month.



The day of significance would not close schools or state offices, according to its text.



However, Randy Thomasson, the president of SaveCalifornia.com, said the bill was vague and could allow for a number of things at schools, including gay pride parades or "mock gay weddings."



"Harvey Milk was a terrible role model for children," said Thomasson, whose organization opposed the bill.



"The reality is Harvey Milk is a hero to so many people and a great role model," said Geoff Kors, executive director of Equality California, the group that backed the bill introduced by Leno.



"It's very appropriate that the state he worked in and passed the first gay rights bill in the country should honor him."



He said the bill marks the first time any state has officially honored an openly gay person.



Leno said that claims that the bill would lead to schools holding gay-pride parades and similar activities were "hyperbole." The bill "mandates nothing," he said, although it "affords an educational opportunity."



President Obama posthumously honored Milk with a Presidential Medal of Freedom this year, and Sean Penn portrayed him in the 2008 film "Milk," for which he received an Oscar for best actor.

***

(CNN) -- Life goes on for people who jump out of airplanes, even a day after two fellow parachutists died when their canopies apparently became entangled.



Jumps continue at the Parachute Center, where two parachutists died Sunday.



On Monday, the Parachute Center near Lodi, California, was open, just like it is any other day. The two jumpers who died Sunday had taken off from the parachute facility in central California.



"Everybody's sad. Everybody's unhappy," said Parachute Center owner Bill Dause. "But everybody here is here because they enjoy jumping. Neither one of them would have wanted us to shut the doors," he said, referring to the jumpers who died Sunday.



The San Joaquin County Sheriff's Office received a 911 call for assistance at 12:53 p.m. Sunday, said Deputy Les Garcia. The sheriff's spokesman confirmed there were two deaths, but referred questions to the Federal Aviation Administration.



"We're investigating," said FAA spokesman Ian Gregor, adding that two investigators were on their way to the jump center.



The inquiry could take months, Gregor said.



"One of the main things we want to do is get a hold of a video that was supposedly taken," Gregor said.



The FAA has purview over such issues as how the parachutes were packed -- by whom, when and how -- and whether weather conditions were correctly considered.



"Obviously, in a situation like this, we certainly want to look at how the parachutes were packed," he said. "But it's possible that what happened is beyond our regulatory capability."



Garcia said he could not identify the two victims.



"The ID and notification of next of kin is pending," he said, because "one of the victims has two names."



Parachute Center owner Dause and media reports have identified the victims as Robby Bigley and Barbara Cuddy.



They were among eight parachutists from a competition team who jumped from an airplane at 9,000 feet to practice making a "canopy-relative formation," a maneuver in which they stacked parachutes near each other to form a wedge, Dause said.



"The last two individuals docking experienced canopy problems," Dause said.



One jumper's chute rotated into another jumper's canopy and they smacked into a third parachutist, Dause said. The third parachutist managed to wriggle free, Dause said, but the other two remained entangled and spiraled down from 5,000 feet. They were unable to deploy their reserve chutes.



They landed in a vineyard, Dause said.



One victim was dead at the scene and the other died at a local hospital, reports said.



Bigley and Cuddy are listed on the United States Parachute Association Web site as national record holders for formation jumps. Bigley's record jump occurred this year and Cuddy's in 2007.



The jump team was preparing for a national competition in October.



According to the United States Parachute Association, there were 30 skydiving fatalities last year. No figures were available for this year.



The most fatalities occurred in 1998, when 44 people died. The fewest in recent years was in 2007, with 18, according to the association.



Dause said there have been previous fatalities at the Parachute Center, but he did not elaborate.



"We've been open for a long time," he said.

***

CAIRO, Egypt (CNN) -- An Egyptian real estate mogul and a former police officer pleaded not guilty Saturday to the murder of a rising Lebanese pop singer who was found slain in her United Arab Emirates apartment.





Lebanese singer Suzanne Tamim was found slain in her apartment in Dubai in July.





Prosecutors allege that Hisham Talaat Moustafa, a Parliament member for the ruling National Democratic Party, paid Muhsen el Sukkari $2 million to kill Suzanne Tamim.





Both have denied the charges.





Tamim, 30, was found in her Dubai apartment in July with her throat slit.





Moustafa's lawyer told CNN his client loved the singer, but could not take Tamim as a second wife because his family objected.





Polygamy is legal in Egypt, and it not unusual for men -- such as Moustafa, a married father of three -- to take on additional wives.





The prosecutors say the murder was a "means of taking revenge" but have not elaborated.  Watch report on murder trial »





"It did not happen and I have presented all the evidence that I am not guilty," Moustafa said in the courtroom Saturday, according to Reuters.





"It did not happen," Sukkari said, according to Reuters. "By Almighty God, my blood is innocent of her."





Although Tamim was killed in the United Arab Emirates, the Egyptian judiciary is trying the case in Cairo because Egyptian law does not allow its citizens to be extradited for trials in other countries.





The defendants appeared Saturday in cages -- as is typical in Egypt -- before three judges in a crowded downtown courtroom.





Heavy security surrounded the building, amid a crush of reporters and onlookers.





The case, with its high-profile victim and defendant, has captivated Egypt and the region.





After his arrest in September, Egyptian authorities indicted Moustafa, stripped him of his parliamentary immunity and jailed him pending trial.





He also resigned as chairman of Talaat Moustafa Group -- a conglomerate with construction and real estate arms that was founded by his father, Talaat Moustafa.





Moustafa's brother, Tarek Talaat Moustafa, now chairs the company.





The case will resume on November 15. The defendants will remain jailed until then.

***

NEW DELHI, India (CNN) -- Indian police swiftly handled a "security scare" at New Delhi's major airport early Friday amid heightened concern in the wake of last week's terror attack in which gunmen killed 179 people in Mumbai.

An Indian soldier joins the beefed up security detail at New Delhi airport.

New Delhi police spokesman Rajan Bhagat said police responded to reports of gunfire at Indira Gandhi International Airport but found no casualties or damage. Bhagat said there was "no terror threat."

"And there's no cause of panic," he added.

Uday Banerjee, the head of India's Central Industrial Security Force, told reporters at the airport that something sounding like gunshots was heard, but no one saw anything and no bullet casings were found.

Indian authorities stepped up security at the nation's airports on Thursday after receiving intelligence reports that terrorists might be planning an air attack.

At Indira Gandhi, four armed police stood guard at each entrance, and people waiting for arriving passengers were not allowed inside.  Watch what triggered the security scare there Â»

"There have been intelligence inputs about some terrorist activity, and therefore security has been tightened (at airports)," civil aviation spokesperson Moushmi Chakraborty told CNN.  Watch heightened anxiety after the attacks Â»

Police beefed up security at all airports including in the capital New Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai and Bangalore, Chakraborty said.

A spokesman for the Indian Navy, Cmdr. Nirad Sinha, also confirmed to CNN that security officials had received warnings about an airborne attack.  Watch more on increase in security Â»

The Press Trust of India, a nonprofit newspaper cooperative, said that reports had suggested that terrorists could have sneaked into the country to carry out strikes on the anniversary of the Babri mosque demolition. The mosque -- one of the largest in the Uttar Pradesh state -- was destroyed on December 6, 1992, by Hindu nationalists who believe it was built on the site of an existing temple.

On Wednesday India's defense minister met with the chiefs of the army, air force and navy and discussed what the ministry in a news statement called "possible terror threats from air."

The officials also discussed the country's coastal security plans and how to tighten security along the military line of control dividing the disputed region of Kashmir between India and Pakistan to "prevent infiltration of terrorists," the statement said.

India ranks among the countries where terrorism is most common, according to the U.S. State Department.

CNN's Harmeet Shah Singh and Sara Sidner contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- World-record signing Cristiano Ronaldo scored on his debut as Real Madrid kicked off the Spanish football season with a shaky 3-2 victory at home to Deportivo La Coruna on Saturday night.



Cristiano Ronaldo celebrates after paying off a small chunk of his record transfer fee with a goal on his Real debut.



Real's new generation of "Galacticos" were preceded onto the pitch by the world's fastest man Usain Bolt, with the Jamaican sprint star dribbling a ball to the delight of a packed Bernabeu crowd.



Coach Manuel Pellegrini fielded seven new signings against a team who stunned Real 2-1 on the opening day last season to foreshadow a season of massive upheaval for the underachieving capital club.



The first goal took just 26 minutes in coming as $92 million signing Kaka fed the ball to $50 million capture Karim Benzema, whose shot rebounded off the post and fell welcomingly to Real captain Raul to score.



Ronaldo, who cost $130 million when he left Manchester United, then rose highest to meet a free-kick from $50 million midfielder Xavi Alonso but headed over the bar.



Deportivo stunned the home crowd in the 30th minute when former Real striker Riki was allowed a free header to equalize in the type of defensive lapse that typified Madrid's performances last season.



But while Pellegrini has obvious problems to sort out at the back, where he fielded debutants Ezequiel Garay and Raul Albiol in the absence of the suspended Pepe, he has volumes of attacking resources at the other end of the pitch.



His team took the lead again in the 34th minute through Ronaldo, who coolly slotted home from the penalty spot after Raul went down under goalkeeper Daniel Aranzubia's challenge following a clever pass from midfielder Lassana Diarra.



However, Real could not hold onto the lead, with veteran Juan Carlos Valeron firing a leveler from the edge of the area just 43 seconds into the second half following a cross by Andres Guardado.



Valeron should have made it 3-2 with an even easier chance 12 minutes later, but he sidefooted another pass from Guardado wide of the Real goal.



Real continued to pile forward in numbers, peppering the Deportivo goal, but it was the unexpected figure of Diarra who netted the eventual winner in the 60th minute with a low drive from outside the box.



Benzema should have doubled the lead soon after following a mistake by Aranzubia, but saw his chip over the keeper rebound off the bar.



The Frenchman made way for last season's top scorer Higuain in the 72nd minute, with the Argentine lucky to avoid being booked for a blatant dive in the penalty area.



Real's rivals Barcelona start the defense of their title on Monday at home to Sporting Gijon, having already won a trophy this season by beating Shakhtar Donetsk 1-0 in the European Super Cup on Friday.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- FBI Director Robert Mueller pointed Monday to recent terror attacks in Mumbai, India, and Somalia to highlight the FBI's concern that small groups or individuals could carry out such attacks on U.S. soil.





FBI Director Robert Mueller says he worries the Mumbai attack could be replicated in the United States.





In a speech to the Council on Foreign Relations, Mueller worried that the dramatic terror attack on hotels and other facilities in Mumbai potentially could be replicated in the United States.





"This type of attack reminds us that terrorists with large agendas and little money can use rudimentary weapons to maximize their impact. And it again raises the question of whether a similar attack could happen in Seattle or San Diego, Miami, or Manhattan," Mueller said.





He said he is increasingly concerned with "pockets of people around the world that identify with al Qaeda and its ideology" but who have little or no actual contact with al Qaeda.





Mueller cited the first-ever suicide bombing by a naturalized U.S. citizen last October. A Somali native who had settled in Minnesota traveled back to Somalia and blew up himself and 29 others.





The idea that Shirwa Ahmed, 27, was radicalized in the United States raised red flags throughout the FBI.





"One pattern in particular concerns us," Mueller said. "The prospect of young men, indoctrinated and radicalized within their own communities and induced to travel to Somalia to take up arms -- and to kill themselves and perhaps many others -- is a perversion of the immigrant story. And it raises the question of whether these young men will one day come home and, if so, what they might undertake here."





Authorities have said as many as 20 young Somali men reported missing in Minnesota may have returned to Somalia to take up arms.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- On his final full day in office, President Bush issued commutations for two former U.S. Border Patrol agents convicted in 2006 of shooting and wounding an unarmed illegal immigrant -- suspected of drug smuggling at the time -- and then covering it up.



An artist's sketch shows Ignacio Ramos, left, and Jose Compean.



The prison sentences of Ignacio Ramos and Jose Compean will now end March 20.



Ramos had received an 11-year prison sentence; Compean had received a 12-year term. They began serving their sentences in January 2007.



The Office of the Pardon Attorney was still reviewing the clemency request when Bush made his decision, Justice Department spokeswoman Laura Sweeney said.



"The president has reviewed the circumstances of this case as a whole and the conditions of confinement and believes the sentences they received are too harsh and that they, and their families, have suffered enough for their crimes," a senior administration official said.



"Commuting their sentences does not diminish the seriousness of their crimes. Ramos and Compean are convicted felons who violated their oaths to uphold the law and have been severely punished," the official stated.



"This commutation gives them an opportunity to return to their families and communities, but both men will have to carry the burden of being convicted felons and the shame of violating their oaths for the rest of their lives."



The official noted that both Democratic and Republican members of Congress have supported a commutation, including President-elect Barack Obama's incoming White House chief of staff, Rahm Emanuel, and Texas GOP Sens. Kay Bailey Hutchison and John Cornyn.



The head of the labor union representing Border Patrol agents told CNN Radio he was "grateful" that Bush commuted the sentences but questioned why the prison terms won't end until March 20.



"I would be quite curious to learn why they have to wait another two months for an unjust sentence," said Rich Pierce, president of the National Border Patrol Council.



He said the union's ultimate goal would be for the men to get their Border Patrol jobs back.



The shooting happened February 17, 2005, on the border southeast of El Paso, Texas.



During their trial, Ramos and Compean said the illegal immigrant, Osvaldo Aldrete-Davila, had brandished a gun while actively resisting arrest. Aldrete-Davila, however, said he was unarmed and was attempting to surrender when Compean attempted to beat him with a shotgun.



Aldrete-Davila was shot while fleeing toward the Rio Grande.



Ramos and Compean were ultimately convicted of assault with a dangerous weapon, lying about the incident and violating Aldrete-Davila's Fourth Amendment right against illegal search and seizure.



After receiving immunity to testify in the case against the two agents, Aldrete-Davila was arrested in 2007 on charges of bringing more than 750 pounds of marijuana into the United States.



The case quickly became a political flash point, with advocates of tighter border controls defending the agents and civil liberties groups saying that the agents had used illegal and excessive force against Aldrete-Davila.



Bush has granted 189 pardons and 11 commutations over his eight years in office, far fewer than Presidents Bill Clinton and Ronald Reagan in their two-term administrations. During the final months of the Bush administration, speculation has swirled around the question of whether former vice presidential aide Lewis "Scooter" Libby would be granted the presidential favor.



Libby was convicted in March of 2007 of four counts of lying and impeding a federal investigation into the leak of information that revealed that Valerie Plame was a covert CIA operative.



Among the more notable people who have applied for -- but not received -- some form of clemency are: former Rep. Randall "Duke" Cunningham, R-California, who was convicted of receiving bribes; publishing executive Conrad Black, who was found guilty of fraud; former junk bold salesman Michael Milken, who pleaded guilty to securities fraud;  and former WorldCom CEO Bernard Ebbers, convicted of accounting fraud.



The parents of John Walker Lindh, who was given a 20-year sentence after pleading guilty to supporting terrorists in Afghanistan, held a news conference

***

MIAMI, Florida (CNN) -- A Florida boy remains in stable condition just days after he found his parents' long-forgotten handgun in a closet and accidentally shot himself in the head.



Police are deciding whether or not to charge parents after their son found a forgotten gun and shot himself.



Sheriff's detectives in Pinellas County, Florida, near St. Petersburg, say the boy found the .25-caliber European semi-automatic handgun in a box in a closet in their home.



"They are dealing with this very tragic situation, and at this point, no charges have been filed," said Cecilia Barreda of the Pinellas County sheriff's office.



His stepfather found Jacob Larson, 12, with a gunshot wound to the head Friday. The stepfather called 911.



Police say the shooting took place between 7:40 a.m., when his mother, Tracy Newman, leaves for work, and about 11 a.m., when his stepfather, Joseph Newton, returns home. The boy normally goes to school about 8:30 a.m.



"A few years ago, they moved, and [the gun] was stored in the closet. The mother never checked it, never fired it," Barreda said.



"They told detectives that they forgot they had stored it in a box inside a closet. Both her and her husband forgot about it," she said.



Newman told detectives that she received the gun six years ago from a former employer. Police say that both she and her husband are cooperating in the investigation into the incident.



The sheriff's office says it's unlikely that they will face charges.



Florida law prohibits a person from leaving a loaded firearm where a minor might have access to it. Prosecutors do have some discretion, and depending on what happens with the gun, charges ranging from a misdemeanor to a felony can be filed in the event of death or serious injury.



The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention say that 17 states have child firearm access protection and safe-storage laws.



Chief Assistant State Attorney Bruce Bartlett says that although laws are needed, an accident with a firearm can be a greater penalty than any judge could ever hand down.



"Sometimes, the injury of a child is more severe from a punishment standpoint than any kind of criminal charge," he said.



The CDC says one child, on average, every three days died in accidental incidents in the United States from 2000 to 2005, the last year data are available.



Bartlett said his office has filed charges in previous cases when there was culpable negligence on the part of a gun owner. But, he says, there are cases where accidents happen, not crimes.



The Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence says that 34 percent of children in the United States live in homes with at least one firearm, so people have to be aware.



"It's a horrible thing, and those parents will blame themselves from here out, and you have to look at things real close to see if it warrants any enforcement from our end," Bartlett said.

***

ATLANTA, Georgia (CNN) -- Three men who kidnapped and tortured a man over a drug debt were sentenced Tuesday in Atlanta, Georgia, to decades in prison, in a case tied to Mexican drug cartels.



Federal authorities point to the 2008 case as evidence that Atlanta has become a major distribution hub for powerful Mexican drug groups such as the Sinaloa and Gulf cartels.



Victor Abiles Gomez, 20, Omar Mendoza-Villegas, 19, and Gerardo Solorio Reyes, 23, were sentenced to more than 20 years each in the kidnapping and beating of Oscar Reynoso in a suburban Atlanta home, federal authorities said.



Gomez and Mendoza-Villegas were sentenced to 24 years in federal prison; Reyes was sentenced to 26 years.



The three gagged the victim and left him chained to a mattress in an unfinished basement for six days because of a $300,000 drug debt, authorities said.



The three are illegal immigrants from Mexico and had ties to powerful drug cartels there, authorities said.



"This case demonstrates the danger inherent in the illegal business of drug-dealing," said Atlanta U.S. Attorney David Nahmias. "Fortunately, this violent episode did not spill over to innocent members of our community."



In fiscal 2008, authorities confiscated about $70 million in drug-related cash in Atlanta, more than anywhere else in the United States, the Drug Enforcement Administration has said.



Atlanta has become a stopping point for truckloads of Mexican cocaine, heroin, marijuana and methamphetamine, agents say. The drugs are held in stash houses before being distributed on the East Coast.

***

(CNN) -- Scientists in Colombia have unearthed the remains of a true prehistoric monster believed to be the biggest snake ever to have lived on Earth.





An artist's impression of what Titanoboa cerrejonensis would have looked like.





Named Titanoboa cerrejonensis, the snake would have weighed 1,140 kilograms (2,500 pounds) and measured 13 meters (42.7 feet) nose to tail tip -- dwarfing the largest modern pythons and anacondas which can grow to 6 meters (19.5 feet).





Scientists believe it slithered around the planet between 58 and 60 million years ago.





Geologist David Polly, who identified the position of the fossil vertebrae which made a size estimate possible, said in a statement Wednesday: "At its greatest width, the snake would have come up to about your hips. The size is pretty amazing.





"But our team went a step further and asked, how warm would the Earth have to be to support a body of this size?"





Titanoboa's fossilized remains were discovered at a coal mine in the tropical Cerrejon region of northern Colombia by an international team of scientists.





"Truly enormous snakes really spark people's imagination, but reality has exceeded the fantasies of Hollywood," paleontologist Jonathan Bloch, who co-led the expedition, told reporters.





"The snake that tried to eat Jennifer Lopez in the movie 'Anaconda' was not as big as the one we found."





Based on the snake's size, the team was able to calculate that the mean annual temperature in equatorial South America 60 million years ago would have been about 91 degrees Fahrenheit, about 10 degrees warmer than today, Bloch said.





"Tropical ecosystems of South America were surprisingly different 60 million years ago," said Bloch. "It was a rainforest, like today, but it was even hotter and the cold-blooded reptiles were all substantially larger.





"The result was, among other things, the largest snakes the world has ever seen...and hopefully ever will."





According to Nature.com, snakes are poikilotherms (cold-blooded) that, unlike humans, need heat from their environment to power their metabolism. Therefore research suggests that at the time the region would have had to be no less than 86 to 93 degrees Fahrenheit for the snake to have survived.





Most large snakes today live in the tropical regions of South America and south-east Asia, where the high temperatures allow them to grow to impressive sizes.





Meanwhile, Carlos Jaramillo -- who was also part of the expedition -- said the tropical rainforest at Cerrejon appeared to have thrived at these temperatures.





"This data challenges the view that tropical vegetation lives near its climatic optimum, and it has profound implications in understanding the effect of current global warming on tropical plants," he said.

***

ATLANTA, Georgia (CNN)  -- Artist Robert West is proud of his connection to the Pullman Company. His grandfather, Allen Parrish, was a Pullman Porter and helped inspire some of his train paintings.



Robert West paints his latest project in his Atlanta, Georgia,  studio.



"When I was growing up, we would often take grandfather to work at the train station. I became impressed and mesmerized with trains through this experience. This passion ultimately led me to become a full-time railroad illustrator," West said.



The Pullman Company was one of the largest employers of African-Americans in the 1920s and '30s. It hired them as porters in railroad sleeping cars to assist railroad passengers and make up beds.



These jobs were once highly regarded in the black community because they offered the opportunity to travel and better pay and security than most jobs open to blacks at the time.



West says trains have an important place in African-American history -- from symbolism in Negro spirituals to a real conveyance for the mass migration of blacks moving to the North in the 1930s, '40s and '50s.



"Trains have so long symbolized hope, freedom and power -- what better metaphor could there be to represent our struggle and our assimilation into mainstream American life," West said.



Many of West's paintings depict historical scenes with the now defunct Atlantic Coast Line Railroad, because that's where his grandfather worked for many years.  Watch award-winning artist on trains and history »



West paints other trains, including the Steam, Gas turbine, Electric, as well as first through sixth Generation Diesel Electric Locomotives. He wears a conductor's hat as he works.



"I think it's important that all the cultures in the United States look back at our history by way of the railroads," West said. "It was through our contributions to the railroads, that also pushed us forward as a nation and as a human race."



West has been drawing and painting trains since the age of 2. In 1973, he decided to make railroad illustrating a profession. Through the years his work has won several awards in shows of national and regional scope.



"I'm probably more of a visual historian more than anything else, because I conduct weeks, months, sometimes years of research prior to doing a painting," he said.



West has painted more than 500 original works, which have sold across the United States and around the world. Train enthusiasts are his largest market.



"When one looks at my paintings, I like for them to not only feel a sense of joy, but to feel good about times when times were happier, kinder, and gentler," he said. E-mail to a friend

***

MOSCOW, Russia (CNN)  -- Dozens of gay and lesbian rights activists planning a parade in southwestern Moscow Saturday have been detained, Russia's Interfax news agency reported.



Gay and lesbian rights activists are detained in Moscow Saturday ahead of a planned march.



The arrests included Nikolai Alexeyev, a prominent gay activist in Russia, and his associate Nikolai Bayev, Interfax said, adding that more people trickling into the location were being arrested without explanation.



Officials of Moscow's gay community had announced earlier plans to rally at Novopushkinsky Park in central Moscow, Interfax said.



The arrests came ahead of Saturday night's Eurovision Song Contest, which is being held in Moscow. The contest has a strong following among the gay and lesbian community.  Watch police break up the march »



Journalists from various countries gathered at the scene, as police barricaded the park with metal bars. Trucks with soldiers onboard were parked on nearby streets, Interfax said.



UK gay human rights campaigner Peter Tatchell, in a statement on his Web site ahead of the march, said it was being held to coincide with the final of the Eurovision Song Contest.



"This parade is in defense of human rights. We are defending the often violated human rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender Russians. They want legal protection against discrimination and hate crimes. I support their cause.



"Not all Russians are homophobic, but many are. Gay Russians suffer queer-bashing attacks, blackmail, verbal abuse and discrimination in education, housing and employment. This shames the great Russian nation."



The Eurovision Song Contest, which began in 1956, sees singers and groups from a short list of European nations perform a specially written song before telephone votes from each nation decide the winner.



In western Europe, the contest is regard as a light entertainment spectacular, with a strong following among the gay and lesbian community. Many fans dress up, hold parties and gather round the TV to watch the three-hour-plus televised marathon.



In recent years, however, eastern European nations, which take the contest much more seriously, have come to dominate.



The contest is also known for its political edge, as nations either give zero points to traditional enemies -- or, if they are enjoying good relations, the maximum number of points, as a sign of friendship.



The most famous winners of the contest were ABBA, who came to attention as the Swedish entry with "Waterloo" in 1974. In 1988, Celine Dion won the contest while singing on behalf of Switzerland. The dance show Riverdance first came to attention as an interval act when the contest was held in Dublin, Ireland, in 1994.



The organizers of the contest estimate it is watched by 100 million people worldwide.

***

(CNN) -- World No. 2 Novak Djokovic stumbled at the opening hurdle at the Sony Ericsson Open in Miami, but Rafael Nadal and Andy Roddick cruised into the third round.





Second seed Djokovic, who had a first-round bye, was surprisingly beaten 6-2 6-7 (7-9) 6-4 by Belgian Olivier Rochus on Friday.





The world No. 59 could have won in straight sets after leveling at 6-6 in the tie-break, but held his nerve to break Djokovic in the final game of the decider to triumph.





Serbian Djokovic, the 2007 champion, successfully defended his Dubai title last month but bowed out in the last-16 at Indian Wells two weeks ago.





The reward for Rochus is a third-round clash with Brazilian 27th seed Tomaz Bellucci, who defeated American James Blake 3-6 6-1 6-2.





Nadal, the tournament's last second seed to lose his opening match in 2006, had no such problems this time as he beat another U.S. player, Taylor Dent, 6-4 6-3.





The Spanish fourth seed -- beaten in the semifinals at Indian Wells by Djokovic's conqueror and eventual champion Ivan Ljubicic -- will next play Argentine wildcard David Nalbandian, who overcame Serbian 30th seed Viktor Troicki 6-3 4-6 6-4.





Sixth seed Roddick, last weekend's losing finalist, gave home fans some cheer as he crushed Russia's Igor Andreev 6-4 6-4 to set up a clash with Ukraine's Sergiy Stakhovsky.





Eight seed Jo-Wilfried Tsonga also progressed with a 6-4 6-3 win over Spain's Guillermo Garcia-Lopez, and the Frenchman will next play German 28th seed Philip Kohlschreiber.





World No. 1 Roger Federer begins his bid for a record-equaling 17th Masters 1000 tournament victory against Ecuador's Nicolas Lapentti on Saturday, while third seed and defending champion Andy Murray takes on American Mardy Fish.





In the women's tournament, Kim Clijsters and Justine Henin made it a good day all-round for Belgium as the former world No. 1s progressed into the third round.





Clijsters, the 14th seed but champion in Miami in 2005, crushed 20-year-old Czech Petra Kvitova 6-1 6-1 to earn a third-round clash with Israel's Shahar Peer.





Henin, seeded 33rd after receiving a wildcard, beat Elena Dementieva for the second time in her comeback season, winning 6-3 6-2 against the Russian fifth seed.





The Australian Open runner-up will next play Slovakian 26th seed Dominika Cibulkova.





Second seed Caroline Wozniacki came from behind to defeat Bulgarian qualifier Tsvetana Pironkova 3-6 6-3 6-4 and set up a third-round tie with Russia's Maria Kirilenko. The Dane had to come back from 3-1 down in the second set and 3-0 adrift in the decider.





Fourth seed and defending champion Victoria Azarenka also progressed with Indian Wells winner and No. 7 Jelena Jankovic, No. 9 Samantha Stosur and Russia's No. 11 Vera Zvonareva.

***

BRUNSWICK, Georgia (CNN) -- Seven of eight people killed last week in a southeast Georgia mobile home were laid to rest Saturday.



The caskets were laid side by side for graveside ceremonies Saturday in Eulonia, Georgia.



The funerals at Youngs Island Church in Eulonia, Georgia, were held for Chrissy Toler, 22; Russell D. Toler Sr., 44; Michelle Toler, 15; Michael Toler, 19; Russell D. Toler Jr., 20; Guy Heinze Sr., 45; and Brenda Gail Falagan, 49.



The funeral for the eighth victim, Joseph L. West, 30, is to be held at mid-month.



Police have arrested Guy Heinze Jr., the son of Guy Heinze Sr., on eight counts of first-degree murder.



Seven caskets for the seven victims stood side by side for the burial under sunny skies at a nearby cemetery.



More than 200 mourners attended the funeral, including William Heinze, father of one of the victims and grandfather of the man accused of the killings.



"I've never seen so much love and support at a funeral," William Heinze told CNN affiliate WJXT.



William Heinze also said he doubted that his grandson, Guy Heinze Jr., was responsible for the killings.



"We want to know what really happened," he said. "The police may think they know what happened, but we want to really know the truth."



Investigators obtained an arrest warrant Friday evening for Guy Heinze Jr., 22, just hours after he had been freed from jail on charges of tampering with evidence and making false statements to a police officer, Police Chief Matt Doering of Glynn County, Georgia said Friday.



"I can assure you that this person is responsible," Doering said at a news conference Friday evening.



The bodies were discovered a week ago at New Hope Plantation mobile home park, north of the Atlantic coastal city of Brunswick. Seven died in the mobile home, and the eighth died a day later at a hospital. The chief refused to reveal how the victims were killed or the suspected motive.



A 3-year-old who was injured was on life support at a Savannah hospital, her grandmother said.



A man identified as Guy Heinze Jr. reported the slayings. He told an emergency dispatcher when he called last Saturday, "I was out last night. I got home just now, and everybody's dead. ... My whole family's dead. It looks like they've been beaten to death."  Watch report on funerals and arrest from CNN's Sean Callebs »



According to the first arrest warrant, Heinz provided "investigators with false and misleading information about his whereabouts and involvement in the circumstances leading up to him calling 911 to report the deaths of his family members."



The arrest warrant also said he removed a shotgun from the residence and hid it in the trunk of his car.



The killings have made people in the southeastern Georgia city of more than 16,000 uneasy, a waitress at a restaurant said.



"There's still a lot of concern that that many deaths at one time can not have been done by one person," Lucinda Bennett, a waitress at the 4th of May Cafe, said. "There is still a little bit of nervousness in the area over whether they have got everyone that was involved with it."



Linda Davis, who works at a barbershop in the city, said everyone is puzzled over the slayings. "You don't go in and kill eight people and nobody hears screams or shots or anything like that with trailers that close together," she said.



CNN's Sean Callebs and Lee Garen contributed to this report.

***

BOSTON, Massachusetts (CNN) -- In his first public appearance since the "Beer Summit" at the White House, Harvard University professor Henry Louis Gates joked about his controversial arrest last month in Cambridge, Massachusetts, and said he likes police Sgt. James Crowley.



Sgt. James Crowley and professor Henry Louis Gates Jr. sit for beers with the president and vice president Thursday.



"I offered to get his kids into Harvard if he doesn't arrest me anymore," Gates said.



Gates was speaking Sunday at the Martha's Vineyard Book Festival where he signed copies of his book, "In Search of our Roots."



The professor said he plans on meeting with Crowley again. "I offered for the two of us to have lunch together, one-on-one, or go to a Red Sox game, or a Celtics games, or maybe the families can get together for dinner. Why not?"



Gates had a face-to-face meeting and a beer with Crowley at the White House last week, a move orchestrated by President Obama in an attempt to defuse racial tensions that had erupted following Gates' arrest. Gates called the president's gesture "brilliant."



Crowley arrested Gates on July 16 when the officer responded to a call of a possible home break-in at the Cambridge residence.



Gates was charged with disorderly conduct for allegedly yelling at the officer and protesting his actions. But Gates, who is black, claimed he never raised his voice and accused Crowley of racial profiling. Charges against the professor were later dropped.



The tone at the book fair turned more serious when someone asked Gates how the arrest has affected him. "I'm still trying to figure that out and processing it. It was stressful. I was worried about my daughters."



Fortunately, he said, the press was not camped out at his family home like they were at the Cambridge residence, which is owned by the university. He admitted to receiving bomb threats and deaths threats and said the university is encouraging him to move. "I haven't been back to the Cambridge house since I got arrested so I have to make that decision."



He also said he has had to change his phone numbers and close his public e-mail account. "I received thousands of fan letters but some of the e-mails were from crazy wacko people who wrote 'You should die,' 'You're a racist,'"



Still, Gates said he doesn't want to exaggerate the trauma of the arrest. "A lot of people go through far worse. I was in jail for four hours, not four years or four months or four days," he said.



"The night before I went to the White House, I had a dream that I got arrested in the White House," he said.



Then he joked, "But it's cool; I was OK."

***

PARIS, France (CNN) -- The backstage gossip at recent fashion shows wouldn't be complete without rampant speculation about who is likely to replace esteemed American Vogue Editor in Chief Anna Wintour.



Vogue editors Anna Wintour and Carine Roitfeld at AmfAR's 10th Annual New York Gala in January 2008.



Wintour has yet to announce any plans to retire but her advancing age -- she's 60 this year -- has stoked speculation that after more than 20 years in the role it might be time to leave.



One name touted as a possible replacement is Carine Roitfeld, the highly respected editor in chief of Vogue Paris. Read more about Carine Roitfeld



Roitfeld is accustomed to the speculation, describing it as "frustrating." She told CNN she hadn't been offered the job and even if she was she probably wouldn't take it.



"It's a bit like for an actor. Do you want to go to Hollywood or do you want to stay here in Paris and do the cinema I like to do?," Roitfeld said. "I think I prefer to stay here in Paris." Watch Carine Roitfeld Revealed



A fixture at the U.S. title since 1988, Wintour has a fearsome reputation, mostly courtesy of the 2006 film starring Meryl Streep, "The Devil Wears Prada."



The film is based on a book penned by a former assistant at American Vogue who has denied suggestions Wintour was the inspiration for the demanding and odious lead character.



Roitfeld is anxious not to create any friction between her and her U.S. counterpart, telling CNN "I think Anna does a great job... I think she's a great person."



She said she would be honored to be asked to fill Wintour's shoes, but pointed out that "it's a very different job."



"I'm very happy at French Vogue to be able to do everything -- almost everything -- I want in the magazine," she said. "It would be too political at American Vogue for me. And I'm not sure I'm talking enough good English to work there."



At Vogue Paris, Roitfeld knows her readers. They are a select group of incredibly stylish and wealthy women who are thrilled rather than alienated by unconventional ideas.



The best-selling edition so far, in August 2003, featured French actress Sophie Marceau on the cover smoking a cigarette.



At French Vogue, there's less pressure to appeal to the masses. Its circulation of some 139,000 is dwarfed by the million plus readers of American Vogue.



Fashion shoots are about fantasy. There's no imperative to make any clothes they feature wearable. If it's unusual and innovative, then it's in.



With just 25 staff, Roitfeld describes the team at French Vogue as like a family. And that's how she prefers it.



Having said that, she told CNN she wouldn't dismiss any offer out of hand.



"Of course I would consider it because it would be ridiculous not to consider such a huge position -- in terms of money and in terms of power," she said.



"But I'm very happy. It's very much a small team (in Paris). America is a huge team. I know because I've worked for them before. I think it's not for me."

***

WASHINGTON (CNN)  -- President Obama on Tuesday left open the possibility of criminal prosecution for Bush administration officials who drew up the legal basis for interrogation techniques that many view as torture.



President Obama says any congressional investigation should be conducted in a bipartisan fashion.



Obama said it will be up to Attorney General Eric Holder to decide whether or not to prosecute the former officials.



"With respect to those who formulated those legal decisions, I would say that is going to be more a decision for the attorney general within the parameter of various laws, and I don't want to prejudge that," Obama said during a meeting with Jordan's King Abdullah at the White House.



"There's a host of very complicated issues involved there. As a general deal, I think we should be looking forward and not backward.



"I do worry about this getting so politicized that we cannot function effectively, and it hampers our ability to carry out critical national security operations."  Watch as Obama says U.S. can be protected and live up to its ideals »



The president added that any congressional "accounting of what took place" should be done "in a bipartisan fashion outside of the typical hearing process that can sometimes break down ... entirely along party lines."



It is important, he said, for the "American people to feel as if this is not being dealt with to provide one side or another political advantage."



Obama's remarks came five days after the administration released four Bush-era memos detailing the use of terror interrogations such as waterboarding, a technique used to simulate drowning.



One memo showed that CIA interrogators used waterboarding -- which Obama has called torture -- at least 266 times on two top al Qaeda suspects.



Obama reiterated his belief that he did not think it is appropriate to prosecute those CIA officials and others who carried out the interrogations in question.



"This has been a difficult chapter in our history and one of [my] tougher decisions," he added. The techniques listed in memos "reflected ... us losing our moral bearings."



The president's apparent willingness to leave the door open to a prosecution of Bush officials seemed to contradict White House Chief of Staff Rahm Emanuel, who indicated Sunday that the administration was opposed to such an action.



Obama believes "that's not the place that we [should] go," Emanuel said on ABC's "This Week."



"It's not a time to use our energy ... looking back [with] any sense of anger and retribution."



On Monday, Obama asserted during a visit to CIA headquarters that he had released the documents primarily because of the "exceptional circumstances that surrounded these memos, particularly the fact that so much of the information was [already] public. ... The covert nature of the information had been compromised."

***

(CNN) -- An Ethiopian-flagged vessel fought off a pirate attack in the Gulf of Aden earlier this week, the multi-national anti-piracy task force said Thursday.





The MV Andinet, part of the Ethiopian Shipping Line, was approached by two pirate skiffs Monday, with one of them coming close enough to fire automatic weapons in an attempt to force the ship to stop, the task force said in a statement.





But the vessel's crew used anti-piracy measures -- including firing flares in the air and utilizing fire hoses, as well as "evasive maneuvering" -- to repel the pirates, Combined Maritime Forces said.





After a distress call was sent out, the USS Farragut, a U.S. Navy destroyer assigned to the task force, deployed her SH-80 helicopter to follow the skiffs, and the USS Porter gave chase as well, the task force said.





"A boarding team from the USS Farragut subsequently stopped and boarded the pirate skiffs, but only an empty magazine and used rounds were found on board."





"The MV Andinet once against demonstrated that even basic preventive measures can save a crew from a successful pirate attack," said Commodore Tim Lowe of Britain's Royal Navy, deputy commander of the Combined Maritime Forces.





"Although there is (a) significant international naval presence in the Gulf of Aden, these warships cannot be everywhere and may not always be close at hand to prevent an attack."





The incident occurred about 145 miles east of Aden, Yemen.





The task force advocates that commercial and civilian vessels in the region implement anti-piracy measures such as maintaining a 24-hour lookout, traveling in convoys and using high-intensity lighting.

***

(CNN) -- A group of native Hawaiians occupied the grounds of the old Hawaiian monarchy's royal residence Wednesday, vowing to stay and do the business of the kingdom's government.



A member of the protest group Hawaiian Kingdom Government unlocks the palace gate.



"It is through a greater realm than ours" that the group took this action, said Mahealani Kahau, elected leader of the group, called Hawaiian Kingdom Government. "Today and every day, we will be here to assume our role."



Group members left the palace grounds Wednesday afternoon, but vowed to return Thursday morning, The Honolulu Advertiser reported.



"We'll be here at 6 o'clock in the morning," Kahau told the newspaper.



The group is one of several in Hawaii that reject statehood and seek to return to the constitutional monarchy that effectively ended in 1893 when a group of politicians, businessmen and sugar planters -- aided by the U.S. minister to Hawaii -- overthrew the kingdom's government.



The monarchist groups say that the kingdom was overthrown and annexed into the United States illegally.



Hawaii's office of the attorney general did not immediately return a phone call seeking comment on Wednesday's action.



The staff of Iolani Palace, built in 1882 and now operated as a museum, shut down the building to visitors. The 60 or so protesters occupied the grounds, chaining the gates and stationing guards there to explain to visitors the purpose of the action.



The group later reopened the gates, but remained on the grounds and the building was kept closed.



"It saddens my heart to have to turn away visitors," said palace staff member Cindy Ascencio, who added that although she, too, is a native Hawaiian, she does not understand the actions of the group. Ascencio also said that the group appeared peaceful and she was not concerned about security.



Jose Carrion, a visitor to Hawaii from Puerto Rico, told Honolulu's KHON-TV that he was "disappointed" he wouldn't be able to visit the ornate palace and "learn about the culture of the Hawaiians."



"We wanted to come here precisely because we thought we'd learn something about the history of Hawaii and the last queen and the monarchy," said Carrion, who said he had reservations for the visit. "But we're leaving tomorrow so we won't get to see the palace."



But Carrion also said he "kind of understood" the actions of the group.



Puerto Rico and Hawaii, along with Guam and the Philippines, were annexed into the United States in 1898 after the Spanish-American War. Guam and Puerto Rico remain territories of the United States. The Philippines gained independence after World War II, and Hawaii became the 50th state in 1959.



Although the monarchy was not overthrown until 1893, its fate effectively was sealed six years earlier when the same group that forced the overthrow imposed a new constitution on King David Kalakaua, who was forced to sign it under threat of arms.



The document dramatically reduced the authority of the monarchy and instituted voter requirements that limited voting to wealthy businessmen and Hawaiian landowners, barring 75 percent of the native Hawaiian population and all Asians.



When Queen Lili'uokalani ascended the throne after the death of her brother in 1891, she began work on a new constitution that would have effectively reversed the 1887 document. With the help of John L. Stevens, the U.S. minister to Hawaii, the elite group that had changed the constitution in 1887 opposed the queen's actions.



Two years later, under threat of U.S. troops, she yielded her authority, saying, "Until such time as the Government of the United States shall ... undo the action of its representative and reinstate me in the authority which I claim as the constitutional sovereign of the Hawaiian Islands."



The queen was later imprisoned in Iolani Palace for eight months for her participation in an attempted 1895 revolt, until she relinquished her claim to the throne in return for her release. She died in 1917 at 79.



In 1993, the U.S. Congress approved, and President Clinton signed, an apology to the people of the

***

NEW DELHI, India (CNN)  -- The only surviving suspect in last month's attacks in Mumbai has written a letter to the Pakistan High Commission, or embassy, seeking legal aid, CNN's sister network in India reported Saturday, quoting a Mumbai police official.



Flames and smoke gush from the Taj Mahal hotel in Mumbai, India, on November 27.



Investigators said that Mohammad Ajmal Kasab is from Faridkot village in the Okara district of Pakistan's Punjab province and that the other nine attackers also are from Pakistan. Pakistani officials have denied that assertion, blaming instead "stateless actors."



Rakesh Maria, Mumbai's joint police commissioner of crime, said Saturday that Kasab's three-page letter was written in Urdu. In the letter, Kasab confesses his role in the attacks, CNN-IBN said.



The letter is to be delivered to the commission's New Delhi, India, office, possibly Monday, the network reported.



Maria paraphrased parts of the letter at a news conference but did not release a copy to the media, CNN-IBN said.



More than 160 people were killed in the three-day Mumbai siege that started November 26 and targeted 10 sites, including two luxury hotels, a train station and other landmarks. Of the 10 suspects, only 21-year-old Kasab survived, according to police.



This week, Pakistani authorities banned a charity linked to the attacks and placed its leader under house arrest, Pakistan's information minister told CNN.



The move came after the U.N. Security Council designated the charity, Jamaat-ud-Dawa, as a terrorist organization because of its links to Lashkar-e-Tayyiba (known by the acronym LeT) and placed sanctions on the group.



India has blamed LeT for training the attackers who carried out the Mumbai attacks.

***

(CNN) -- Ireland's top Catholic cardinal is using the "Nuremberg defense" in the face of public outrage at his role 35 years ago in investigating one of the country's most notorious child-abusing priests, an activist said Tuesday.





Cardinal Sean Brady has been under fire over the investigation into the Rev. Brendan Smyth.





The latest scandal comes on the heels of a huge government-backed report that found the Archdiocese of Dublin and other Catholic Church authorities in Ireland covered up child abuse by priests from 1975 to 2004. Child sexual abuse was "widespread" then, the report found.





Brady's office said Tuesday that the cardinal, then a priest and teacher with a doctorate in canon law, had been asked to investigate two complaints against Smyth in 1975, but had no decision-making power. He reported his findings to Bishop Francis McKiernan, his office said, and McKiernan recommended Smyth get psychiatric help.





But John Kelly, the founder of Irish Survivors of Child Abuse, said Brady should not have remained silent about what he learned in the course of investigating Smyth, who was later convicted of dozens of counts of child abuse in both Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic. He died in prison.





"He's basically using the Nuremberg defense, he was carrying out orders," Kelly said, in reference to the justification many Nazis used in their war crimes trials after World War II.





There has been particular outrage over the revelation that two boys who filed complaints against Smyth were asked to sign confidentiality statements as part of Brady's investigation.





The oaths of secrecy were "to avoid potential collusion" between the two boys as church officials investigated the case, Ireland's Catholic Communications Office said Tuesday.





Despite his criticism of Brady, Kelly said it would not necessarily do any good for the cardinal to resign.





"He's lost all moral authority to lead, but by replacing him, it won't resolve the problem," he said, arguing that the Vatican would "just replace guys with other guys."





The best solution, he said, would be for the Roman Catholic Church to let secular authorities deal with accusations of abuse, rather than trying to handle them itself.





"They have to accept secular authority, and they can get on with the business of religion," Kelly said. "It would be in the church's own interest. Resignations in themselves aren't the answer."





Four Irish bishops tendered their resignations in the wake of the government-backed report, and Pope Benedict XVI is expected to make a formal statement, or pastoral letter, on the Irish abuse issue by Easter.





The pope himself has been under fire since it was revealed that a priest suspected of abusing children was allowed to move into his diocese when he was Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger in Germany in 1980.





The Archdiocese of Munich and Freising said in a statement Monday it must have been clear at the time that the priest, whom multiple sources identified to CNN as Peter Hullermann, was coming to get therapy for allegedly molesting children. He was convicted of abuse in 1986, after Ratzinger moved to Rome. Hullermann was suspended on Monday.





Hundreds of allegations of sexual or physical abuse of children by Catholic clergy have come to light in Germany, Austria and the Netherlands this year.





CNN's Frederik Pleitgen in Berlin, Germany, contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- The city councils in two of Arizona's largest cities have voted to file suit over the state's controversial new immigration law, which allows police to ask anyone for proof of legal U.S. residency.





The Tucson City Council voted 5-1 to file suit, and the city council in Flagstaff approved a similar measure 7-0. Both votes occurred Tuesday.





Members of the Phoenix Suns basketball team, meanwhile, plan to wear jerseys that say "Los Suns" in a playoff game Wednesday as "a way for our team and our organization to honor our Latino community," managing partner Robert Sarver said in a statement.





Opposition to the law continued Wednesday, with some civil rights and labor organizations saying they will announce a boycott Thursday.





Joining in Thursday's announcement will be the National Council of La Raza, which bills itself as the largest national Hispanic civil rights and advocacy organization in the United States; the Asian American Justice Center; the Center for Community Change; the Service Employees International Union; and the United Food and Commercial Workers, the groups said in a release.





Arizona Gov. Jan Brewer signed the immigration measure April 23. It is scheduled to go into effect this summer.





Critics say the law will lead to racial profiling. Brewer and others who support the law say it does not involve racial profiling or any other illegal acts.





The city councils said they passed the measures because of concerns over enforcement costs and negative effects on Arizona's tourism industry. Opponents of the immigration law have called for a boycott of Arizona tourism and urge that no one engage in any commerce with businesses located in the state.





In Tucson, council member Regina Romero introduced a motion for "the city attorney to bring a legal challenge" because the immigration bill is "a bad law, which could cost the city millions of dollars in lawsuits and is unconstitutional."





"This bill opens the door to racial profiling, and it puts Latinos in Arizona in automatic suspect mode," Romero said.





Tucson Mayor Bob Walkup said up to 38 percent of retail sales in the city come from legal Mexican visitors.





The state immigration law threatens those businesses, Walkup said, just when "the city is just beginning to recover from the economic downturn."





The Mexican government issued an advisory to its citizens last week to avoid travel in Arizona.





The Organization of American States expressed its concern about the law last week, and presidents of South American countries meeting in Argentina for a gathering of the Union of South American Nations condemned the law Tuesday.





Well-known Mexican writer Carlos Fuentes recommended this week that dark-skinned people, men with mustaches, women who use shawls, or anyone who does not speak English well should not go to Arizona because the state has "officially declared itself racist," the government-run Notimex news service reported Wednesday.





The Phoenix Suns basketball team also criticized the new law.





"The frustration with the federal government's failure to deal with the issue of illegal immigration resulted in passage of a flawed state law," managing partner Sarver said. "However intended, the result of passing this law is that our basic principles of equal rights and protection under the law are being called into question, and Arizona's already struggling economy will suffer even further setbacks at a time when the state can ill-afford them."

***

(CNN) -- The mayor of Portland, Oregon, publicly apologized Tuesday for lying about a sexual relationship he had with an 18-year-old male in 2005, and for asking the teen to lie about it.



"This was a serious error that happened about four years ago," Portland Mayor Sam Adams tells reporters.



"I want to apologize to the people of Portland for my dishonesty and for embarrassing them," Mayor Sam Adams, a Democrat, said at an afternoon news conference.



But the mayor -- who is openly gay and whose election last year possibly made Portland the largest U.S. city to elect an openly gay mayor -- said he has no plans to resign.



"This was a serious error that happened about four years ago," Adams said. "My job now is to come clean -- I mucked it up -- and to press forward."



Adams returned to Portland from Washington, where he had planned to attend the inauguration of President Barack Obama, to hold the news conference.



A day earlier, Adams issued a statement saying: "In the past, I have characterized my relationship with Beau Breedlove as purely nonsexual. That is not true. Beau Breedlove and I had a sexual relationship for a few months in the summer of 2005 after he turned 18 years of age."



Adams issued the statement Monday after a local newspaper, the Willamette Week, published a story about the relationship between Adams, who was a city commissioner in 2005, and Breedlove, then a legislative intern.



During the mayoral campaign, questions had emerged about whether Adams and Breedlove had a sexual relationship. Adams said he had lied about the relationship during the campaign, and had asked Breedlove to lie, because of "untrue rumors being circulated saying that I had broken the law regarding sex relations with a minor."



"The allegation coming at me was 'sex with a minor,' " Adams said. "But still, I should have told the truth at the time and taken the consequences."



The relationship was consensual and "although inappropriate, was legal," Adams said.



"I'm the one that should be held accountable. I'm the older adult," he said.



Adams was 42 and Breedlove was 17 when the two met, according to the Willamette newspaper.



Adams emphasized that what he called a "romantic" relationship with Breedlove did not begin until after Breedlove was 18.



Adams said the two had "maybe three or four dates" over two or three months in 2005 before the relationship ended.



The mayor apologized to Breedlove for asking him to lie, and to Portland's gay community "for embarrassing them." It was not clear whether Breedlove was in attendance at Tuesday's news conference.



Adams said that "this is fundamentally an issue of a public official lying."



"I don't think this fundamentally is an issue about sexual orientation," he said. "Other people can debate that but, for me, it's about an error in judgment and then seeking to make amends for that and being very up-front about the mistake and then carrying on," he said.



Asked by a reporter if he lied to get elected, Adams said: "I definitely lied to avoid what I thought was another lie that I couldn't overcome. So, in a way, yes."



Asked if he had thought he could get away with lying, Adams responded: "I think that's going to be up to my colleagues and the people of Portland."

***

(OPRAH.com) -- Oprah has always said that mothers have the most difficult job on earth, and actress Jenny McCarthy is one mom who has never backed down from a challenge.



Doctors removed Monica's uterus, ovaries, gallbladder and part of her colon, along with her legs and arms.



Jenny has been an outspoken advocate for parents of children with autism since her son was diagnosed with the disease two and a half years ago.



In her new book, "Mother Warriors," Jenny tells the story of other moms fighting for their special-needs kids.



So when Oprah heard about Monica, another mom fighting for her children, she thought Jenny would be just the person to get this mother warrior's story.



After going through a painful divorce, Monica met Tony when she least expected it. Monica already had a 9-year-old daughter, but soon after she and Tony got engaged, they were thrilled to be expecting another bundle of joy.



In August 2007, she had a C-section, and though she worried about complications, Monica delivered a healthy baby girl. But hours after Sofia was born, Monica began running a fever. No one was concerned at first -- Monica figured it was just hormones -- but three days later the fever hadn't broken, and Monica's abdomen was swollen and painful. iReport.com: What do you think about this story? Sound off on video



The doctors at Monica's hospital thought she might be infected with a deadly strain of bacteria. They flew her to a hospital in Boston where she was diagnosed with necrotizing fasciitis, also known as flesh-eating bacteria.



Defying the odds, Monica survived, but many of her organs didn't. The doctors removed Monica's uterus, ovaries, gallbladder and part of her colon that same day.



Within four weeks, Monica's infection had restricted the blood flow to her arms and legs. Her nurses cleaned her limbs every day, and she knew they were trying to keep her from seeing the damage. But Monica wanted to face the disease head on. "I needed to know what I was up against. I didn't want to be shielded anymore," Monica says.



Eventually, doctors told Monica they had to amputate both arms and both legs. The surgery sounded scary, but Monica was determined to put it behind her and get back to her daughters.



"I was frightened at first, but when they told me [my arms and legs] had to be amputated, it was: 'Do it. I've got to go home,'" Monica says. "[I thought,] 'I have a life to live and it's not here, and until you amputate, I can't move forward.'"



After her amputation, Monica spent two months in the hospital, where she underwent a total of 37 surgeries. As Monica grew stronger, Tony realized there was no reason to postpone their wedding any longer -- they got married in the hospital chapel in October, 2007.



Monica spent the next two months going through grueling rehabilitation.



"She's a fighter," Tony says. "If they told her two hours of physical therapy a day, she'd ask to double it up to four. She wanted to come home as soon as possible. They didn't think she'd ever walk again, but she made it happen."



Right before Christmas, Monica got what she'd been waiting for. She was given the okay to go home to her husband and two daughters.



A year later, Jenny visited Monica and her family at their home outside Boston, Massachusetts. "I had a big aha! moment after spending six hours with her. Monica accepted what is. She looked down and said: 'Okay, this is the situation. I can't change this, so I might as well surrender to it,'" Jenny says. "When she does that, she is able to move forward in peace." Oprah.com: Jenny McCarthy answers parenting questions



Nurses and doctors say they expected a "why me

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- British Prime Minister Gordon Brown's wife, Sarah, wore an outfit from designer Britt Lintner to greet President Obama and his wife, Michelle, while Michelle Obama wore J.Crew, according to spokeswomen for both sides.

Sarah Brown, left, wears a dress from an American designer. Michelle Obama wears J.Crew.

Both women later changed and wore other designer outfits for the formal pre-G-20 summit dinner at 10 Downing Street, the British prime minister's official residence.

Wednesday morning, Sarah Brown wore a one-of-a-kind navy dress with red lining by the American-born Lintner, a spokeswoman for 10 Downing Street said.

The designer specially made the dress in navy for Brown, but retails the garment in black for $720, Lintner said.

Michelle Obama's outfit included a $158 green skirt and $298 bead and rhinestone cardigan from J.Crew, the store's Web site showed.

Brown also wore a pair of Astley Clarke earrings, according to a spokeswoman from 10 Downing Street. The Astley Clarke Web site sells earrings from less than $100 to more than $10,000.

The first ladies' choices of outfits during this summit are being closely watched by the world's media, both in terms of style and comparative cost.

Both women pay for all of their clothes themselves and receive no clothing allowance, according to spokeswomen for both sides.

Lintner first designed a dress for Brown for the British Fashion Council Awards in November 2007, Lintner said. She sells to clients only through her West London studio and said she started her company out of frustration over the selection of workwear available for women. Although the clothes are expensive, she said, they are made to last.

This is not the first time Michelle Obama has chosen an "off the rack" outfit. She has worn J.Crew before, including in American Vogue.

When appearing on "The Tonight Show" with Jay Leno, she wore a J.Crew ensemble, on which she commented, "You get some good stuff online."

After the photo call, Obama and Brown visited Maggie's Cancer Caring Center, where Brown is a patron.

The spouses of the G-20 leaders have several events scheduled during their stay in London. On Tuesday, Brown will be host of a dinner for G-20 spouses.

The dinner will take place at No. 11 Downing Street, the London residence of the chancellor of the exchequer, while the G-20 leaders take a working dinner next door at No. 10.

As well as the spouses of the G-20 leaders, prominent women in British sport, arts, fashion, charity and business are also expected to attend. Downing Street has said those invited are "all intended to show off British talent."

Those invited include "Harry Potter" author J.K. Rowling, supermodel Naomi Campbell and Olympic gold medal runner Kelly Holmes. Downing Street sources said Michelle Obama will be seated between Holmes and Rowling.

The spouses also will visit the Royal Opera House in Covent Garden, London. They are expected to watch some short performances of opera and ballet, the Prime Minister's Press Office said.

***

Washington (CNN) -- Foreign nationals who are HIV-positive will find it easier starting Monday to visit the United States.



The Department of Health and Human Services and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention removed HIV infection from the list of diseases that prevent non-U.S. citizens from entering the country.



HIV is the human immunodeficiency virus -- the virus that causes AIDS.



Advocates for HIV-positive people said the new policy was long overdue, calling it "a significant step forward for the United States."



"The end of the HIV travel and immigration ban is the beginning of a new life for countless families and thousands who had been separated because of this policy," said Steve Ralls, spokesman for Immigration Equality, a national rights organization for lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and HIV-positive individuals. "This is a new beginning for them."



The final rule was approved in November and went into effect Monday.



The new regulation takes HIV infection out of the category of "communicable diseases of public health significance," the CDC said. It also removes required testing for HIV infection from the U.S. immigration medical screening process and eliminates the need for a waiver for entry into the United States.



U.S. laws and regulations enacted since 1952 have made persons "who were afflicted with any dangerous contagious disease" ineligible to receive a visa to enter the country. People infected with HIV have been restricted since 1987, when Congress directed the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services to add HIV to its list of diseases of public health significance.



The United States Global Leadership Against HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria Reauthorization Act of 2008, which President Bush signed on July 30, 2008, removed the statutory requirement that mandated the inclusion of HIV on the list of diseases of public health significance that barred entry in the United States.



The legislation did not, however, automatically change the existing regulations, administered by HHS, that continued to list HIV as a "communicable disease of public-health significance" and required the more cumbersome visa process.



The United States was one of 13 countries that restricted entry of HIV-positive visitors, according to amfAR, an AIDS research foundation.

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- Three years ago Tuesday, Leslie Marva Adams, an attractive, 40-year-old hair stylist from Atlanta, Georgia, chatted on the phone with her mother in the morning.



Leslie Adams, 40, filed a restraining order against an old boyfriend and disappeared three years ago.



It was the last conversation she would have with a family member.



On the third anniversary of Adams' disappearance, her family is still waiting for answers. Her daughter, Cierra Burk, 19, clings to the belief that Adams is alive.



"We will find her," Burk says.



The family became concerned when Adams failed to show up for her sister's birthday party the day after she talked on the phone with her mother. Two days after the missed party, Adams was officially reported missing.



At her apartment in suburban Lilburn, police found evidence suggesting foul play -- a 12-inch blood stain near her bed and a .45-caliber bullet casing. Adams' car was parked in her driveway and a handwritten note was found on her door.



Investigators soon learned the note was from her sister, Roberta. It said, "Leslie, we're worried about you, please call me as soon as possible."  Watch how the mystery began with a missed party »



Adams had been having trouble with her ex-boyfriend, Billy Joe Cook, in the days leading up to her disappearance. She had accused him of stalking her and had filed a restraining order.



In the court document, she alleged that Cook had verbally and physically abused her. She said she feared for her life. A temporary restraining order was granted by the court, but Adams vanished before a scheduled hearing on the matter.



Phyllis Adams said her daughter told her in their final conversation that she had argued with Cook over the phone on the previous day.



According to the temporary restraining order, Cook was not to have any contact with Adams.



Police brought Cook in for questioning and learned he had spoken to Adams on the phone twice the day before she last spoke to her family. Although he was questioned extensively, police have not named Cook a suspect.



Police say he was very cooperative and there is no evidence suggesting his involvement in her disappearance, although they have not ruled him or anyone else out as a potential suspect or person of interest.



Just when they thought the trail had gone cold, police found what could be a lead in the case. In May 2007, clothing was recovered that could belong to the missing hair-dresser. Police found a pair of men's size 8 Reebok sneakers, size 10 capri pants, and a black sweater in the woods along I-85 in Franklin County, 90 miles from Adams' home in Atlanta.



They also discovered human bones and a breast implant near the clothing.



Police have sent the remains to a DNA testing lab and they have yet to be identified. The results are inconclusive, and police continue to collect DNA samples from Adams family members for future tests.



Leslie Marva Adams is an African-American female who stands 5 feet 5 inches, weighs 130 pounds, and has breast implants. Family members fear the remains could be Leslie Adams, but they are still hopeful that she will be found alive and well.



Burk, Adams' daughter, says she struggles with her emotions at this time of year.



"I still believe she is alive and we will find her, but this time of year is very hard," she said, fighting the tears. "It's my aunt's birthday, the day my mom didn't show up and we never saw her again, so it's hard not to break down."



Police and family urge anyone with information on the whereabouts of Leslie Adams to call the Gwinett County Police Department at (770) 513-5300. There is a $25,000 reward for information that helps locate Leslie Adams or leads to the arrest of the person responsible for her disappearance.

***

HARARE, Zimbabwe (CNN)  -- Zimbabwe Prime Minister Morgan Tsvangirai was in stable condition and recovering from head injuries Friday night after a car wreck that killed his wife, Susan, medical sources told CNN.



Tsvangirai and his wife, Susan, were en route to the prime minister's hometown of Buhera.



The crash, on a busy two-lane highway between Tsvangirai's hometown of Buhera and the capital city of Harare, comes just weeks after the start of a power-sharing agreement between Tsvangirai and his political rival, President Robert Mugabe.



Analysts say the crash is bound to raise suspicion of foul play, with one former U.S. diplomat calling for an outside investigation, saying it is not the first time that a political foe of Mugabe has been killed or injured in a car crash.



Members of Tsvangirai's political party, the Movement for Democratic Change, said Friday that it was too early to tell whether the crash is anything other than an accident.



Tsvangirai's aide and driver also were injured in the head-on collision with a large truck, according to his spokesman, James Maridadi.



Movement for Democratic Change spokesman Nelson Chamisa said he spoke to Tsvangirai at the hospital, and the party leader was in "relatively stable" condition.  An MDC spokesman describes 'critical' accident »



Sources at The Avenues Clinic in Harare said that Tsvangirai was in stable condition with minor head injuries and that the prime minister was alert and talking. One source said the attending doctor had told him of his wife's death.



Another said that doctors were planning to keep Tsvangirai overnight for observation and that specialists were checking his condition.



Tsvangirai, Zimbabwe's main opposition leader, took office last month under a power-sharing deal with Mugabe after a contentious election.



Tsvangirai's MDC reached the power-sharing agreement with Mugabe in September after months of angry dispute that included violence. More than 200 deaths, mainly those of opposition supporters, were reported leading up to and in the aftermath of the election.



"I'm skeptical about any motor vehicle accident in Zimbabwe involving an opposition figure," said Tom McDonald, the U.S. ambassador to Zimbabwe from 1997 to 2001. "President Mugabe has a history of strange car accidents when someone lo and behold dies -- it's sort of his M.O. of how they get rid of people they don't like."  Watch more on the fatal crash »



McDonald cited the 2001 death of Defense Minister Moven Mahachi, Employment Minister Border Gezi's death in 1999 and the death last year of Elliot Manyika, a government minister and former regional governor.



All three died in car crashes.



"This is several," McDonald said. "So, when I hear that Tsvangirai was in an accident, it gives me pause."



McDonald, now an attorney with the Washington law firm Baker Hostetler, urged a full investigation by outside authorities.



One analyst who studies the region said the collision could "exacerbate" the fragile unity government.



"There will undoubtedly be suspicions about the cause of the crash and whether there was foul play involved," said Jennifer Cooke, director of the Africa Program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington.



"At a time when there needs to be confidence-building measures, this incident potentially raises suspicions and undermines the potential for greater cohesion of the government. [There is] huge potential for the agreement to be manipulated by Mugabe."



McDonald, however, was quick to say that traffic accidents are common in Zimbabwe. The highway on which Tsvangirai was traveling is a two-lane road where tractor-trailers are common, vehicles in the country are often in bad shape and drivers often are inexperienced, he said.



"It's certainly plausible that this was just one of those tragic things," he said.



The collision occurred on the Harare-Masvingo Road as Tsvangirai and his wife headed to his hometown of Buhera, south of the capital, Harare, his spokesman said.



The couple, who were married in 1978, have six children, according to the British Broadcasting

***

DENVER, Colorado (CNN) -- On a good day, Keri Christensen spends the day watching her children. She prepares their meals, gets them ready for school and helps them with their homework.



Keri Christensen was nearly a victim of a roadside bombing in Iraq when the convoy in front of hers was hit.



But this housewife and mother of two is far different than most of the women living in her Denver, Colorado, suburb.



She's an Iraqi war veteran, among the first women in the United States to be classified as combat veterans.



Even though she's been home from the war for more than 2½ years, she's now fighting another battle -- this one with depression, nightmares, sleeplessness and anger. She says all of it is caused by her time in Iraq.



"I start feeling those feelings of 'I'm not worthy. I can't raise my family,' " Christensen said.



Women have made up about 11 percent of the military force in Iraq and Afghanistan in the past six years, according to the Department of Defense; that's an estimated 180,000 women in the war zone. The figure dwarfs the 41,000 women deployed during the Persian Gulf War and the 7,500 who served during the Vietnam War, mostly as nurses.



Unlike past wars, women are assigned to combat support roles. Many are seeing violence firsthand in an unconventional war.  Watch CNN's Randi Kaye report on female veterans »



As a member of the National Guard, Christensen transported tanks in Iraq. She says she was shot at and was nearly a victim of a roadside bomb when a convoy in front of hers was hit.



"You have this fear, 'Oh, my God, I still have to go through there,' " she recalled. " 'Am I going to make it?' "



Christensen says that she was sexually harassed by a superior while serving in Iraq and that the harassment added to the pressure created by just being in a war zone.



"I just know it took a big toll on me because I was trying to deal with it myself. Just trying to be a soldier," Christensen said.



In 2007, the Department of Veterans Affairs found that women are reporting signs of mental health issues when they return home at a higher rate than their male counterparts.



The VA diagnosed 60,000 veterans with post-traumatic stress disorder. Of those, 22 percent of women suffered from "military sexual trauma," which includes sexual harassment or assault, compared with 1 percent of men.



Christensen, who has been diagnosed with PTSD, says she doesn't like leaving her comfort zone. She doesn't drive more than two miles from her home.



"When I get outside my familiar safe territory, I start to feel overwhelmed," Christensen said. "It gets foggy. Not sure where I'm really going. Something comes over me where I don't feel like I have control over it."



"PTSD is actually something that shows up over time, and so the natural recovery process doesn't happen," said Dr. Darrah Westrup, who counsels female veterans at the VA-run Women's Health Clinic in Menlo Park, California.



"So three months out or so, you find yourself still not sleeping, still with nightmares, still having intrusive thoughts," Westrup said.



Westrup says another factor contributing to poor mental health is the high amount of sexual trauma reported by women screened by the Veterans Administration. She says many women have trouble reporting the trauma to their superiors out of fear of retribution.



"When you are in a war zone, your survival depends on people watching your back and on unit cohesion," Westrup said. "The same individuals who attacked you are those who will be protecting you, or you'll be fighting alongside the next day."



Christensen receives counseling and group therapy sponsored by the VA. However, the military has said there is no merit to her claims that she suffered military sexual trauma.



Like many who suffer from post-traumatic stress, Christensen still has

***

SHANGHAI, China (CNN) -- Natalie Williams, a 21-year-old Special Olympics basketball player from Kentucky, says she's never really been treated like a true athletic star. But that was before she came to the Games in China, which has undergone a major change in its treatment of the mentally disabled.



Hong Kong's Special Olympics team marches into the stadium during last week's opening ceremony.



"They are able to accept special needs people in a way that maybe some other countries do not," Williams says.



Last week, organizers rolled out the red carpet for athletes arriving at the Special Olympics in Shanghai, China. Never before in the 39-year history of the Special Olympics has there been such an extravagant, star-studded opening ceremony. And everywhere in this city, there are billboards with the smiling faces of the mentally disabled promoting the Games.



China spent millions ensuring the 7,500 competitors are cared for -- and more importantly accepted.  Watch 'This is a highlight to their lives' »



That's quite a turnaround for a country whose leadership, less than 20 years ago, refused to even acknowledge any of their citizens were intellectually disabled. At the time, former Prime Minister Li Peng was quoted as saying, "Mentally retarded people give birth to idiots."



"There's a long way to go -- there's a long way. But the good news is we're moving," says Tim Shriver, chairman of the Special Olympics.



China's transformation is so far mostly from the top down, beginning with no less than President Hu Jintao whose presence at the Opening Ceremony was particularly notable.  See photos of the opening ceremony »



Also notable was the president's visit to one of Shanghai's "Sunshine Homes" this month. The shelters are a direct result of this city winning the rights five years ago to host the Special Olympics. Back then, officials quickly realized their treatment of the city's 70,000 mentally disabled was woefully inadequate.



Now there are 240 Sunshine Homes spread across this sprawling city, caring for about 15,000 of those most in need, like 25-year-old Chen Xiaohan. She still struggles to speak with strangers, but her parents boast of her many achievements since enrolling a year ago.



Xiaohan can make her own bed, walk to school and is learning piano. But more notable, says her father, Chen Zhixiang, is the change in recent years in the way his daughter is treated by neighbors.



"If in the past you looked down on them and now you still look down, it only proves your thinking is bad. Now when our neighbors see her, they're very nice. They ask, 'Chen Xiaohan, how are you today?' There isn't any more discrimination."



The Special Olympics may have been a watershed moment for China's mentally disabled, but perhaps a breakthrough came a few years earlier, when Special Olympian Judy Yang appeared in a splashy spread on the front cover of a mainstream teen-age magazine.



Photogenic and well-spoken, Yang has been an unofficial ambassador of sorts and, after her magazine debut, she noticed a real shift in how the Chinese related to the disabled.



"A lot of people are accepting now. They're willing to be friends, to let their children play with one another, and they can learn from each other as well."



That may be true in China's biggest, richest and most Western city, Shanghai, but in the countryside not much appears to have changed. Intellectually disabled children that are hard to manage are often locked in caged rooms. Humanitarian officials say stories of doctors recommending disabled children be killed at birth are common.



In addition, programs like Sunshine Homes are almost unheard of outside of Shanghai and caring for the almost 13 million intellectually disabled in China remains a major challenge.



Earlier this year, authorities exposed a human trafficking ring selling young men, many of them intellectually disabled,  to work in brick kilns.



"Neglect and discrimination is still quite prevalent. People tend to be ashamed of children with disabilities

***

ORLANDO, Florida (CNN) -- Authorities cordoned off the home of missing toddler Caylee Anthony's grandparents on Thursday, hours after the remains of a small child were found nearby.

Investigators have sealed off the Anthony home, which shows a large Caylee poster.

The sheriff's office in Orange County, Florida, said it is seeking a warrant to search the home of George and Cindy Anthony.

Sheriff Kevin Beary said the home has been secured "pending more investigation." The house has the "possibility of being more of a crime scene later," he added.

A child's skull was found at about 9:30 a.m. by a utility meter reader who alerted authorities, sheriff's spokesman Jim Solomons said. Investigators, including those from the Anthony case, rushed to the scene, he added.  Watch investigators swarm the scene Â»

CNN affiliate WFTV reported that the meter reader picked up a plastic bag at the site and a skull fell out. The remains have been removed by the medical examiner and will be sent to the FBI lab at Quantico, Virginia, Sheriff Beary said.

The agency has told its lab analysts that the case is top priority, Beary added. "If they have to work through the weekend, they'll work through the weekend."

"Bottom line, it's real simple, folks," Beary said. "We've recovered this human skull, it appears to be that of a small child, and now the investigation continues. We've got a lot of lab work to do, a lot of DNA work to do, a lot of crime scene work to do. We could be here all night."  Watch the sheriff talk about what needs to be done Â»

Prosecutors have asked police not to disclose many details surrounding the discovery, Beary said.

Caylee Anthony, 3, has been missing since June in a case that has received national attention. Casey Anthony, the child's 22-year-old mother, was charged last month with murder and other offenses. She is being held at the Orange County Jail.

The area where the remains were found had been searched as part of the investigation into Caylee's disappearance, he said. But the precise spot where a county meter reader found them -- "45, 50, 60 feet back" from the street -- was flooded at the time of the search.

No clothes were found with the remains, Beary said.

Asked whether the remains could belong to another child, Beary said, "Not that we know of, but that's always a possibility, and that's why we've got a lot of work to do on this case still."

Earlier, authorities said the Anthony family had been notified of the discovery. The remains were found "in very close proximity" to the Anthony home, Solomons said.  View a map of where the remains were found Â»

An attorney for Casey Anthony filed legal papers Thursday afternoon seeking a court order to preserve all evidence collected, and to permit the defense to conduct its own forensic testing. A hearing has been scheduled for Friday morning.

In a court hearing earlier Thursday, 9th Circuit Judge Stan Strickland postponed Casey Anthony's trial at the request of defense attorney Jose Baez. The attorney said he had not received all the evidence due him from prosecutors and was not ready to proceed with the January 5 trial.

Baez asked Strickland whether the trial could be delayed until March. The judge scheduled a hearing January 15 to consider a new trial date as well as a possible change of venue.

Casey Anthony remains in protective custody and has no contact with other inmates, corrections officials said.

"She has been seen by a Corrections Health Services psychologist and her status was reviewed," officials said in a statement, adding Anthony was under psychological observation -- which is not the same as suicide watch.

Baez arrived at the jail just before noon Thursday and stayed about an hour and a half, officials said.

Prosecutors said this month that they would not seek the death penalty against Casey Anthony. If convicted of

***

WASHINGTON (CNN)  -- A man who his attorney says was the youngest prisoner sent to the Guantanamo Bay detention center -- captured in Pakistan at 14 -- was ordered freed by a federal judge Wednesday.



A guard keeps watch from a tower at the military facility at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.



The judge ruled Mohammad el-Gharani was not an enemy combatant and directed the military "to take all necessary and appropriate diplomatic steps to facilitate the release" of el-Gharani from the U.S. base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.



El-Gharani, now 21, was among the first terrorism suspects and enemy fighters sent to the U.S. military prison camp. His arrival in 2002 came after he was seized by Pakistanis at a mosque and transferred to the U.S.-led coalition. He has been in custody since.



El-Gharani's lawyers filed a habeas corpus petition in federal court, demanding the government justify its continued detention or release him.



Details of his case have not been widely released, but his lawyer said he was accused of working with al Qaeda 10 years ago, at age 11. The court ruling also alleges el-Gharani, a citizen of Chad, was an al Qaeda courier and participated in the battle of Tora Bora in late 2001 in Afghanistan.



But U.S. District Judge Richard Leon noted serious questions were raised about another detainee who implicated el-Gharani.



Leon said that given the "substantial and troubling uncertainties regarding petitioner's conduct and whereabouts prior to his detention by Pakistani forces, the [U.S.] government has failed to establish a preponderance of the evidence" that el-Gharani was an al Qaeda agent.



The judge gave no timetable on when the suspect -- also called Yousef -- must be freed. Under U.S. and international policy, he could not be sent to a country where he might face torture or severe physical mistreatment. The Bush administration has said it has had difficulties finding countries willing to take many Guantanamo prisoners awaiting release.



El-Gharani's lawyers have alleged mistreatment by his captors, including cigarette burns and verbal abuse.



Court records allege he was a native of Saudi Arabia who left that country around 2001 and moved to Pakistan. He denied that he was fleeing the fighting in Afghanistan when he was captured across the border in Pakistan.



Another Guantanamo detainee, Canadian Omar Khadr, was 14 or 15 when he was captured six years ago. Military prosecutors formally charged him in April 2007 with killing Sgt. Christopher James Speer, a U.S. soldier whose reconnaissance patrol was ambushed in Afghanistan in 2002. The American died nearly two weeks later. Khadr and el-Gharani remain among the youngest of Guantanamo's approximately 250 prisoners.



The civil case is el-Gharani v. Bush (05-429).

***

(CNN) -- The magnitude-8.8 earthquake that rocked the west coast of Chile last month was violent enough to move the city of Concepcion at least 10 feet to the west and the capital, Santiago, about 11 inches to the west-southwest, researchers said.





The quake also shifted other parts of South America, as far apart as the Falkland Islands and Fortaleza, Brazil.





The results were reached via global positioning satellite measurements taken before and after the February 27 quake by teams from The Ohio State University, the University of Hawaii, the University of Memphis and the California Institute of Technology, as well as agencies across South America.





NASA scientists have also credited the quake with shifting the Earth's axis enough to create shorter days. The change is negligible, but still worth noting: Each day should be 1.26 microseconds shorter, according to preliminary calculations. A microsecond is one-millionth of a second.





A large quake -- like the one that hit Chile's Maule region -- shifts massive amounts of rock and alters the distribution of mass on the planet.





When that distribution changes, it changes the rate at which the planet rotates. And the rotation rate determines the length of a day.





"Any worldly event that involves the movement of mass affects the Earth's rotation," Benjamin Fong Chao, of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, said while explaining the phenomenon in 2005.





Despite the tragedy of the earthquake, which killed hundreds of Chileans, scientists see opportunities to gain valuable information in the aftermath.





"The Maule earthquake will arguably become one of the, if not the most important, great earthquakes yet studied," said Ben Brooks of the School of Ocean and Earth Science and Technology at the University of Hawaii.





"We now have modern, precise instruments to evaluate this event."

***

(CNN) -- The Okavango Delta is one of earth's remote places; it is not easy to get to, and it is quite wild. Independent travel there is not for the inexperienced or the faint-hearted.





There are few roads and those that exist are difficult to drive and navigate and subject to flooding and other hazards; communications are spotty at best and locations are distantly apart.





Winning and losing on Botswana's Okavango Delta





The vast majority of tourists fly into camps in the delta, many from the town of Maun, which is easily reached by scheduled airlines from Botswana's capital, Gaborone (Air Botswana), from Johannesburg, South Africa (South African Airways), from Windhoek, Namibia (Air Namibia), and from Victoria Falls, Zimbabwe. From Maun, a host of bush plane companies fly tourists to the camps and reserves, most of which, including Kwara, are privately owned and operated.





Most tourists make their arrangements through organized tour companies, and there is no shortage of tour operators in southern Africa who can arrange an all-inclusive visit. More resourceful travelers can save money by making their own arrangements using the Internet to identify individual camps, and arranging transportation and accommodations directly through them. The camps vary from luxury suites to basic pup tents, and prices reflect the differences.





Kwara Camp is mid- to upper range, offering heavy canvas tents on wood platforms with full beds and in-tent plumbed bathrooms, full board and a host of activities, including overland Jeep safaris, dugout canoe trips and motorboat journeys that are included in the basic price.





Less expensive camps, such as Oddballs Camp, feature simple pup tents on platforms, but can be hundreds of dollars less expensive. Some camps are fenced to keep animals out at night, while others such as Kwara are not (if the sound of a two-ton elephant or hippopotamus tramping through the bushes right outside your window unnerves you, you might want to opt for a fenced camp).





Botswana is deliberately expensive, as the government wishes to limit the number of tourists who visit Okavango to lessen environmental impact. Rates during high season (July-October) can be twice as high as during low season (November-June). Try going during low season, just before or after high season, to maximize wildlife viewing but minimize cost.





For most upscale camps, plan on US $900-$1,600 per person, per night in high season, and a low of about $700 in low season. For mid-range camps, plan on about $700-$950 in high season, as low as $350 in low season. For basic camps, looks for rates as low as $340 per person, per night in high season and $240 in low season. Most rates are all-inclusive, including lodging, food and all safaris and other activities. Tourists on tighter budgets might want to consider camps in South Africa, although they tend to be less wild and more tourist-populated.





Large animals including lion, zebra, hippopotamus, wildebeest, elephant and others are abundant in the Delta, and while it is thrilling to see them, tourists must always remember, this is not a zoo. The animals are wild. But as long as visitors follow a few simple rules, there is little danger.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Who's the greatest driver of all-time? Michael Schumacher? Maybe Alain Prost? Ayrton Senna perhaps? In an exclusive interview with CNN, three-time Formula One world champion, Jackie Stewart had no hesitation in naming his choice for the greatest driver of all-time.



Three-time F1 champion, Jackie Stewart back in his heyday.



"My hero, and the man I most respected and probably still do is Juan Manuel Fangio." Stewart told CNN.



It's not misty-eyed nostalgia for a bygone era that persuades "The Flying Scot," as Stewart became known. And it wasn't just Fangio's tally of world titles that convinced Stewart; it is the manner in which the Argentine legend saw off his rivals. Who do you think is the greatest?



"Fangio won five world championships almost in a different car every year. He had the dignity, the style and the ability," Stewart explained.



What's more, as Stewart points out, Fangio didn't start racing in Formula One until he was 39-years-old, and whether driving a Ferrari, Lancia, Maserati or Mercedes, he kept on winning races.



Though Fangio was the greatest, Stewart rated fellow countryman Jim Clark as the best driver he raced against.



"His batting average was very good and he didn't race in too many grands prix." Clark -- who was tragically killed racing at Hockenheim in 1968 -- won 25 of his 73 Formula One races. Stewart's record is comparable, winning 27 from 100 starts.



It's this win to race ratio that really separates the good from the great Stewart believes.



"I'm on record as saying winning is not enough, it's easy to win. Most people win. To be successful, like a Fangio or a Jim Clark is more difficult."  See our photo gallery of Formula One's greatest drivers »



As much as Stewart admires seven-time champion Michael Schumacher, he's finds it hard to put the German in the same league as Fangio or Clark.



"Not to take anything away from him [Schumacher], but his car was so dominant and his team had so much in terms of money and resources," Stewart said. "Although he has won more, his batting average isn't as good -- from starts to wins -- as Fangio or Clark."



Stewart, who retired from Formula One in 1973, is a great admirer of the current crop of drivers and he singled out Lewis Hamilton and Sebastian Vettel as potential legends of the future. But they have a long way to match Stewart's record of three Drivers' Championships, let alone Fangio or Schumacher.



Do you agree with Jackie Stewart? Or do you think that Michael Schumacher is the greatest? Have we missed anyone you think deserves special mention? Use the Sound Off box to have you say.

***

(CNN) -- A magnitude 8.0 earthquake struck the Pacific near American Samoa, triggering towering tsunami waves that gushed over the island and leaving at least 22 people dead.



The tsunami wave hit right in the middle of the harbor of Pago Pago, the capital.



American Samoa Gov. Togiola Tulafono, speaking from Hawaii, said Tuesday's quake ranked "right up there with some of the worst" disasters on the island. He said about 50 people had been treated for injuries so far but he expected that number to rise.



The quake hit the small cluster of South Pacific islands early Tuesday morning. By evening, Laumoli, standing outside the LBJ Tropical Medican Center morgue in the capital of Pago Pago, confirmed 22 deaths.



"I thought it was the end of the world," said Dr. Salamo Laumoli, director of health services. "I have never felt an earthquake like that before."



Laumoli feared more fatalities would turn up as rescue workers were still trying to access parts of the island severed by damaged infrastructure.



Laumoli said people in outlying villages on one end of the main island have been cut off because the main bridge was washed away.



"Two or three villages have been badly damaged," he told CNN International.  Listen to Laumoli speak about the impact of the quake and tsunami »



Tulafono cited extensive damage to roads, buildings and homes, and said he had spoken to the military about mobilizing reserve forces for assistance.



The Pacific Tsunami Warning Center in Ewa Beach, Hawaii, canceled tsunami watches and warnings for American Samoa about four hours after the earthquake hit. However, a tsunami advisory is still in effect for for the coastal areas of California and Oregon.  Watch report on end of tsunami warning »



The Japan Meteorological Agency also activated a tsunami advisory along its eastern coast. The precautionary alert means that the height of a possible tsunami wave would be less than a foot and a half.



President Barack Obama "declared a major disaster exists in the Territory of American Samoa" late Tuesday and ordered federal aid to supplement local efforts. The declaration makes federal funding available to affected individuals.



The tsunami waves hit right in the middle of the Pago Pago harbor, the capital, said Cinta Brown, an American Samoa homeland security official working at the island's emergency operations center. The water devastated the village of Leone.  Watch a resident talk about what happened »



"The wave came onshore and washed out people's homes," Brown said.



The same happened on the hard-hit east and west sides of American Samoa, she said.



The quake generated three separate tsunami waves, the largest measuring 5.1 feet from sea level height, said Vindell Hsu, a geophysicist with the Pacific Tsunami Warning Center. Preliminary data had originally reported a larger tsunami.



Officials in the U.S. territory issued a clear call and were focusing on assessing the damage, Brown said.



Reports of damage were still emerging, but a bulletin from the Pacific Tsunami Warning Center said the waves "may have been destructive along coasts near the earthquake epicenter and could also be a threat to more distant coasts. Authorities should take appropriate action in response to this possibility."



Tulafono, the governor, was on his way back home Tuesday night on one of two U.S. Coast Guard C-130 transport planes flying to American Samoa with aid.



The Coast Guard also will transport more than 20 officials from the Federal Emergency Management Agency to American Samoa, said John Hamill, external affairs officer for FEMA in Oakland, California.



The FEMA team will include a variety of debris experts, housing experts, members of the Corps of Engineers, and other disaster relief specialists, Hamill said.



Tulafono told reporters Tuesday that it was hard being away from home when disaster came calling. It was a time, he said, for families to be together.



Those who experienced the massive quake described it as a terrifying event.



Brown was standing in a parking lot when her sports utility vehicle began rocking left and right.



"You could hear the rattling of the metal" of a large chain

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- The missing engine from a US Airways jet that ditched in the Hudson River was recovered Friday, more than a week after the crash landing.



A jet engine lost after Flight 1549 ditched in the Hudson River is hoisted from the water Friday.



Icy conditions and strong currents hampered efforts to locate and raise the plane's left engine, which apparently tore from the Airbus A320 when it hit the water in an emergency landing January 15.



The engine was found Wednesday in about 50 feet of water. The divers who found it reported that it was in one piece, said New Jersey State Police Sgt. Stephen Jones.



A crane brought the engine up Friday afternoon as daylight began to fade. It was placed on a barge and hauled to the New Jersey side of the river, according to a spokeswoman for the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, which was supervising the recovery.  Watch the engine pulled from Hudson River »



After an initial examination at the site, the engine will be shipped with the plane's other engine to the manufacturer, where "the NTSB will supervise and direct a complete tear-down of each engine," NTSB spokesman Peter Knudson said.



The right engine was still attached to the plane when it was pulled from the Hudson last week.



It will be at least next week before any information from the initial examination is released, Knudson said.



Investigators said this week that they found a single feather and evidence of "soft-body impact damage" on the aircraft. The find reinforces the pilot's report that the plane was brought down by a flock of birds.



Pilot Chesley B. "Sully" Sullenberger, 58, told investigators that his aircraft struck birds, disabling both engines, about 90 seconds after takeoff from LaGuardia Airport in New York.  Map »



The feather, found on a flap track on the wing, was sent to identification experts at the Smithsonian Institution, the National Transportation Safety Board said.



Samples of what appears to be organic material found in the right engine and on the wings and fuselage have been sent to the U.S. Department of Agriculture.



Meanwhile, a pilot program involving "birdstrike avoidance" radar systems will be expanded to include LaGuardia, said a spokesman for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.  See authorities' efforts to retrieve plane »



The Air Force has been using such systems at its bases for years, and last year the Port Authority -- which operates five metropolitan New York airports -- struck an agreement with the Air Force and the Federal Aviation Administration to install the bird-detecting system at John F. Kennedy International Airport.



In the wake of the US Airways crash-landing, that program will be expanded to include LaGuardia and Newark International airports within a few months, according to Pasquale DiFulco, spokesman for the Port Authority.



Newly released video captured seconds after the Airbus A320 ditched in the Hudson River showed passengers trying to flee the aircraft almost immediately after it settled in the water and began to float along the river current.



All 155 crew members and passengers on the plane survived the incident, which Gov. David Paterson dubbed a "miracle on the Hudson."



The video, which the Con Edison utility company released Thursday, first shows a long wake behind the plane before zooming in on the aircraft. Steam surrounds the plane as it floats with a slow counterclockwise twist.



An exit hatch opens on the plane's left side, and several people file out onto one of the plane's wings. Seconds later, an inflatable evacuation ramp extends from the opposite side of the plane.  Watch their escape »



Passengers run onto the plane's other wing as the aircraft floats off-screen for a few seconds. The camera jerks, and when the plane reappears, passengers can be seen at the bottom of the inflatable ramp.



Some passengers jump into the water, which was a chilly 41 degrees when the plane splashed down on the afternoon of January 15.



Within minutes, a ferry and other boats come into the picture and begin to take the people aboard.



The

***

BILOXI, Mississippi (CNN)  -- It's been almost three years since Hurricane Katrina cut a merciless path of destruction across the U.S. Gulf Coast, killing more than 1,800 people and displacing tens of thousands more.





Cameron Sinclair on site in Biloxi, Mississippi -- one of many rebuilding projects that Architecture for Humanity is overseeing.





The coastal resort of Biloxi was among the hardest hit; hurricane-force winds leveled homes, stripped branches from trees and created a trail of devastation that rendered the popular Casino town virtually uninhabitable.





Three years on, homes are still being rebuilt to house people who were forced to seek shelter wherever they could. For some, that's meant spending years living in cramped conditions in caravans until they could afford to rebuild.





Cameron Sinclair, Co-founder of Architecture for Humanity, is leading a project to rehouse residents of Biloxi affected by the storm. On July 9, he'll be taking part in a Principal Voices debate on Design for Good: How can clever design conserve precious resources and lead to a greener way of life?





CNN caught up with Cameron Sinclair in Biloxi and started by asking him what the difference is between design and design for good?





Cameron Sinclair: Design is about creating spaces for people to enjoy and of course, creating moments where you elevate the spirit, but design for good is figuring out a program that not only creates better spaces, but creates jobs, creates new industry and really kind of raises the conversation about how we rebuild.





CNN: How many countries are you working in and what are you doing?





CS: We are currently in about 26 countries and we have around about 4000 volunteer architects and designers globally. We are working on a whole range of projects whether it be bringing health services into remote Nepal or working on a chocolate factory in the Amazon which is actually a conservation project, or doing low income housing in Cape town, South Africa, so we're pretty global in our reach.





CNN: You have worked all over the world, Iran, Africa, and Asia. When you think of people's living conditions, are you surprised that Americans don't realize how tough people have it in their own country? Have you seen things in the U.S., for example, that are worse than in so-called developing countries?





CS: Yeah, I mean people find it kind of shocking when I talk about this. You know, there are places in rural America, especially in places like the reservations, we've done a lot of work with Hopi and Navajo and we're about to start work with the Iroquois where I look at the housing stock and it is far worse then I've seen in somewhere like South Africa or you know, in Ghana.





You know, Americans are unbelievably open, welcoming and helpful, they donate to everybody. But quite often we don't look at the reality of our own lives. The fact that we have a crumbling school system, that our healthcare in this country is just diabolical, the support for nurses and teachers is just out of control and I look at all these facilities that are happening in the U.S. and I begin to question. This is supposed to be the most powerful place in the world but we can't build a decent school for our kids so you know there is a reality check that needs to happen.





CNN: When you look at the big picture of the problems the world is facing, what solutions can you see that cities and their designs can offer when it comes to global issues such as global warming?





CS: What worries me the most is you have all these global issues that are out there, whether its lack of education or lack of healthcare or climate change, and people think they are separate compartmentalized issues, but they're all interweaved so that when we're working on structures, we're thinking about how can we make the building energy efficient. How can we make the design open, allowing access to everybody so that you're hitting on all these things.





We're working in neighborhoods where sustainability is a matter of life

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- The driver of the limousine in which Princess Diana and her lover Dodi Fayed were killed spent time in a bar shortly before the 1997 Paris crash, a jury at an inquest into her death has heard.



But the jury also watched video from security cameras at the Ritz that gives no outward sign that Henri Paul was drunk when the Mercedes he was driving crashed in an underpass while being chased by paparazzi, as both French and British police have concluded.



Paul is seen squatting in the lobby of the hotel to tie his shoe laces, shifting his weight from one foot to another and rising steadily. He is also shown bounding up stairs two at a time.



The jury has already heard that Paul ordered two Ricards - an aniseed spirit - that night after arriving at the hotel.



The father of the princess's lover Dodi Fayed, Ritz owner Mohamed al Fayed, says Paul was not drunk and that the samples were switched after the tragedy.  Watch footage of Diana's last hours »



The purpose of the inquest, which is taking place in London, must decide whether the deaths of Diana and Dodi on August 31, 1997 was an accident or murder. It is expected to be a six-month process.



Al Fayed says Diana and his son were murdered because the British royal family "could not accept that an Egyptian Muslim could eventually be step-father to the future king of England," referring to Prince William, the son of Diana and her former husband, Prince Charles.



The elaborate efforts of Diana and Dodi to give the paparazzi the slip in the minutes before the tragedy in the Pont de l'Alma tunnel were also shown in a new video.



Jurors were shown second-by-second security footage of the couple's efforts to escape the Ritz Hotel undetected.



The images show how security staff choreographed a decoy exit in an effort to distract a swelling pack of press photographers and onlookers.



But even as Diana and Dodi are led through the bowels of the hotel and out through a service doorway, paparazzi lie in wait.



The security footage shows Diana, Dodi's arm around her, standing for 10 minutes behind one exit, waititng for the all-clear to sprint to a car.



At one point the princess delivers what appears to be a mock salute as she receives instructions from bodyguard Trevor Rees-Jones -- the sole survivor of the crash -- and Paul.



The wait over, Diana, Dodi, Paul and Rees-Jones run to a awaiting Mercedes and are immediately surrounded by photographers. But as they leave the paparazzi give chase in cars and on motorcycles.



Intriguingly, Paul was earlier seen waving to two photographers who had uncovered the plan to leave by the rear service entrance of the Ritz.



On Wednesday previously unseen footage of Diana was shown to the jury. Images taken from a security camera at the Ritz show the 36-year-old smiling as she and Fayed, 42, step into an elevator and later walk out of the hotel.



Further footage shows Fayed visiting a jeweler's shop, images that could lend support to claims that he was buying an engagement ring.



Earlier, the coroner at the inquest said it may never be known for certain whether Diana was pregnant when she died.



Lord Justice Scott Baker told the jury that scientific evidence might be unable to demonstrate "one way or the other" whether she was in the early stages of pregnancy. But he said they would hear "intimate" details of her personal life.



Baker told the 11 members of the jury -- six women and five men -- Diana may have been on the contraceptive pill and that evidence she was poised to get engaged to Dodi on the night she died was contradictory.



On Tuesday the judge, who is acting as coroner in the case, told the jury that a famous image taken in summer 1997 showing Diana wearing a swimsuit could not be proof she was pregnant with Dodi's child as she had not started a relationship with him at that stage.



Next week, the jury is scheduled to travel to Paris to

***

(CNN) -- "Benjamin Button" received more life, but Batman ended up in the dark.



"The Curious Case of Benjamin Button" scored a best actor nomination for Brad Pitt, here with Cate Blanchett.



The nominations for the 81st annual Academy Awards were announced Thursday morning, and to nobody's surprise, "The Curious Case of Benjamin Button" did well, nabbing 13 nods to lead all films.



The movie, about a man who ages in reverse, is a big film (almost three hours long) with big themes (death and love) and earned nominations for best picture, best director (David Fincher), best actor (Brad Pitt), best supporting actress (Taraji P. Henson) and best adapted screenplay along with eight nominations in other categories.



"This is a great honor for the movie, and I'm especially happy for David Fincher, for without him there would be no Ben Button," said Pitt in a statement. The film, based on an F. Scott Fitzgerald short story, has been a project of Fincher's for years.  Gallery: The major Oscar nominees »



However, despite eight Oscar nominations, "The Dark Knight" -- 2008's box-office king -- only picked up one in a major category, that for Heath Ledger's performance as the villainous Joker. The late actor, who died exactly one year ago Thursday, is nominated for best supporting actor, the same award he won posthumously at the Golden Globes almost two weeks ago. Commentary: CNN.com film critic Tom Charity rates the Oscar nominations



"The Dark Knight" had made the short lists for the producers', directors' and writers' guilds, but those honors weren't enough to qualify it for a best picture Oscar nomination. What do you think of the nominations? Send us an iReport



"Slumdog Millionaire," the sleeper hit about a Mumbai orphan who seeks fame and love through the Indian version of "Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?", earned 10 nominations, including best picture, best director (Danny Boyle) and best adapted screenplay. The film, which struggled to find a U.S. theatrical distributor after its initial studio folded, has dominated the awards season thus far and is considered the front-runner for best picture.  Watch star Anil Kapoor talk about the reaction the film has gotten »



"I'm ecstatic," Boyle said in a statement from Mumbai, where the film premiered Thursday. "Thank you to the Academy from the cast and crew here in Mumbai where the film was made. ... It feels like you've given us a billion nominations."



In a mild surprise, "The Reader," based on the best-selling novel about a postwar German boy who has an affair with an older woman with a Holocaust-related secret, took home nominations for best picture, best actress (Kate Winslet) and best director (Stephen Daldry). "The Reader" comes from the Weinstein Co. -- the studio headed by producer and master Oscar player Harvey Weinstein.



"I'm extremely happy to have been nominated. And very fortunate. Playing Hanna Schmitz will always remain one of the biggest challenges I've ever been blessed with," Winslet said in a statement.



The other best picture nominees are "Frost/Nixon" and "Milk."  Watch a rundown of the major nominations »



The Oscar nominations included a handful of other surprises. "Revolutionary Road," featuring the heavyweight trio of Winslet, Leonardo DiCaprio and director Sam Mendes ("American Beauty"), picked up just one major nomination -- a best supporting actor nod for Michael Shannon's portrayal of a troubled savant.



Woody Allen, whose "Vicky Cristina Barcelona" was widely praised, didn't receive his usual original screenplay nomination. He can take solace in his previous 21 Oscar nominations, including three wins. One of "Barcelona's" performers, Penelope Cruz, received a nomination for best supporting actress. iReport.com: Deliver your acceptance speech



And Oscar favorite Clint Eastwood, who many believed would pick up an acting or directing nomination for his

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- The parent company of a security contractor said Thursday it is "fully cooperating" in the investigation of allegations that the contractor allowed mistreatment, sexual activity and intimidation within the ranks of private guards hired to protect the U.S. Embassy in Afghanistan.



A spokeswoman for a watchdog group says hazing at a camp for security guards went "well beyond partying."



The allegations came to light earlier this week when the watchdog group Project On Government Oversight sent a letter to Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and briefed reporters on its findings, which it said were based on e-mails and interviews with more than a dozen guards who have worked at the U.S. compound in Kabul.



The company, ArmorGroup, North America, has a security contract with the State Department to provide services through July 2010.



Wackenhut Services Inc., the corporate parent of ArmorGroup, e-mailed a statement on Thursday in response to questions about ArmorGroup's private guards in Kabul.



"Our contract with the Department of State requires us to refer all questions to the Department of State, director of public affairs. We are fully cooperating with the DOS in the investigation of the recent incidents referred to in the letter from" Project On Government Oversight, said the statement, sent by Wackenhut Services spokeswoman Susan Pitcher.



On Wednesday, the U.S. Embassy said it was taking the allegations very seriously.



"Nothing is more important to us than the safety and security of all Embassy personnel -- Americans and Afghan -- and respect for the cultural and religious values of all Afghans," the embassy said. "We have taken immediate steps to review all local guard force policies and procedures and have taken all possible measures to ensure our security is sound."



The watchdog group said it began receiving whistleblower-style e-mails two weeks ago, some with graphic images and videos, that are said to document problems taking place at a nonmilitary camp for the guards near the U.S. diplomatic compound in Kabul.



"This is well beyond partying," Danielle Brian, executive director of Project On Government Oversight, told reporters earlier this week after showing a video of a man with a bare backside and another man apparently drinking a liquid that had been poured down the man's lower back.



She said that ranking supervisors were "facilitating this kind of deviant hazing and humiliation, and requiring people to do things that made them feel really disgusted."



In the letter Project On Government Oversight sent to Clinton, Brian wrote that the problems are "posing a significant threat to the security of the embassy and its personnel."



Among the recommendations from the group: immediate military supervision of the private security guards, a review of whether the contract should be revoked and consideration as to whether government forces should replace private security in a combat zone.



CNN's Charley Keyes contributed to this report.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- After Friday night's presidential debate, former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger defended Sen. John McCain's attack against Sen. Barack Obama for Obama's willingness to meet with the Iranian president "without precondition."



Former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger says he is not in favor of negotiations with Iran at the presidential level.



Immediately after the debate, the McCain campaign released a statement from Kissinger backing the Republican nominee's sentiments on structuring any talks with Iran.



"Sen. McCain is right. I would not recommend the next president of the United States engage in talks with Iran at the presidential level," Kissinger said in the statement.



"My views on this issue are entirely compatible with the views of my friend Sen. John McCain. We do not agree on everything, but we do agree that any negotiations with Iran must be geared to reality."



McCain and Obama sparred during the debate over how to best handle relations with Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, who has repeatedly threatened Israel.



Both candidates referenced Kissinger's comments from a CNN forum last week in which former secretaries of state discussed several topics, including Iran, and the presidential candidates disagreed over what Kissinger had said.



The exchange started with McCain criticizing Obama for stating in two previous debates that he would sit down with Ahmadinejad, Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez and Cuban President Raúl Castro "without precondition."



McCain, the Republican nominee, said that in the past, U.S. presidents such as Ronald Reagan refused to meet with adversaries until a Cabinet member, such as the secretary of state, had several talks.



"Look, I'll sit down with anybody, but there's got to be preconditions," McCain said.  Watch the candidates debate policy in Iran »



Obama responded by claiming that Kissinger, "along with five recent secretaries of state, just said we should meet with Iran, guess what, without preconditions."



McCain denied the claim: "Dr. Kissinger did not say that he would approve a face-to-face meeting" with Ahmadinejad. "He did say there could be secretary and lower-level meetings."



Obama defended his stance, explaining, "Look, Sen. McCain keeps on using this example that suddenly the president would just meet with somebody without doing any preparation, without having low-level talks. Nobody's been talking about that. Sen. McCain knows it. That's a mischaracterization of my position."



He also said, "I reserve the right as president of the United States to meet with anyone at the time and place of my choosing if I think it's going to keep the American people safe."



He added that those talks would come after "preparations, starting with low-level diplomatic talks."



The forum last week -- "The Next President: A World of Challenges" -- was co-sponsored by CNN and hosted former secretaries of state Warren Christopher, Kissinger, Madeleine Albright, James Baker and Colin Powell.



During the forum, Albright, who served in the Clinton administration, said, "I believe we need to engage with Iran." Kissinger, who served in the Nixon and Ford administrations, echoed the sentiment. He said he is "in favor of negotiation with Iran" at the secretary of state level.



"I always believed that the best way to begin a negotiation is to tell the other side exactly what you have in mind ... what the outcome is that you're trying to achieve so that they have something that they can react to," Kissinger said.

***

(CNN) -- David Waller has some simple advice for anyone looking to improve morale at their organization -- even if it's not the easiest advice to follow.



IAEA deputy director David Waller calls Nobel "a bolt of lightning" for his staff



"I say to them, jokingly, 'Why don't you try winning the Nobel Peace Prize?' " he said.



Waller, deputy director general of the International Atomic Energy Agency, knows what he's talking about. The organization, based in Vienna, Austria, and dedicated to the safe and peaceful use of nuclear power, was awarded the prize in 2005.



President Barack Obama was the surprise winner Friday of this year's peace prize. But for most of this week's other winners, the honor marks a leap from relative obscurity to a spot in the international limelight.



Waller said the scientists, authors, activists and others receiving Nobel honors this week should be prepared for an experience that will change their lives in the months and years that follow.



"The day that it was announced that we were winning the Nobel Peace Prize, I can assure you that it was like a bolt of lightning that went through this place in terms of energizing staff and giving people a sense of self-worth," he said. "It was absolutely remarkable."



In all, 172 people and 33 organizations were nominated for the peace prize-- although the Oslo, Norway-based Nobel committee had not announced who its finalists were.



The peace prize is one of five awards handed out annually by the Nobel Foundation in Stockholm, Sweden. The other four prizes are for physiology or medicine, physics, chemistry and literature.



Starting in 1969, the Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel also has been awarded. The peace prize is the last of the awards to be announced this week and the Riksbank prize will be awarded Monday.



Even for an organization like the IAEA, a United Nations affiliate that traces its roots back to 1957, things were never the same after receiving the revered award, Waller said.



"Many, many things changed," he said. "The number of applications we had for positions here, which was already high, skyrocketed. People returned phone calls very quickly. The whole spectrum of things of that nature changed."



Elizabeth Dobie-Sarsam, a media specialist with the agency, remembers the day it received the Nobel -- she was on vacation and asleep on her sister's floor in Canada when it was announced.



"For three years running, we had been sitting on the edges of our chairs hoping that we won," she said. "That year, for some reason, we thought, 'Oh, forget it. We're not going to get it.' "



The trip back to Vienna would have taken her too long to handle the initial rush of attention, so she finished her vacation, with family members introducing her as "the Nobel Peace Prize winner" for the rest of the week.



Months later, Dobie-Sarsam said, she was still working to keep up with a flood of media interest in the agency spurred by the award.



She said that, four years later, the award still contributes to a feeling of unity among the agency's more-than 2,000 employees who come from over 100 different countries.



"That flush of excitement, unfortunately, it goes away with time," she said. "[But] you do get reminded. You walk through the corridor and you see that certificate hanging -- it's acknowledgement that what we do is incredibly important."



The Nobel recipient receives a prize of 10 million Swedish crowns, or about $1.4 million, another life-changer for many recipients.



But Waller said it's the recognition of what the Nobel panel called the "incalculable value" of his agency's work that helps when employees are having a hard time with their sometimes slow, frustrating work.



"I think it's a continuing energizer for our staff," he said.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Dozens of suspected terrorists released by the United States from Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, are believed to have returned to terrorism activities, according to the Pentagon.



Pentagon officials say 61 former Gitmo detainees have committed or are suspected of returning to terrorism.



Since 2002, 61 former detainees have committed or are suspected to have committed attacks after being released from the detention camp, Pentagon spokesman Geoff Morrell said at a briefing Tuesday.



The number is up since the Pentagon's last report in March 2008 when officials said 37 former detainees had been suspected of returning to the battlefield since 2002.



Since 2007, more than 100 detainees were released, significantly more than in previous years, according to Pentagon officials.



According to the statistics, of the 61 former detainees that are believed to have returned to fighting, 18 have been officially confirmed while 43 are suspected, Morrell said.



The 18 were confirmed through intelligence, photographs, fingerprints and other information, Morrell said.



Of the 43 other detainees suspected of taking part in terrorist attacks, only "plausible reporting" on their activities indicated some kind of involvement, according to Morrell.



Officials would only identify one of the confirmed attackers, Adballah Salih al-Ajmi, a Kuwaiti man released from U.S. custody at the Guantanamo Bay Naval Base in 2005. Pentagon officials said Salih al-Ajmi blew himself up in a suicide attack in Iraq in April 2008.



Since 2002, the Pentagon has released about 520 detainees to their home countries or counties that agreed to take them. Some have been released in full by those countries while others are still being held.



"There, clearly, are people who are being held at Guantanamo who are still bent on doing harm to America, Americans and our allies, so there will have to be some solution for the likes of them," Morrell said.



About 250 detainees remain held at Guantanamo and about 60 of those detainees have been cleared for release by the Pentagon, but their home countries will not take them or the U.S. believes they could be harmed by their governments if returned.



President-elect Barack Obama has said he intends to shut down Guantanamo. Earlier this week, two sources close to the Obama transition team said he could issue an order to do so as early as his first week in office, saying that Obama believes "the legal framework at Gitmo has failed to successfully and swiftly prosecute terrorists."

***

HARARE, Zimbabwe (CNN) -- Zimbabwe President Robert Mugabe published a draft constitutional amendment in the government gazette Saturday, paving the way for the power-sharing agreement reached after violence disrupted this year's presidential election.



President Robert Mugabe, left, and opposition leader Morgan Tsvangirai signed the deal in July.



Constitutional Amendment 19 details the posts and institutions that were created by the power-sharing deal, including the position of prime minister intended for Morgan Tsvangirai, leader of the Movement for Democratic Change.



The publication of the draft is the first step in creating a law in Zimbabwe. For the law to pass, it must be appear before parliament in 30 days, according to the country's constitution. If it is approved, it will be sent to Mugabe for his signature.



The deal arose after Tsvangirai withdrew from a June 27 runoff days before the vote, saying Mugabe's supporters had waged a campaign of violence and intimidation against opposition supporters.



The two leaders signed the initial agreement, brokered by former South African President Thabo Mbeki, in July but have failed to agree on how to form a cabinet.



The MDC, the main opposition party, noted that Mugabe's latest move does not legalize the amendment.



"Gazetting the bill -- which was done by [Mugabe's party] Zanu-PF -- does not automatically translate into passing it into law," MDC spokesman Nelson Chamisa said. "That can only take place if outstanding issues have been addressed. Otherwise we will not support the bill."



The two parties agreed last month to the draft amendment during talks in South Africa, but Chamisa warned then that problems remained.



"We have differed with Zanu-PF for a long time while the citizens suffer, but fortunately we have agreed on something. I need to hasten to mention that we still have some outstanding issues, such as the cabinet, appointment of diplomats," he said in late November.



Zanu-PF lost its majority in the parliament in the March elections. As no party has the two-thirds majority to pass the law, its passage relies on MDC support.



If parliament does not approve the amendment, Mugabe may call for new elections, Zimbabwe Justice Minister Patrick Chinamasa told state-run daily newspaper The Herald.



"I envisage that it will require two weeks for it to be debated and passed through both Houses. If no support is forthcoming, it means that Amendment Number 19 Bill will be dead matter," Chinamasa is quoted as saying The Herald.



"In the event that the collaboration that we envisage is not forthcoming, then that will necessitate fresh harmonized elections at some point in time," he said, according to The Herald.



Tsvangirai won the most votes in the March election, but not enough to avoid a runoff, according to the government's official count.



South African President Kgalema Motlanthe, chairman of the Southern African Development Community, welcomed the draft.



"The gazetting of Amendment 19 of the Zimbabwean Constitution is indeed a major step towards the formation of an inclusive government in Zimbabwe," he said in a written statement. "We urge the Zimbabwean political parties to establish an inclusive government."



Meanwhile, the country is battling a cholera outbreak that has killed nearly 800 people since August, according to the World Health Organization. More than 16,000 people have been infected, WHO said.



This week, Mugabe declared that "there is no cholera in the country." His spokesman later said Mugabe was sarcastically ridiculing what he believes are Western designs to invade the country.



Another Zimbabwean official, Information Minister Sikhanyiso Ndlovu, said Friday that the disease was a "calculated, racist attack on Zimbabwe by the unrepentant former colonial power, which has enlisted support from its American and Western allies so that they can invade the country."



Britain ruled the country as a colony until 1965.



Ndlovu's claims triggered quick and pointed reaction from Britain and the United States.



In Washington, State Department spokesman Rob McInturff called Ndlovu's accusations "patently ridiculous."

***

BAGHDAD, Iraq (CNN) -- While violence decreases across Iraq, women in the war-ravaged country face worsening hardships as warfare has thrust them into the role of family breadwinners, an aid group's survey said.



An Iraqi woman who sells incense and candles to support her children says, "to work is to preserve your honor."



In a release dated Sunday coinciding with International Women's Day, Oxfam International issued, "In Her Own Words: Iraqi Women Talk About Their Greatest Concerns and Challenges."



Many women have been widowed and have had to run their families because their husbands "had been killed, disappeared, abducted or suffered from mental or physical abuse," the survey says.



As a result, many have been unable to earn a decent living. While there are no precise numbers, there are now an estimated 740,000 widows in Iraq, Oxfam says.



"Women are the forgotten victims of Iraq," said Oxfam International Executive Director Jeremy Hobbs, in quotes included in the survey.  See pictures of women working in Iraq »



The survey found that largely because of the conflict in Iraq, 35.5 percent of participants were acting as head of the household and that "nearly 25 percent had not been married."



"If this reflects Iraq as a whole, it is the highest rate in the larger region, a result of the loss of men of marrying age as a result of the conflict," the survey said.



Oxfam and its Iraqi partner group Al-Amal Association, conducted the survey in five provinces -- Baghdad, Basra, Tameem, Najaf and Nineveh. Questioners interviewed 1,700 respondents starting last summer.



While the survey doesn't represent the situation facing all Iraqis, it provides "a disturbing snapshot of many women's lives and those of their children and other family members."



"A quarter of the women interviewed still do not have daily access to water, a third cannot send their children to school and, since the war started, over half have been the victim of violence," Hobbs said.



"And to add further insult more than three-quarters of widows, many of whom lost their husbands to the conflict, get no government pension which they are entitled to."



The report urges Iraq to invest in social welfare essential services.



"A whole generation of Iraqis are at risk. Mothers are being forced to make tough choices, such as whether to pay for their children to go to school and receive health care, or to pay for private power and water services. These are choices no mother should have to make. And they are not only threatening individual families, they are also threatening the future of Iraq itself," Hobbs said.



Here are some of the survey results.



• Security and safety are the top concerns of nearly 60 percent of women.



• More than 40 percent of respondents said their security situation worsened last year.



• 55 percent had been victims of violence since 2003.



• Some 45 percent of women said their income was worse in 2008 than in 2007 and 2006.



• 69 percent said access to water was worse or the same as in in 2006 and 2007.



• 80 percent said access to electricity was more difficult than or the same as in 2007.



• Nearly half of the women said access to quality health care was more difficult in 2008 compared with 2006 and 2007.



• 40 percent of women with children reported that their sons and daughters were not attending school.

***

(CNN) -- Luci Baines Johnson was just 16 years old when she approached her father, President Johnson, with what she considered a reasonable request.



Luci Baines Johnson, left, and her older sister, Lynda Bird, pose inside the White House in 1963.



"I asked my father if we could have the Beatles come to play at the White House," she recalled. "I was very excited about it."



His response? A decisive no, "without even any moment of trying to soften the blow," Johnson said in a recent phone interview.



The president thought the move would be viewed as self-serving. His daughter, however, saw it as a chance to honor "a great talent" and strengthen ties between the United States and Great Britain -- not to mention a golden opportunity for her and her friends.



"I could see how different sets of folks could have either perspective. And I suspect my father could see that too," she said.



Luci Baines Johnson learned quickly of the scrutiny that came from being a first daughter. Her family moved into the White House in 1963, following the assassination of President John F. Kennedy.



Johnson was catapulted into the exclusive fraternity of White House families and embraced what she describes as a role she landed simply by chance. That fraternity has most recently expanded to include President Obama's daughters, Sasha and Malia.



"I was an eyewitness to history, over and over, during my father's five years in the White House. And I wasn't elected to that option. I had no qualifications that provided me that privilege except an accident of birth," she said.  See famous first kids who grew up in the White House »



Johnson speaks fondly of the opportunity she was afforded to dine with kings and queens, meet the movers and shakers of her time, engage with the body of America and hold a front-row seat to history. While most of her memories fall into two categories -- "the fond personal memories" and "the fond memories of public privilege" -- there's one in particular that was a combination of both.



"My 17th birthday, I received a handwritten note from my father, the only handwritten note I have, telling me how much he loves me and how much he has delighted in having me as his daughter for all those 17 years," she said.



The note was dated noon, July 2, 1964.



Six hours later, in the East Room of the White House, Lyndon Johnson signed the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which banned discrimination based on race or gender in public places, schools and places of employment.



"Can you imagine ever receiving a more momentous, glorious, exciting, thrilling birthday present that lasted forever and ever than something like that, that would change the world for all time and make it a much more decent place? That took place on my birthday," she said.



Life in the White House, however, came at a cost. Johnson and the first children before and after her will always have to "pay a big price in terms of personal time," she said. More than 45 years after she moved into the White House, she still receives requests for interviews about the time she spent there.



But the public's interest in first daughters is nothing new. Fanny Hayes, for example, who was about the same age as Malia when she moved into the White House in 1877, was followed by the media until the day she died. "She was an American celebrity," said presidential historian Doug Wead.



While the interest in first daughters has stayed steady, the pressure on the children has intensified, said Wead, author of "All the Presidents' Children: Triumph and Tragedy in the Lives of America's First Families."



"It's like the Miss America contest -- it's a real dilemma for the daughter of a president. She's supposed to be gracious. She's mocked and ridiculed if she isn't pretty," he said.

***

MARATHON, Florida (CNN)  -- Juan Lopez reads meters with one eye and looks for snakes with the other. Lopez is a member of the "Python Patrol," a team of utility workers, wildlife officials, park rangers and police trying to keep Burmese pythons from gaining a foothold in the Florida Keys.



Members of the Python Patrol show off a giant snake that stretched more than 20 feet.



Officials say the pythons -- which can grow to 20 feet long and eat large animals whole -- are being ditched by pet owners in the Florida Everglades, threatening the region's endangered species and its ecosystem.



"Right now, we have our fingers crossed that they haven't come this far yet, but if they do, we are prepared," Lopez said.



Burmese Pythons are rarely seen in the middle Florida Keys, where Lopez works. The Nature Conservancy wants to keep it that way.  Watch huge python wrap around a CNN reporter »



The Python Patrol program was started by Alison Higgins, the Nature Conservancy's Florida Keys conservation manager. She describes it as an "early detection, rapid response" program made up of professionals who work outside.



Eight Burmese pythons have been found in the Keys.



"If we can keep them from spreading and breeding, then we're that much more ahead of the problem," Higgins said.



Utility workers, wildlife officials and police officers recently attended a three-hour class about capturing the enormously large snakes. Lt. Jeffrey L. Fobb of the Miami-Dade Fire Rescue Venom Response Unit taught the participants how to capture pythons.



"There's no immutable laws of snake catching. It's what works," Fobb said as he demonstrated catching a snake with hooks, bags, blankets and his hands.



"We're doing it in the Florida Keys because we have a lot to protect," Higgins said. "The Burmese pythons that are coming out of the Everglades are eating a lot of our endangered species and other creatures, and we want to make sure they don't breed here."



Where the snakes are breeding is just north of the Keys in Everglades National Park. An estimated 30,000 Burmese pythons live in the park.



The Everglades, known as the "River of Grass," is a vast area with a climate perfect for these pythons to hide and breed. And breed they do: The largest clutches of eggs found in the Everglades have numbered up to 83.



The snakes grow like they're on steroids. With a life span of 30 years, these pythons can weigh as much as 200 pounds. And the larger the snake, the bigger the prey. Biologists have found endangered wood rats, birds, bobcats and other animals in their stomachs.



Two 5-foot-long alligators were found in the stomachs of Burmese pythons that were caught and necropsied, officials say.



Officials also say Burmese pythons can travel 1.6 miles a day by land, and they can swim to reach areas outside the Everglades.



This nonvenomous species was brought into the United States from Southeast Asia. Everglades National Park spokeswoman Linda Friar says biologists believe that well-intended pet owners are to blame for their introduction into the Everglades.



"These pets were released by owners that do not understand the threat to the ecosystem," she said.



Higgins says 99,000 of the popular pets were brought into the United States from 1996 to 2006, the most recent data available. She says they are an easy species to breed, and you can buy a hatchling for as little as $20.



The problem with these pets, Friar says, is that they get too big for their owners to handle. Making the owner aware of what to expect when the animal becomes full-grown is a priority.



"The pet trade is pretty supportive in educating people," Friar said. She hopes a "Don't let it loose" message campaign makes an impact on pet owners.



Florida Sen. Bill Nelson, a supporter of restoring the Everglades, has introduced a bill that would ban importing the python species into the United States.

***

(CNN) -- Somali pirates demanded a $7 million ransom for a British couple kidnapped aboard their yacht last week, a British agency said Friday.



The British government says it won't pay.



"The government will not make substantive concessions for hostage takers, including the payments of ransom," the British Foreign and Commonwealth Office said.



Paul and Rachel Chandler, who were snatched last week from their yacht in the Indian Ocean, had been held aboard a Singaporean cargo ship hijacked by pirates.



They have been moved to a hijacked Spanish ship that pirates have stocked with more supplies and armed men, a local journalist in contact with the pirates said Friday.



The pirates moved them to the Spanish vessel after elders in the Somali town of Haradhere refused a pirate request to allow the Chandlers ashore, the journalist said. The journalist's identity is not being disclosed for security reasons.



After hours of negotiation, the couple spoke with Rachel Chandler's brother, Stephen Collett, on Friday -- a phone conversation that was videotaped by CNN's British affiliate ITN. In the conversation, Rachel Chandler confirmed only that they had been moved from the Singaporean cargo ship, but not their current location, the network reported.



"We're managing. They tell us that we're safe and that we shouldn't worry and that if we want anything, they will provide it in terms of food and, you know, water," an emotional Rachel Chandler told Collett. "They're very hospitable people, so don't worry. ... Physically we're fine; physically, we're healthy."



Paul Chandler spoke slowly and carefully in the interview:



"Rachel and I are here. We are fine," he told Collett. "We know nothing here. It is nice to speak to you. I can only say we are well and that's as far as I can say."



Collett read a message to the captors, asking them to release his sister and her husband to show "your compassionate nature."



ITN reporter Angus Walker noted that Paul Chandler's tone sounded more strained than during their conversation Thursday, when he laughed at one point and sounded more relaxed. In their Thursday conversation, Chandler told ITN that men with guns had boarded the couple's yacht, demanding money and taking everything of value.



Paul Chandler spoke later with the BBC's Somali Service, reportedly saying, "We are well and being looked after OK." He said they were being fed and "food is OK at the moment."



The pirates abandoned the Chandlers' yacht, the 38-foot Lynn Rival, which the British Royal Navy found drifting in international waters Thursday.



The Chandlers set off from the Seychelles islands on October 21 bound for Tanzania, according to their blog. A distress beacon was activated on October 23, according to naval officials.



Britain's Foreign Office said it has been in close contact with the couple's family.



Pirates have been very active off the east coast of Africa in the past several years, operating out of lawless Somalia.



Two vessels were attacked the day after the Chandlers set sail. One of them -- a cargo ship -- was successfully boarded and seized off the Seychelles, while the other fought off its attackers near the Kenyan coast.



Thursday, pirates attacked and boarded a Thai-flagged fishing vessel about 200 miles north of the Seychelles, according to the European Union Naval Force.



Attacks in the region have significantly increased this year, according to the International Maritime Bureau, which monitors shipping crimes. But successful attacks have gone down as a result of a strong presence of international monitors.



The first nine months of this year has seen more pirate attacks than all of last year, the bureau reported October 21.



From January 1 through September 30, pirates worldwide mounted 306 attacks, compared with 293 in all of 2008, it said. More than half of this year's attacks were carried out by suspected Somali pirates off the east coast of Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden, a major shipping route between Yemen and Somalia.



Out of

***

MANCHESTER, New Hampshire (CNN) -- If you listen to inventor Dean Kamen, the biggest health problem facing the world today is not AIDS, obesity or malnutrition. It's a shortage of water.



Dean Kamen hopes to tackle the world's fresh water shortage with the Slingshot, a water purifying device.



Water is the most abundant resource on the planet, yet less than one percent of the Earth's freshwater supply is readily available to drink, according to the World Health Organization. Lack of accessible or clean drinking water, exacerbated by drought, is crippling communities in many developing countries.



"In your lifetime, my lifetime, we will see water be a really scarce, valuable commodity," Kamen says.



Those are scary words from the man whose creations include the Segway personal motorized scooter and the Luke (as in Skywalker) prosthetic arm. But the forward-thinking inventor and his team at DEKA Research in Manchester, New Hampshire, aren't sitting around waiting for the world's wells to dry up.



They've been working on an invention they say can tap into 97 percent of the world's undrinkable water.



It's called the Slingshot, and it's a portable, low energy machine that is designed to purify water in remote villages where there's not a Wal-Mart in sight. The device takes its name from a well-known story.



"We believe the world needs a slingshot to take care of its Goliath of a problem in water," Kamen says. "So we decided to build a small machine and give it to the little Davids."



Perhaps you've heard about the Slingshot, which Kamen has been working on for more than 10 years. Over that time it has turned dirty river water, ocean water and even raw sewage into pure drinking water. Kamen says it can turn anything that looks wet, or has water in it, into the "stuff of life."



The magic behind the Slingshot is a "vapor compression distiller" that stands between what looks like two empty fish tanks connected by a couple of hoses. One tank contains the contaminated liquid, the other is for the newly clean water.  Watch Kamen demonstrate the Slingshot »



The Slingshot boils, distills and vaporizes the polluted source, in turn delivering nothing but clean water to the other side. And it does it all on less electricity than it takes to run a hair dryer.



In summer 2006, Kamen delivered two Slingshots to the small community of Lerida in Honduras. They were used for a month and Kamen says everything ran as planned.



"The machine worked very well down there, taking virtually any water that the people from that village brought to us," he says. "All the water that we got from the machine was absolutely pure water."



But there's a problem. Kamen says each Slingshot costs his company several hundred thousand dollars to build. He's looking to partner with companies and organizations to distribute Slingshots around the world, but says a little more engineering work needs to be done in order to lower the production costs.



Kamen says the company would like to get the price down to about $2,000 per machine.



"The biggest challenge right now between this being a dream and a reality is getting committed people that really care about the state of the world's health to get involved," Kamen says.



The world's population is quickly approaching 7 billion, making access to clean water that much more important. According to the World Health Organization and UNICEF, more than 3.5 million people die every year from water-related diseases and almost 900 million don't have access to a safe water supply.



Kamen says people in developing regions of the world need the Slingshot as soon as possible. He also thinks the problem with polluted water will spread beyond small villages.



He says one Slingshot machine can supply about 250 gallons of water a day, which is enough for 100 people. That's a lot of Davids.



"It is literally like turning lead into gold," he says. "But I believe it

***

(CNN) -- Space shuttle astronaut Randy Bresnik has welcomed a daughter -- from space.





Bresnik is part of the crew on the space shuttle Atlantis, currently docked with the International Space Station.





Bresnik called Mission Control at 6:14 a.m. ET Sunday to announce the birth of Abigail Mae Bresnik about seven hours earlier, according to the NASA Web site on the shuttle mission. The baby weighed 6 pounds, 13 ounces and was 20 inches long.





"Just wanted to take this opportunity to report some good news," Bresnik said, according to a NASA transcript. "At 11:04 last night, Abigail Mae Bresnik joined the NASA family, and mama and baby are doing very well."





Bresnik had private communication channels arranged in advance for the birth, the agency said.





Atlantis lifted off Monday on a mission to deliver parts to the international space station.





"I think like most parents, I would prefer to be there at the birth for sure, but we don't pick this timing and so it's ... a little bit disappointing not to see her in person right when she enters the world," Bresnik said in a preflight interview, a transcript of which is posted on the NASA Web site.





"But fortunately, through the wonders of modern technical advancements and our amazing communication systems on the ISS and space shuttle, hopefully I'll be able to hear and see the pictures and be able to talk with her maybe on the IP phone and see some video shortly thereafter and be home only a few days afterwards."





NASA did not disclose the location of Bresnik's wife and daughter, citing privacy concerns.





The couple already has a 3-year-old son, whom they adopted from Ukraine a year ago, Bresnik said.





Bresnik's wife echoed his mixed feelings in the preflight interview.





"I'm a little disappointed that he won't be able to be there, but understanding that we don't choose the timing, and [I'm] excited for him that he's doing what he's doing," said Rebecca Bresnik, a NASA attorney.





She said labor was being induced two weeks early for medical reasons, "so we're able to play with the date a little bit."





The shuttle crew was awakened Sunday morning by the song "Butterfly Kisses," which was selected for Bresnik, NASA said. The song, by Bob Carlisle, is about a man and his daughter.





It was the second time a baby has been born to a U.S. astronaut who was on a space mission. Mike Fincke's daughter was born in June 2004 while he was aboard the international space station, NASA said.





Bresnik and astronaut Robert Satcher Jr. were gearing up Sunday for a third and final spacewalk, planned for Monday. The two will prepare spacesuits and tools Sunday, along with reviewing the updated procedures, NASA said.





The spacewalk was replanned overnight after Bresnik and Mike Foreman were able to get ahead during a spacewalk Saturday, according to NASA. The shuttle is scheduled to land on Friday.





CNN Radio's Andy Rose contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Skeletal remains found in a hayfield are those of Virginia Tech student Morgan Harrington, a spokeswoman for the Virginia State Police said Wednesday.





The remains were identified based on dental records provided by the victim's family, spokeswoman Corinne Geller said.





Morgan Harrington, a 20-year-old education major, went to a Metallica concert at the University of Virginia's John Paul Jones Arena in Charlottesville, Virginia, on October 17. She was separated from her friends and was the subject of repeated searches.





"Investigators are now working to determine how the remains came to be in this particular location, cause and time of death, and identifying who was responsible for the remains being there," Geller said in a news release.





More information is expected after the completion of an autopsy, the spokeswoman added.





Police said skeletal remains were found Tuesday morning by a farmer driving a tractor through a hay field on his 700-acre farm. The area has no public access point, police said.





The farm is about 10 miles from where the concert was being held.





The farm's owner, David Dass, told CNN affiliate WTVR that he was out looking for damage after wind and rain knocked down several trees in his yard over the past week. He told WTVR that the area is at least a mile and a half from a main roadway.





"I looked down and saw what looked like a human skull, and my first thought was that it was Morgan Harrington," Dass told WTVR, adding that he immediately called 911.





WTVR: State police 'confident' remains are Harrington





There was significant evidence leading police to believe that the remains are Harrington's, Virginia State Police Col. W. Steven Flaherty said, though he declined to specify what the evidence was.





Police said the area where the remains were found had not been searched during the early stages of the investigation into her disappearance.





The girl's parents, Dan and Gil Harrington, were in town to identify the remains, WTVR reported.





Dan Harrington, in tears, told WTVR that "this is a horrible day" for his family.





Gil Harrington expressed concerns Saturday that there was beginning to be complacency in the search, she wrote in a blog on the Web site set up to help find their daughter.





On Sunday, more than three months after Morgan went missing, Gil Harrington still clung to hope.





"Despite the length of time Morgan has been gone I remain hopeful," she wrote. "Part of me is waiting to be surprised. Waiting for God to pull the rabbit out of the hat and bring Morgan home.





"I remember that the light always returns, it cannot help but return. Will the light of my life return soon? I cannot imagine that all the water of Morgan's potential is to run down the drain and be wasted. Can it really play out like that?"





Now, it appears, the Harringtons finally have their answer. Police say they have now switched their focus to finding out how Morgan Harrington ended up in the remote farm and who put her there.





During the concert, Harrington left her friends to use the restroom, police said. When she did not return, they called her cell phone at 8:48 p.m. She told them she was outside the arena and could not get back in because of its policy, police said, but told them not to worry about her and that she would find a ride home.





There are restrooms inside the arena, police said, and police do not know how or why Harrington got outside. Witnesses who saw her outside the arena said she did not appear to be with anyone, police said.





About 9:30 p.m. that night, witnesses reported seeing a person matching Harrington's description walking on a nearby bridge, police said. No further sightings were reported.





Harrington's purse, with her identification and cell phone inside, was found the following day in an overflow parking lot near the arena, police said. A friend had driven Harrington's car to the concert, she said, and

***

(CNN) -- They were there for the view -- spectators awed by a vista of massive waves smashing against the rocky shore.



A U.S. Coast Guard rescue boat reaches a man swept out to sea Sunday at Acadia National Park in Maine.



But then one wave struck violently, sweeping three people into the churning ocean, one of them a 7-year-old girl.



What spectator Mary Ellen Martel saw next were bodies bobbing along in the frothy waters.



And in a heartbeat, a day of spectacular surf turned tragic.  Watch a dramatic rescue at sea »



Thousands of people flocked to the jagged shoreline of Maine's Acadia National Park on Sunday as Hurricane Bill weakened offshore on its trajectory north and delivered dramatic waves to the New England seaboard.



"People were clapping and laughing when the wind would bring the spray over. It was a very festive atmosphere," Martel told CNN in a telephone interview. "It was a warm, sunny day, and everyone was just enjoying the show that Mother Nature was offering, but not everybody knows to stay away from the edge -- or way away from the edge."



A section of the shore is known as Thunder Hole, a popular tourist attraction where waves crashing against the shore mimic the sound of thunder. But Sunday, conditions were such that even the walkway to Thunder Hole was closed for the safety of spectators.



On a rock cliff about 20 feet above the sea, a wave struck about 11:50 a.m., pushing water onto the ankles of some of the people standing on "top of what we think would be a safe area," Acadia Chief Ranger Stuart West told CNN.



People started to turn back, to get farther away from the edge, and then a second, monstrous wave hit them.



The unrelenting sea dragged in seven onlookers, forcing four to claw their way back to shore but sweeping three others out into the chilly waters. Two were rescued, but 7-year-old Clio Axlerod of New York perished, West said.  Watch preparations for the storm »



Martel, a resident of Maine's Southwest Harbor for more than 35 years and a frequent park visitor, had come there with her husband, and she said she feels "pretty certain" she had been on the same ledge as the three victims swept out to sea.



Martel had stood far enough back that the first wave did not affect her much, but when she saw the second coming, she turned her back to protect the camera she used to photograph the surf. She was doused from her shoulders down, she said. She said she knew then she had to get back to the road that led to the area.



"When I looked [back], everybody was scrambling to get off the ledge," she said.



Her husband, a volunteer firefighter, ran back to offer his help and overheard a woman say that her husband and daughter were swept away from the spot where the Martels and maybe 30 others had been, she said.



U.S. Coast Guard rescuers arrived about 20 minutes after the first call and had the tough task of finding the three drifting in the rough seas.



"Of course, trying to locate a head in frothy, agitated water like it was is a very difficult operation," West said. "But the rangers on the shore could still spot them."



Martel saw bobbing buoys out in the distance, but not until she used a zoom lens on her camera could she tell the buoys from the bodies, she said.



At 12:52 p.m., the Coast Guard picked up Simone Pelletier, 12, of Belfast, Maine, and Peter Axlerod, 55, Clio's father. The 7-year-old was found at 3:32 p.m., West said in a statement.



Petty Officer Dayton Trubee of the Coast Guard said he was not present during the rescue effort, but heard from his colleagues what happened when they grabbed Peter Axlerod out of the sea's grip.



"They told me when they pulled them on board he was exhausted," Trubee said. "He really didn't have any idea

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- The "vast right-wing conspiracy" that attacked him during his presidency has been weakened, but continues to operate against President Obama, former President Clinton said Sunday.



Former President Clinton said Republicans won't see a 1994-like surge at the polls in 2010.



On NBC's "Meet the Press," Clinton was asked about the term his wife Hillary Clinton, now secretary of state, famously coined. "Is it still there?" host David Gregory asked.



"Oh, you bet. Sure it is. It's not as strong as it was, because America's changed demographically, but it's as virulent as it was," the former president replied.



"I mean, they're saying things about him [Obama] -- you know, it's like when they accused me of murder and all that stuff they did," Clinton said, in an apparent reference to conspiracy theories surrounding the suicide of White House deputy counsel Vince Foster.



"It's not really good for the Republicans and the country, what's going on now," Clinton said. "I mean, they may be hurting President Obama. They can take his numbers down, they can run his opposition up. But fundamentally, he and his team have a positive agenda for America."



The nation needs "a credible debate about what's the right balance between continuing to expand the economy through stimulus and beginning to move back to fiscal balance," Clinton said. "We need a credible debate about what's the best way to get to universal [health care] coverage."



Clinton was asked whether he is concerned that the 2010 midterm elections could resemble those of 1994, when Republicans took control of the House and Senate two years into his first term.



"There's no way" that could happen, Clinton said, adding that "the country is more diverse and more interested in positive action." Also, he said, Republicans had control of Congress for several years under President George W. Bush, "and they know the results were bad."



And, he said, "the Democrats haven't taken on the gun lobby like I did."



"Whatever happens, it'll be manageable for our president," Clinton said.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- With irresponsible banking practices taking the blame for bringing about the global economic crisis, there has been a surge of interest in Islamic finance.



Islamic finance is estimated to be worth $700 billion and has been growing by 15 to 20 percent per year.



Now, a slew of academic courses are springing up to meet the demand of those wanting to break into an expanding market.



According to ratings agency Moody's, the global Islamic finance sector is worth $700 billion and has the potential to be worth $4 trillion.



What's more, the ethical principles underpinning Islamic finance are seen by some as offering a more sustainable alternative to profit-oriented conventional banking. The result is that academic institutions are lining up to offer formal training in the area.



"There is a huge demand for Islamic finance courses now, so large that it's difficult to cope with," Professor Habib Ahmed, Sharjah chair in the school of government and international affairs at Durham University, England, told CNN.



Durham will launch a Masters degree in Islamic finance from October, becoming one of a number of European institutions to offer Islamic finance programs.



"Islamic finance has been growing by 15 to 20 percent per year for some time and there is a lot of interest at the moment. People are looking for alternatives after the economic crisis."



"Islamic economists believe that if the principles of Islamic finance were followed the crisis wouldn't have happened. We are seeing a lot of non-Muslim countries, including the UK, France, Japan, Hong Kong and Singapore encouraging Islamic finance," he said.



There are many differences between Islamic and conventional banking practices. One fundamental difference is that Islamic banks do not charge interest. Rather than borrowers and lenders, the system is based on buyers and sellers.



"Conventional banking is biased to the seller. Islamic finance is trying to level the ethics between the two parties," Aly Khorshid, an Islamic finance scholar who writes for Islamic Banking and Finance magazine, told CNN.



"People think the Islamic system is based on faith, but it's based on justice. The system is based on justice for the two parties and how you get to the justice is extracted from Islamic faith," he said.



Khorshid said that there are similarities between "ethical investment" schemes and Islamic finance, in that the Islamic system does not allow investment that harms people or the environment. He credits the rapid growth of the Islamic finance sector on the success of "sukuk" -- Islamic bonds.



In the West, banks including Lloyds TSB, HSBC, Deutsche Bank and Citibank all offer Islamic finance products, catering to a niche market of Muslim borrowers.



But while Islamic banks allow Muslims to take advantage of financial services that are consistent with their religious beliefs, it is the ethics underpinning Islamic finance that are attracting the interest of conventional finance institutions keen to learn lessons from the banking crisis.



Although Islamic banks have suffered from the global repercussions of the economic downturn, they emerged largely unscathed from the initial banking meltdown that brought about that financial turmoil.



Ahmed told CNN that is because Islamic banks are not allowed to deal in mortgage-backed securities or credit-default swaps, two of the practices accused of helping bring about the banking crisis.



Khorshid said that although it's too early to say if Islamic finance has dealt with economic downturn better than conventional finance, the Islamic system has many more layers of risk assessment and management, which could help protect it from the problems afflicting conventional banks.



But the growth of Islamic finance has brought its own problems. Critics say some banks use Islamic finance to package what are essentially conventional products. "Islamic banks are also driven by the profit motive and sometimes that can dominate the ethics," Ahmed told CNN.



While Europe is catching up with the demand for these banking products, the U.S. is lagging behind. Ahmed says that regulatory and legal changes are needed for Islamic finance to grow in the U.S., but he adds there are signs that Canada may become a North American center

***

(CNN) -- Farrah Fawcett, whose public battle with anal cancer has brought new attention to a rarely discussed disease, has not been given a timetable from her doctor about how much time she has left, according to her friend Alana Stewart.



Farrah Fawcett, seen here in 2006, has waged a very public battle with anal cancer.



"No one has said to her you have two months to live," Stewart said Monday. "So I'm looking at that as a really good sign."



Stewart talked with Lara Spencer, host of "The Insider," who discussed her interview with Fawcett's close friend on CNN's "Larry King Live" Monday night.



Spencer said Fawcett, her family and friends are clinging to hope for a recovery.



"She [Alana Stewart] doesn't want to throw out a number. And neither does Farrah. ... They're still hoping for that miracle," Spencer said.



"Farrah's Story," a documentary-style program that has followed the course of her illness and showed her grueling treatment in graphic detail, aired on NBC Friday and was viewed by almost 9 million people.



Fawcett and partner Ryan O'Neal watched the show together, Spencer confirmed.



"Alana said it was the ultimate in bittersweet," Spencer said. "You know, they're reliving two years of hell that they've endured together."



King asked Spencer whether Fawcett, who made her name a household word on the hit '70s TV series "Charlie's Angels," and O'Neal might marry.



"He said you never know. He was cagey about it," Spencer said. "And, you know, I think he would in a second. He's so madly in love with her."



King also had a panel of medical experts on his show to discuss Fawcett's cancer.



Dr. Thomas Vogl, who at one time treated the actress in Germany, called her medical condition "very, very serious."



Dr. Allyson Ocean, a medical oncologist in New York, said only about 5,000 cases of anal cancer are diagnosed in the United States yearly. Unlike Fawcett's case, it usually doesn't spread, and only about 10 to 15 percent of cases are advanced, Ocean said. Fawcett's cancer, however, is in Stage 4 and has spread to her liver.



Ocean said there are various causes of anal cancer.



"One of the causes is a virus called the human papilloma virus, which is a sexually transmitted virus. It seems to be more common in women, in general, outside of any viral infections. Smoking is actually a risk factor," she said.



King asked Dr. Paul Song, a radiation oncologist, if he had seen Stage 4 cancer cured.



"Not with anal cancer. I have seen it with other GI malignancies such as rectal cancer," Song said. "But anal cancer is a little bit more difficult to treat."



Despite the bleak outlook, Song had praise for Fawcett and her documentary.



"I think one of the most powerful things that Miss Fawcett did in this documentary was give patients a sense of hope and to just show how she's handled this with such courage and dignity," Song said.



CNN's Dr. Sanjay Gupta told King that doctors have to strike a delicate balance when they are caring for patients such as Fawcett.



"You have to be absolutely honest with patients, but, you know, you don't want to strip away their hope and optimism, either. There are people, Larry, as you know, who beat the odds," Gupta said.



Vogl told King he developed a close relationship with Fawcett during the time he treated her in Germany and expressed admiration for his one-time patient.



"From a lot of treatments and contact and communication, I think she is extremely special, an extremely brave person," he said.

***

(CNN) -- Two inmates at New Jersey's Union County Jail made a movie-style escape Saturday and remained at large Monday, according to Union County Prosecutor Ted Romankow.



Otis Blunt, left, and Jose Espinosa escaped from the Union County Jail Saturday night, officials say.



Twenty-year-old Jose Espinosa and 32-year-old Otis Blunt, who are considered armed and dangerous, were discovered missing from their cells at about 5:15 p.m. Saturday, Romankow said.



The men left behind dummies in their beds, cinder block dust and a note wishing authorities "Happy Holidays."



Espinosa, who recently pleaded guilty to aggravated manslaughter, was to be sentenced on January 25 and faced a minimum of 17 years in prison. Blunt was being held in lieu of $75,000 bond on weapon and robbery charges.



Both men were being housed in the high security area of the multilevel jail, Romankow said.



Police said Espinosa and Blunt were in adjacent cells and used a long metal wire to scrape away mortar around the cinder block between their cells and the outer wall in Espinosa's cell.



Once the cement block between the cells was removed, they smashed the block and hid the pieces in a footlocker. According to police, Blunt, who is 5 feet 10 inches and weighs 210 pounds, squeezed into Espinosa's cell through an approximately 16- to 18-inch hole.



The two inmates wiggled through another 18-inch hole in the outer wall. From a roof landing, the two men "took a running jump or they were standing and they jumped approximately 15 feet out and about 30 feet down," Romankow said.



Then they jumped a razor-wire fence onto a New Jersey transit railroad bed to freedom, police said. Authorities found two sets of footprints in the snow heading in opposite directions.



At a news conference Monday, Romankow read the note that was found in Espinosa's cell, saying it represented the "arrogance of these two men."



"Thank you officer -------- for the tools needed, you're a real pal, Happy Holidays," the note read, with a smiley face drawn next to it.



Authorities are investigating the note's claims about the guard, the Associated Press reported. The guard has not turned in a report and disciplinary action has not been taken, Romankow said, according to AP.



To delay discovery of the escape, Espinosa and Blunt used dummies made of sheets and pillows in their beds. They also hung photographs of bikini-clad women to hide the holes in the walls, a move reminiscent of a scene in the Hollywood hit "The Shawshank Redemption."



Romankow played down the comparison.



"I think this is a very serious situation you saw," he said. "I really prefer not to compare with any movie, although I can understand why you might because it does look certainly very similar to some of them. Except in 'The Shawshank Redemption' they had a better poster on the wall."



According to police, Blunt tried to escape in September using similar methods. There is an $8,000 reward for the men's capture.



Romankow said a statewide hunt is under way, with several agencies involved. E-mail to a friend



CNN's Brian Vitagliano contributed to this report.

***

MIAMI, Florida (CNN) -- Hurricane Omar became a major Category 3 storm Wednesday night as it barreled toward the Virgin and Leeward Islands in the West Indies, the National Hurricane Center said.



A man watches waves crash into the shore Tuesday at Club Nautico in Falcon state, Venezuela.



Omar is expected to continue gathering strength as it passes east of the Virgin Islands in the next few hours and makes its way to the northern Leeward Islands Thursday morning, the hurricane center said.



At 11 p.m., Omar was moving northeast at about 20 mph with maximum sustained winds of 115 mph. The hurricane's center was about 30 miles (45 km) southwest of St. Croix and about 105 miles (165 km) southwest of St. Martin.



A hurricane warning --meaning winds of 74 mph and higher are expected within a day -- is in effect for the U.S. Virgin Islands, the islands of Vieques, Culebra, St. Martin, Saba, St. Eustatius, St. Barthelemy, the British Virgin Islands and Anguilla.  See where Omar is headed »



Puerto Rico is under a tropical storm warning and a hurricane watch, as are St. Kitts and Nevis, the hurricane center said.



As Omar approached, Hovensa, a 500,000-barrel-a-day oil refinery on St. Croix, began shutting down all processing and auxiliary equipment "except those necessary to maintain power supply in the complex," refinery spokesman Alex Moorhead said in a statement.  Watch Venezuelans try to save homes, dogs »



The move was to ensure the safety of employees and the operation of the refinery, which is jointly owned by Hess Corp. and Venezuela's state oil company.



The U.S. Coast Guard closed the Christiansted Harbor, where the refinery is located, on Tuesday, and it will remain closed until the order is lifted, Moorhead said.



"Once Hurricane Omar has passed, we will conduct an inspection of our facilities as soon as it is safe to do so. If no damage is found that would impact safe operation of the refinery, the start-up of processing units will begin in sequential order," Moorhead said.



Puerto Rico and some portions of the northern Leeward Islands, which includes the Virgin Islands, could get up to 20 inches of rain, according to the forecast.



"These rains could produce life-threatening flash floods and mudslides," the hurricane center warned.



Also, the storm could produce large swells affecting the western and southern coasts of the Lesser Antilles, the Caribbean islands that stretch from the Virgin Islands southward to the islands off Venezuela's coast.



The swells could cause beach erosion and damage coastal structures, the hurricane center said.



Antigua, Barbuda and Montserrat are under a tropical storm warning, meaning they could experience tropical storm conditions over the coming 24 hours. A tropical storm watch is in effect for Guadeloupe.



The storm's forecast track shows it heading into the open waters of the Atlantic Ocean after crossing over the Virgin Islands and sweeping past Puerto Rico, but hurricane tracks are subject to variation, and such long-range predictions can change.



Omar formed Tuesday in the eastern Caribbean. It is the 15th named storm of the Atlantic hurricane season, which began June 1 and ends November 30.

***

(CNN) -- A former Alabama judge accused of checking male inmates out of jail and forcing them to engage in sexual activity was found not guilty Monday on charges of sexual abuse, attempted sodomy and assault, his lawyer said.



Attorney Robert Clark said former Judge Herman Thomas was found not guilty on several charges and the judge in the case granted a directed verdict of acquittal on all the other counts.



The Mobile County district attorney did not immediately return CNN calls for comment.



Thomas, 48, denied wrongdoing. Clark said on October 20 that the judge was trying to mentor the inmates and did not assault them.



The judge does not deny bringing the inmates into his office, Clark said last week. "He was mentoring them. He was trying to get them to do right, to be productive citizens."



Thomas cried after the verdicts were read, Clark said Monday.



"He hugged me and he hugged his wife. And he had a courtroom full of supporters. It all worked out in the end," the attorney said.



One of the alleged victims testified October 19 that he doesn't know why his semen was found on the carpet of a small room used as an office by Thomas, according to The Mobile Press-Register newspaper. But he did say Thomas spanked him with a belt on several occasions, the newspaper reported, and that the paddlings took place inside a jury room, in the small office and at a Mobile, Alabama, fraternity house.



Another man testified that after he was charged with kidnapping and robbery in 2002, Thomas visited him in jail and urged the man to let Thomas decide the case instead of a jury, according to the Press-Register. Thomas convicted him of lesser charges, he testified, and sentenced him to a 90-day boot camp. He said Thomas also beat him with a belt on his bare buttocks about a dozen times at the courthouse, the newspaper reported. Neither man was identified.



"All of them [the alleged victims] were given preferential treatment at some point," Nicki Patterson, chief assistant district attorney for Mobile County, said earlier this month. "And ultimately, when some of them refused to continue participating [in the activities], they were given what I would view as excessive sentences. But certainly while the inmates were involved with the activities we allege, the state would say, it was extremely lenient sentences."



Clark said his client's next hurdle is the Alabama State Bar.



"They suspended him back in March because he got indicted. And we're fighting to give him his law license back," he said.



CNN's Carolina Sanchez contributed to this report.

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN) -- Jay Leno plans "something really unusual and different" when he hands over "The Tonight Show" to Conan O'Brien on May 29, 17 years after Johnny Carson left the hosting duties to him.



Jay Leno begins "The Jay Leno Show" in September. His last "Tonight Show" is May 29.



But don't expect an emotional final show, since Leno and most of his staff are just moving across the NBC lot to produce a nightly prime time show debuting in September.



The traditional desk, chair and guest sofa probably won't follow Leno to his 10 p.m. show, but many of his favorite comedy elements will, Leno said.



Making people laugh before they go to bed is still the mission.



"To me, 10 o'clock is like the new 11:30," Leno said. "I hear more and more people, even young people, say 'I can't stay up past 11. I car pool, I gotta get up at 6.' "



"The Jay Leno Show" will be competing against scripted dramas, not other comedians telling jokes, which Leno said should give him the edge over the long haul.



"When I was a kid, there was comedy all over TV, and it was fun to watch, whether it was Carol Burnett or any of the sitcoms," he said. "You'd have a whole night of comedy, and now everything is very serious and it's all murder."



The new show will have famous guests, but they will not drive the ratings, Leno said.



"It's all about the joke material," he said. He will "try to keep it moving" with a longer monologue with dozens of jokes, he said. The last half-hour will be filled with comedy, he said.



"You look right in the camera, you directly talk to people as low-tech as possible, a little humor before people go to bed," he said.



NBC's decision to put a talk-variety show on at 10 o'clock raised some complaints from affiliate station owners, worried the ratings wouldn't be strong enough to build an audience for their 11 o'clock local newscasts. The network's Boston affiliate briefly threatened to move its news to 10, pre-empting Leno.



Leno, who grew up in Boston, said he understood the economics behind the concern.



"Although my job previous to this was to give a good lead-in to Conan, the job giving a good lead-in to the 11 o'clock news is really, really important," he said. "That's really where our local affiliates make their money, is on the 11 o'clock news."



He doesn't expect to beat the dramas the first week out, but he noted those shows produce only about 22 new episodes a year.



"During those repeat weeks and whatever, we'll be live, fresh, original shows," Leno said.



The last week of "The Tonight Show with Jay Leno" will include a lot of looking back and "best of" segments, "because that's easier than writing new stuff," Leno said.



His guests Monday through Thursday include Mel Gibson, Arnold Schwarzenegger, Wanda Sykes, Billy Crystal and Prince.



Conan O'Brien will be on the final show, along with singer James Taylor.



Taylor's songs were the last thing Leno heard on the radio when he left Boston in the late 1970s to start his career, so he wanted to have him as his last musical guest, he said.



Leno hinted the last show would have some surprises.



"I have something really unusual and different planned," he said, "Something really out of left field that we're going to end on."



Pressed for more hints, Leno said it was "something really personal, something that has to do with show and staff."



"I think it will make people smile," he said.



Leno can smile as he moves on