(CNN) -- A Tampa judge denied bail Wednesday for a Florida man charged with first-degree murder in the death of a 3-month-old child, who authorities say was thrown out of a moving car.



Police say infant Emanuel Murray died after his mother's ex-boyfriend threw him from a car on a Florida interstate.



Richard Anthony McTear Jr., 21, was arrested Tuesday, hours after a confrontation at his former girlfriend's apartment in which he snatched the infant, Emanuel Wesley Murray, the Hillsborough County sheriff's office said.



The child's body was found about 4 .am. Tuesday on the side of Interstate 275 in Tampa, Florida, by a local television photographer on his way to work. The photographer, WTVT's Jason Bird, said he stopped when he spotted something by the roadside



"It had to be a baby doll but it was too big to be a doll," Bird told CNN affiliate WFTS in Tampa. "I almost passed out, I started shaking," said Bird.



A preliminary autopsy determined the child died of blunt trauma to the head, the county medical examiner's office said.



Police were called to the apartment of McTear's former girlfriend about 3:15 a.m. Tuesday. The mother, Jasmine Bedwell, 17, told investigators that McTear had hit her several times and threatened "to kill the both of y'all," the sheriff's department said in a statement announcing the charges.



McTear threw a car seat containing the child across the room during the fight, causing the boy to fall onto the apartment's concrete floor, investigators said. He then picked up the boy and drove off in his blue Chevrolet Impala, throwing the child out while on the interstate, the sheriff's department said.



Video on CNN affiliate WFLA TV showed McTear being led out of a Tampa police squad car after his arrest. He ducked his head as TV cameras surrounded him on his walk into a police building.



When asked by reporters if he had thrown the child out of the car window, McTear answered, "It's a dirty game. A dirty game."



McTear is not related to the child, said sheriff's spokeswoman Debbie Carter.



McTear is facing additional charges of burglary with battery, felony battery, aggravated child abuse and kidnapping, the sheriff's department said.

***

(PEOPLE.com) -- Never one to mince words, "The Talk" co-host Sharon Osbourne came right out and asked guest Melissa Gilbert when she knew her sister Sara Gilbert was gay.





While the question made Sara, 36, who recently started dating Linda Perry, squirm a bit, the audience laughed and cheered.





"You know what, I'll put it to you this way," said Melissa, 47, best known for her role on "Little House on the Prairie." "I took her to dinner when she was in her teens and I sat her down and I gave her this long speech about how much I love you and it doesn't matter and you're my darling and blah, blah, blah and you can tell me anything. And she looked and me and she said, 'I'm not gay.' And I was like, 'OK, whatever.'"





"Years later she called me and we were having a conversation about something and she said, 'You know, what if I just said that I'm gay,' and I went, 'And?' I mean I think always I kinda knew."





Sara, eager to change the subject, responded, "Don't we have a break coming up?"





See the full article at PEOPLE.com.





© 2011 People and Time Inc. All rights reserved.

***

Miami (CNN) -- Rapper Rick Ross suffered medical emergencies aboard two separate flights, forcing both back to the ground, officials said Friday.





Ross was taken to a Florida hospital after he suffered an unidentified medical emergency on a Delta flight to Memphis a law enforcement source with direct knowledge of the situation told CNN.





A Broward County Sheriff's Office fire rescue team met Delta Flight 1310 at the Fort Lauderdale-Hollywood International Airport, said the source, who was not authorized to speak to the media.





"Ross was breathing and conscious and alert when we reached the passenger on the plane," said the source. "He was conscious on transport. He was assessed and transported to Broward General Medical Center."





The rapper later wrote on his Twitter account that he was headed to Memphis and posted a video with him on a plane, getting ready to take off.





His flight, however, was diverted to Birmingham, Alabama, according to CNN Memphis affiliate WMC.





The station reported that Ross had suffered a seizure and was hospitalized.





The University of Alabama at Birmingham Hospital confirmed that it had an emergency room patient under the name of William Leonard Roberts.





Ross, born William Leonard Roberts II, is famous for songs such as "9 Piece."





He was scheduled to perform Friday night in Memphis, at the FedExForum, for the "Memphis Madness" event. The rapper missed that appearance, according to WMC.





CNN's Joe Sutton contributed to this report.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- The FBI and the Department of Homeland Security issued a bulletin Thursday citing an alleged claim of responsibility by al Qaeda for former Pakistani Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto's assassination, a DHS official told CNN.



An Italian news agency says al Qaeda No. 2 Ayman al-Zawahiri began planning Bhutto's killing in October.



But such a claim has not appeared on radical Islamist Web sites that regularly post such messages from al Qaeda and other militant groups.



The source of the claim was apparently Italian news agency, Adnkronos International (AKI), which said that al Qaeda Afghanistan commander and spokesman Mustafa Abu Al-Yazid had telephoned the agency to make the claim.



"We terminated the most precious American asset which vowed to defeat [the] mujahadeen," AKI quoted Al-Yazid as saying.



According to AKI, al Qaeda No. 2 Ayman al-Zawahiri set the wheels in motion for the assassination in October.



One Islamist Web site repeated the claim, but that Web site is not considered a reliable source for Islamist messages by experts in the field.



The DHS official said the claim was "an unconfirmed open source claim of responsibility" and the bulletin was sent out at about 6 p.m. to state and local law enforcement agencies.



The official characterized the bulletin as "information sharing."



Ross Feinstein, spokesman for Director of National Intelligence Mike McConnell, said the U.S. intelligence community is monitoring the situation and trying to figure out who is responsible for the assassination.



"We are not in a position to confirm who may be responsible," Feinstein said.



Feinstein said that the intelligence community "obviously analyze(s) open source intelligence," but he would not say whether the community believes the claim has any validity.



For now, he said, there is "no conclusion" as to who may be responsible.



Earlier, DHS spokesman Russ Knocke said Bhutto's assassination had not prompted "any adjustments to our security posture."



"Of course, we continue to closely monitor events as they unfold overseas," he said. E-mail to a friend



CNN's Jeanne Meserve contributed to this report.

***

Washington (CNN)  -- Ten million Americans a year are victims of identity theft. It's a growing problem in the United States, but fighting it doesn't appear to be a priority, a new report says.





A report by the Justice Department Inspector General released Tuesday cites the wide-ranging costs and dangers of ID theft. Although the report has no new numbers, the financial losses are believed to be substantially higher than the $15.6 billion documented in 2005.





Inspector General Glenn Fine found the effort to combat the problem, however, has lagged since the President's Task Force on ID Theft was established in 2007.





"We found that to some degree identity theft initiatives have faded as priorities," said Fine. He said the Justice Department has not developed a coordinated plan to combat ID theft and that some recommendations of the President's Task Force have not been addressed. No one has been appointed to oversee the efforts, the report says.





The report says "the specific crime of identity theft is not a top FBI priority." However, the report adds that the FBI often addresses the issue through the Cyber Division's criminal intrusion program, which is a priority of the agency.





Similarly, ID theft investigations are often part of larger federal criminal investigations into health care fraud, mortgage fraud and credit card fraud.





"Identity theft can also be a significant element of violent crimes, such as domestic abuse, and even terrorism, and a significant number of ID theft-related crimes originate overseas," the report said.

***

KARBALA, Iraq (CNN) -- A female suicide bomber apparently targeting Shiite worshippers killed at least 40 people and wounded at least 65 in Karbala on Monday, according to an Interior Ministry official.



Iraqi security forces gather around the site of a car bomb explosion in Baghdad on Monday.



The incident occurred one-half mile from the Imam Hussein shrine of Karbala.



Karbala is a Shiite holy city, and the Imam Hussein shrine is one of Shiite Islam's holiest locations. The shrine marks the burial spot of Hussein bin Ali, the grandson of the Prophet Mohammed, who was killed in battle nearby in 680.



No more information was immediately available about the blast southwest of the capital city, Baghdad.



Earlier Monday, in Baghdad, a roadside bomb exploded near an Iraqi police patrol, killing one officer and wounding another, the Interior Ministry told CNN.



A short time later, another roadside bomb exploded near an Iraqi police patrol on Palestine Street in eastern Baghdad, wounding four bystanders, a ministry official said.



The first attack took place about 8:30 a.m. in the upscale Mansour neighborhood, where law enforcement officials have come under frequent attacks in recent weeks.



Also Monday, two American soldiers were killed by a roadside bomb north of Baghdad, officials said.



The incident occurred about 12:20 p.m.  as the soldiers were "conducting a route-clearance combat operation north of Baghdad," according to a news release.



The names of the soldiers were not immediately released.



Meanwhile, U.S. Vice President Dick Cheney arrived in the Iraqi capital Monday on an unannounced visit.



Cheney told reporters that the five years in Iraq since the war's start has been "well worth the effort."



He said he met with top Iraqi officials.  He appeared at a news conference with Gen. David Petraeus, the top U.S. commander in Iraq, and Ryan Crocker, the U.S. ambassador to the country.



Cheney began a trip to the Middle East on Sunday with an official itinerary that listed stops in Oman, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Israel and the West Bank, according to the White House. E-mail to a friend



CNN's Mohammed Tawfeeq contributed to this report.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- State Department officials should serve where they are needed -- even in war-torn Iraq, U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice said Friday.

U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice says that "people need to serve where they are needed."

Rice was responding to foreign service officers' objections to the possibility of "directed assignments" in Iraq. The issue has caused an uproar in the State Department, resulting in a contentious town hall-style meeting Wednesday.

The new directives would be needed if enough qualified foreign service officers don't step forward to fill open positions at the U.S. Embassy in Baghdad.

If the State Department enforces directed assignments, it will be the first time since the Vietnam War era.

One official called the order to serve in Iraq "a potential death sentence" during the town meeting.

The State Department already has begun notifying about 200 people considered prime candidates. Those chosen will be given 10 days to respond, according to last week's announcement. Unless they have a valid medical reason to refuse, those who decline could face dismissal, it said.

Wednesday's heated meeting was replayed on an internal State Department television channel in Washington several times and talked about widely.

Some at the hourlong meeting questioned why they were not told of the policy change directly, learning about it instead from news organizations last week.  Watch the diplomats exchange angry words »

"I just have no respect for the whole process because you've demonstrated a lack of respect for your own colleagues," said foreign service officer Jack Croddy.

"Thank you for that comment. It's full of inaccuracies, but that's OK," Harry Thomas Jr., director general of the foreign service, shot back.

Others pointed out the risks of such assignments, considering the dangers of a war zone, lack of security and regular rocket attacks on U.S. personnel.

Rice, who did not attend the meeting, tried to calm things down Friday by underscoring the State Department's attempts to do "everything that we can to try and protect our diplomats."

However, she said, "This is one of the highest priority tasks of the United States, and we're going to meet our obligations."

Speaking to reporters en route to Turkey and the Mideast, she said, "I don't know if we will have direct assignments or not, but we are one foreign service, and people need to serve where they are needed."

The secretary sent out a cable to State Department employees worldwide encouraging them to serve in Iraq.

"This year [U.S. Ambassador Ryan Crocker] has identified the need for additional positions to more effectively accomplish our mission in Iraq," Rice said in the cable.

Rice said she has decided to go forward with the identification of  officers to serve, "should it prove necessary to direct assignments."

"Should others step forward, as some already have, we will fill these new jobs as we have before -- with volunteers. However, regardless of how the jobs may be filled, they must be filled," she said.

Rice earlier said reports that the State Department was finding it hard to coax foreign service employees into Iraq "couldn't be further from the truth."

The assignments are new positions. Fifteen people have stepped forward to volunteer for Iraq service since the new policy was announced October 26, department spokesman Sean McCormack said.

McCormack rejected comments by Rep. Duncan Hunter, R-California, that State Department employees are "nervous Nellies" and that wounded U.S. military veterans should be asked to fill the Iraq vacancies.

McCormack said until now the State Department has been successful in filling jobs in Iraq with volunteers. Since 2003, more than 1,500 personnel have volunteered to go to Iraq, he said. But with the expansion of the staff in Iraq this year, 58 spots were left open.

"They are serving in dangerous and challenging places," he said. "We have a lot of brave people who are stepping up to the plate in Anbar and Basra and Baghdad

***

(CNN) -- A seventh minute goal from Brazilian teenager Alexander Pato proved enough to give AC Milan a 1-0 home victory over Fiorentina in a match totally dominated by Manchester City's $150 million bid for playmaker Kaka this week.



Pato (right) and David Beckham celebrate Milan's only goal at the San Siro on Saturday evening.



The goal was created by David Beckham who beat two defenders to a loose ball. He poked it back to Marek Jankulovski who played in Pato inside the penalty area.



There still appeared no danger to the Fiorentina goal, but Pato hit a stunning strike from the left that went in off the far post.



Fiorentina should have equalized on 66 minutes when Juan Vargas got to the byline and crossed to Mario Santana but the Argentine put his shot too close to goalkeeper Christian Abbiati who managed to save.



The result leaves Milan in third place on 37 points, six points behind leaders and city rivals Inter, who have a game in hand. Jose Mourinho's side travel to Atalanta on Sunday.



Jankulovski collected a late red card for timewasting, but Milan held on to secure the three points.



Meanwhile, Milan supporters made their opposition to the Kaka bid, and his possible departure, perfectly clear throughout the match -- unveiling a host of banners and singing songs pleading with the Brazilian to stay at the San Siro.



Reggina remain deep in relegation trouble after suffering a 1-0 defeat at the hands of Siena. Mario Frick's goal 15 minutes from time was enough to give the Bianconeri three points which sees them leapfrog Sampdoria and move up to the relative comfort of 14th spot.



Siena in contrast, stay second from bottom and could slip to the foot of the Serie A standings if Chievo beat Napoli on Sunday.

***

MEXICO CITY, Mexico (CNN) -- The Mexican navy said Wednesday that it rescued five Ecuadorians who had been adrift without supplies in a fishing boat for more than two weeks off the coast of the southern state of Chiapas.



Mexican medical personel examine two of five Ecuadorians rescued at sea.



Mexican authorities initiated the rescue, which occurred Tuesday, after the U.S. Coast Guard alerted them that sailors aboard a fishing boat located 45 nautical miles (83 km) southeast of Port Chiapas had signaled to a passing plane that they needed help.



The Mexican navy dispatched a helicopter, which located the 15-meter-long (49-foot-long) vessel and carried out the rescue by air, the navy said in a news release.



The five aboard identified themselves as Jaime Arturo Alaba Chavez, the 35-year-old captain; Víctor Hugo Alaba Chavez, the 32-year-old cook; Edison Prado Alaba, a 27-year-old sailor; Carlos Cheme Vazquez, a 37-year-old sailor; and Raul Contreras Vera, a 64-year-old machinist.



The sailors were taken to the Naval Sanatorium of Puerto Chiapas, where doctors determined they were dehydrated.



They said they had departed Costa Rica's on May 6 but, five days later, their motor stopped working and, unable to repair it, they had been adrift and without food since.



A naval patrol boat towed the boat to Puerto Chiapas, arriving there Wednesday morning. It will be inspected to rule out the possibility that it may have been used for illicit activities, the navy said.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN)  -- An emotional Nancy Reagan helped unveil a statue of her late husband, President Reagan, on Wednesday, calling the 7-foot figure "a wonderful likeness."



Nancy Reagan, with House Minority Leader John Boehner, wipes away tears at Wednesday's event.



"I know Ronnie would be deeply honored to see himself with a permanent home in the Rotunda of the U.S. Capitol and very proud to be representing his beloved California," Nancy Reagan said.



She appeared to battle emotions as she mentioned her last visit to the marbled hall for Reagan's memorial in June 2004.



"It's nice to be back under happier circumstances," she said.  Watch Nancy Reagan unveil the statue »



The statue is one of two from California in the National Statuary Hall Collection donated by states to honor significant figures.



Nancy Reagan stood arm-in-arm with House Minority Leader John Boehner of Ohio to pull down the curtain from the statue. She thanked House Speaker Nancy Pelosi of California for making the event possible.



In her remarks, Pelosi noted that the former president's statue contains pieces of the Berlin Wall, "as a symbol of his commitment to national security and to his success." The wall was torn down shortly after Reagan left office.



"I'm so grateful to Californians for giving him this honor," Nancy Reagan said. "Artist Chas Fagan has captured his likeness so well, and I think the addition of the pieces of the Berlin Wall in the pedestal reflects my husband's commitment to freedom and democracy for everyone."



The former president is credited with polices that led to the break-up of the former Soviet Union and the dismantling of the wall that divided Berlin as a symbol of Cold War politics.



James Baker, a longtime Republican who served in the Cabinets of Reagan and President George H.W. Bush, recalled that Reagan inherited some major problems when he took office in 1981.



Citing the former president's trademark optimism, he quoted from Reagan's first inaugural address that "we are not, as some would have us believe, doomed to an inevitable decline."



Nancy Reagan attended a White House ceremony Tuesday marking Barack Obama's signing of legislation authorizing a Ronald Reagan Centennial Commission. The 11-member commission will plan activities marking Reagan's 100th birthday on February 6, 2011.



Reagan was president from 1981 to 1989.

***

(CNN) -- Norwegian violinist, Alexander Rybak, 23, won the Eurovision Song Contest with an upbeat ballad that got the most votes in the history of one of the world's most watched television shows.



Alexander Rybak of Norway performs during the final of the Eurovision Song Contest Saturday in Moscow, Russia.



On Saturday night Rybak beat out contestants from 42 countries, with singers from Iceland and Azerbaijan taking distant second and third places.



The boyish Rybak -- who performed a self-composed tune, "Fairytale," with some deft dance steps and a smile plastered on his face -- won with 387 points, the most in the contest's 53-year history, organizers said.



It was the third time Norway has won the competition. Although the classically-trained Rybak grew up outside the Norwegian capital, Oslo, he was born in Belarus.



A television audience estimated at more than 100 million people watch the show.



In years past, winners have parlayed their victory in varying degrees of success -- most notably the Swedish quartet ABBA, which won with "Waterloo" in 1974 and became one of the most successful pop groups of the 1970s.



In the Eurovision Song Contest, which began in 1956, each participating European nation submits one singer or group who then perform a specially-written song. Telephone votes as well as judges from each country decided the winner this year.



This year the contest was televised from a packed stadium in Moscow, Russia.



Earlier police arrested dozens of gay and lesbian rights activists who were planning a rally to coincide with the contest. The protesters wanted to draw attention to what they call widespread discrimination of gays in Russia.  Watch what's different about this year's gay rights protests »

***

(CNN) -- Volcanologists in the Philippines are closely monitoring a volcano on Luzon Island close to the capital, Manila, after a sudden spike in seismic activity.





Twenty one volcanic earthquakes were recorded at Taal Volcano from Sunday 8 a.m. to Monday 8 a.m.





One of the earthquakes was felt by local residents in Brgy Calauit at the southeast side of the island.





Scientists at the Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology (PHIVOLCS) say the quakes are an indication that magma is moving towards Taal's surface.





The main crater lake has been heating up since January.





PHIVOLCS Science Research Specialist Alex Ramos told CNN that scientists have seen "a slight intensification of steaming in the main crater lake."





He said emissions of carbon dioxide have risen from 1,875 tons per day in February to 4,670 tons at the end of March.





PHIVOLCS has raised its five step alert level to 2 around Taal and is warning people not to go near the crater lake or main Daang Kastila Trail due to the high concentration of toxic gases and a risk of steam explosions.





The popular tourist attraction is 65 kilometres (40 miles) south of the Manila.





An estimated 7,000 people live on the volcanic island which last erupted in 1977.





From CNN's Hannah Belcher in Hong Kong

***

ISLAMABAD, Pakistan (CNN)  -- The Pakistani military says security forces have taken back the city of Mingora from the Taliban, calling it a significant victory in its offensive against the Taliban.



Pakistani solders escort a suspected Taliban militant inside an army base in Mingora.



Mingora is the largest city in Pakistan's Swat Valley where security forces have been fighting the Taliban in a month-long offensive.



"It is a great accomplishment," said Pakistani Maj. Gen. Athar Abbas. "This is the largest city in Swat and for all practical purposes, Mingora has been secured."



Abbas said militants put up a stiff resistance, but their resistance weakened as troops moved in. Abbas told CNN pockets of militants remain just outside Mingora.



The fighting has uprooted about 2.4 million Pakistanis from their homes in the northwestern region of the country, according to the latest data from the United Nations. Of those displaced, about 10 percent -- or 240,000 -- are living in refugee camps, according to the U.N.



The announcement that the military has pushed the Taliban out of Mingora comes after days of Taliban attacks in other areas in the country.



The military issued a press release on Saturday saying that 25 militants and a soldier were killed in fighting across the region over the last 24 hours.



Pakistani authorities increased security throughout Islamabad on Friday after a string of deadly bombings in Lahore and Peshawar, and a threat by the Taliban to carry out further attacks.



The Pakistani Taliban claimed responsibility for Wednesday's suicide attack in Lahore on a building housing police, intelligence and emergency offices. Twenty-seven people were killed.



The militant group also threatened to continue attacking cities in Pakistan until the military ends its operations against Taliban militants in the country's northwest.

***

Washington (CNN) -- Melody Barnes, the domestic policy adviser to President Barack Obama, will leave the White House at the end of the year, she said Thursday.





"I plan to take some time off and enjoy my family," she said in a written statement. "I'll also be considering opportunities in the private sector, as well as ways to continue to work on the policy issues about which I care so deeply."





Obama, in a separate statement said he "will always be grateful that a woman of Melody's brilliance, creativity and heart led our domestic policy team during such a challenging time for our nation."





He said Barnes will leave "a lasting legacy, developing and implementing policies that have helped remake our education system, spurred innovation, and fostered opportunity and equality for millions of Americans."





Barnes, in her statement, said she has "enjoyed working closely with the private sector, as well as philanthropists and non-profit organizations, to build public-private partnerships that are providing solutions to our country's biggest challenges."





She said that over the past few months she had "reached the conclusion that I need to move out of a 24/7 work schedule and on to the next phase of my life." But she added, "I also look forward to devoting time to doing everything I can to ensure that President Obama is re-elected."

***

(Mental Floss) -- Everyone goes through a rebellious phase. And, if you're lucky, you'll be able to look back on those years and laugh. If you're less lucky, you spent those years on a reality show, so for the rest of time, millions of strangers can look back on them and laugh instead.

In modern times, cats frolic among the ruins of ancient Rome.

But, hey, it could be worse. You could be responsible for the fall of Western Civilization, just like Justa Grata Honoria, the Roman princess whose wild ways and (literally) naked ambition set off a chain reaction that culminated in the destruction of the Roman Empire.

Barely regal

Smart, conniving, and ruthless, Honoria possessed all the attributes befitting a Roman emperor, except for that pesky Y chromosome.

As a young girl, she watched as her dimwitted six-year-old brother, Valentinian III, was crowned emperor of the Western Roman Empire, while she was set aside to await a suitable marriage.

Hardly content to lead a quiet and chaste life, Honoria rebelled with aplomb, sleeping her way through the royal court while still in her teens.

Although her after-hours habits caused quite the scandal, they failed to satiate her need for attention and power, so Honoria set her eyes on the throne. Employing her ample charms, she seduced her brother's royal chamberlain, Eugenius, and together, they plotted to murder Valentinian and seize power.

But, alas, their scheme was soon exposed. Eugenius was executed, and Honoria was sent to a convent in Constantinople.

Life as a nun was a fate worse than death for Honoria, but even that couldn't quell her ambition. She spent her years at the nunnery plotting one escape attempt after another.

Finally, out of sheer desperation, she turned to sources outside the empire. Her savior would have to be powerful enough to defy Valentinian and risk open war with Rome. Only one man fit that description: Attila, king of the Huns.

Attila the hubby

Honoria got the barbarian's attention with a mutually beneficial proposal: If Attila would rescue her, she would marry him, and he would get half of the Western Empire as her dowry.

Of course, Honoria was in no position to rightfully offer any portion of the Roman Empire. But she was betting that after marrying her, Attila would conquer the whole Empire, and she'd become queen to boot.

Attila had secretly been planning a move against Rome for years, and Honoria's letter gave him the perfect opportunity to strike. Wasting no time, he told Valentinian that he planned to marry Honoria, and demanded the dowry he'd been promised.

Naturally, Valentinian refused, and Attila used his status as a "wronged husband" to invade Roman territory in 451 C.E. The Hun armies quickly swept through the Empire, destroying everything in their path, and eventually they arrived in Rome. Like all the other cities before it, Rome would also have been annihilated were it not for the famine and disease that devastated the Huns during the invasion.

Rome survived Attila's assault with the unlikely help of another nomadic enemy tribe, the Visigoths, but the Western Empire never recovered. Within a generation, the armies of the Goths, Franks, and Huns had overrun the area.

The Princess bride

Ultimately, Honoria became neither Roman empress nor a Hun queen. Attila never rescued her, and she was eventually sent back to Rome and left to her brother's justice.

Not wanting to cause a scandal by having her executed, and unwilling to send her back into exile where she could scheme again, Valentinian settled on a suitable third option.

After years of struggle, Honoria finally suffered the fate she had been dreading all along: She was married off to an elderly Roman senator, and the rest of her life went unrecorded by history. E-mail to a friend

For more mental_floss articles, visit mentalfloss.com

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- America's first female four-star general has been nominated, the Pentagon announced Monday.



Lt. Gen. Ann E. Dunwoody was nominated to be America's first four-star female general.



President Bush nominated Lt. Gen. Ann E. Dunwoody to serve as head of the Army's supply arm.



By law women are excluded from combat jobs, the typical path to four-star rank in the military.



"This is an historic occasion for the Department of Defense and I am proud to nominate Lt. Gen. Ann Dunwoody for a fourth star," said Defense Secretary Robert Gates. "Her 33 years of service, highlighted by extraordinary leadership and devotion to duty, make her exceptionally qualified for this senior position."



The Senate must approve the nomination.



Dunwoody, a native of New York, was commissioned as a second lieutenant in 1975 after her graduation from the State University of New York in Cortland. She also holds graduate degrees in national resource strategy and logistics management.



She became the Army's top-ranking woman in 2005 when she received her third star and became deputy chief of staff for Army logistics.



"I am very honored but also very humbled today with this announcement," said Dunwoody. "I grew up in a family that didn't know what glass ceilings were. This nomination only reaffirms what I have known to be true about the military throughout my career ... that the doors continue to open for men and women in uniform."



The Army Materiel Command handles all material readiness for the Army. During her career, Dunwoody has been assigned to the 82nd Airborne Division, 10th Mountain Division and the Defense Logistics Agency. She served with the 82nd Airborne in Saudi Arabia during the 1991 Persian Gulf War.



She has been awarded the Distinguished Service Medal, Defense Superior Service Medal, the Legion of Merit, the Meritorious Service Medal, the Army Commendation Medal, the Army Achievement Medal, Master Parachutist Badge and the Army Staff Identification Badge.



The first woman to become a general officer in the U.S. armed services was Brig. Gen. Anna Mae Hays, chief of the Army Nurse Corps, who achieved the rank in 1970 and retired the following year.



Elizabeth Hoisington, the director of the Women's Army Corps, was promoted to brigadier general immediately after Hays. She also retired the following year.



Maj. Gen. Jeanne M. Holm, the first director of Women in the Air Force, was the first woman to wear two stars, attaining the rank in 1973 and retiring two years later. In 1996, Marine Lt. Gen. Carol A. Mutter became the first woman to wear three stars. Mutter retired in 1999.



Currently, there are 57 active-duty women serving as generals or admirals, five of whom are lieutenant generals or vice admirals, the Navy's three-star rank, according to the Pentagon.

***

(CNN) -- Actor Larry Hagman said Friday that he has been diagnosed with cancer, but noted "it is a very common and treatable form" of the disease.





Hagman, who turned 80 last month, is best known for his role as J.R. Ewing, the son of a Texas oil tycoon on the primetime television series "Dallas," and as a dashing Florida astronaut living with a 2,000-year-old genie on the sitcom "I Dream of Jeannie."





In recent days he has been preparing for a stint on the remake of "Dallas" later this month.





"As J.R I could get away with anything -- bribery, blackmail and adultery," Hagman said. "But I got caught by cancer."





Hagman said he will receive treatment for his cancer -- the type of which was not disclosed -- while working on the new "Dallas."





This isn't the first health scare Hagman has faced. In 2003, he talked to CNN about his fight with cirrhosis and the 16-hour liver transplant in 1995 that saved his life.





Warner Horizon Television, TNT's television production branch, which is producing the "Dallas" remake, issued a statement Friday expressing support for Hagman.





"We look forward to watching Larry once again work his magic by bringing one of television's most interesting, complex and controversial characters back to the screen in the new Dallas series," the statement said.





The original "Dallas" series ran from 1978 to 1991.





"I could not think of a better place to be than working on a show I love, with people I love. Besides, as we all know, you can't keep J.R. down!" Hagman said.





CNN's KJ Matthews contributed to this report.

***

Atlanta, Georgia (CNN) -- Some southern states were getting a second round of unseasonal snow Tuesday, prompting airlines to cancel flights and schools to close for the day.





Parts of several southern states remained under a winter storm warning Tuesday, as a developing low-pressure system threatened to spread snow and rain across portions of Alabama, Georgia, Tennessee, Kentucky and the Carolinas, the National Weather Service said.





Snow fell north and west of metro Atlanta, Georgia, although the city, with a temperature hovering just above freezing, saw mostly rain.





The weather prompted schools in several northern Georgia counties to close, according to CNN affiliates.





Airlines also canceled flights. AirTran Airways has canceled 69 flights in and out of Atlanta, and is expected to cancel more this afternoon, spokesman Christopher White said.





"Should the [weather] event continue into the evening, there is a possibility of many more cancellations," he said. He said the airline is offering free rebooking and changes for anyone traveling to or from Atlanta.





Delta Airlines said it has made about 250 cancellations for flights leaving Atlanta. "Depending on the severity of the storm some additional thinning may be necessary," spokesman Anthony Black said.





The airline is offering to reschedule Tuesday travel plans for those concerned about the weather, at no fee. Customers will have to pay any increase in fares, according to the Web site.





The National Weather Service said snow will continue Tuesday afternoon across northeast Georgia and the western half of upstate South Carolina, although it will taper off later.





Total snowfall accumulations of 2 to 4 inches are expected, mainly in areas along and north of I-85.





The same amount of snow is expected from Shelby, North Carolina to Gaffney and Union in South Carolina, the National Weather Service said.





Snow is also possible in Tennessee, Kentucky and northern Alabama, it said.





CNN's Carolina Sanchez contributed to this report.

***

DUBAI, United Arab Emirates (CNN)  -- Sudanese President Omar el-Bashir on Tuesday accused the international media of "exaggerating" the situation in Darfur to detract from atrocities in Iraq, the Palestinian territories and Somalia.

Refugees from Darfur gather at a camp in Chad. Sudan's president says the crisis in Darfur is a "media fabrication."

El-Bashir spoke at a news conference in Dubai following a three-day visit to the Persian Gulf emirate. He said the crisis in Sudan's western Darfur region is a "media fabrication."

El-Bashir's government has been blamed by the United Nations of supporting militias that conduct "indiscriminate attacks" on civilians in the Darfur region, including torture, rape, and killings.

Rebels fighting the government-backed militias have also been accused by the U.N. of widespread human rights abuses.

During Tuesday's news conference, el-Bashir restated his position that foreign intervention in Darfur was an obstacle in achieving peace in the region.

The Sudanese president has been outspoken in his opposition to allowing non-African forces in Darfur.

At the start of this year, more than 9,000 members of a joint UN-African Union peacekeeping force were deployed to the region to address the fighting and humanitarian suffering.

The force will eventually number 26,000.

Speaking on Tuesday, el-Bashir said that the fighting only affects 10 percent of the region. In the majority of Darfur, there is little to no conflict and people are living normal lives, he said.

Citing Sudanese government statistics, el-Bashir said that less than 10,000 people have died in the conflict and less than 500,000 have been displaced.

International figures, including United Nations' data, put the death toll in Darfur at approximately 200,000, with another 2.5 million people displaced by the violence since 2003.

The conflict started five years ago when ethnic African tribesmen took up arms, complaining of decades of neglect and discrimination by the Sudanese government.

Sudan's Arab-dominated government is accused of responding by unleashing the tribal militias known as janjaweed, which have committed the worst atrocities against Darfur's local communities.

El-Bashir, however, rejected claims that the Darfur conflict is being fought along ethnic lines. E-mail to a friend

CNN's Elham Nakhlawi in Dubai contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- President Bush blasted the Democratic-controlled Congress on Tuesday for having "the worst record in 20 years."

"Congress is not getting its work done," Bush said, flanked by members of the Republican House leadership. "The House of Representatives has wasted valuable time on a constant stream of investigations, and the Senate has wasted valuable time on an endless series of failed votes to pull our troops out of Iraq."

Bush criticized Congress for not being able to send "a single appropriations bill" to him.

"They haven't seen a bill they could not solve without shoving a tax hike into it," he said.

Democrats quickly fired back. Jim Manley, senior aide to Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, said, "Taking advice from President Bush about fiscal responsibility and getting things done for the American people is like taking hunting lessons from Dick Cheney. Neither is a very good idea."

Rep. Rahm Emanuel, D-Illinois, issued a statement saying, "President Bush's rally this morning reminds us that congressional Republicans remain ready and willing to rubber-stamp the Bush agenda: No to children's health care; no to a new direction in Iraq; and no to investing in America's future. The White House and congressional Republicans want to continue the status quo."

Bush said the Senate was "wasting valuable time" by taking up the children's health insurance bill, which he had earlier vetoed.  Watch Bush describe what he thinks Congress is doing wrong »

House Majority Leader Steny Hoyer, D-Maryland, issued a statement calling Bush "the biggest obstacle" to extending health coverage to "10 million low-income, working-class American children."

Hoyer said GOP House leaders need to "stop posing for pictures, and sit down with Democrats and Republicans in Congress who are working together to extend coverage to our children."

The State Children's Health Insurance Program measure passed in the House last week would expand the program by nearly $35 billion over five years, the same as the measure Bush vetoed on October 3. Bush had proposed adding $5 billion to the program, and said the version he vetoed would have encouraged families to leave the private insurance market for the federally funded, state-run program.

Democratic leaders said the new version addresses Republican objections by tightening restrictions on illegal immigrants receiving SCHIP benefits; capping the income levels of families that qualify for the program; and preventing adults from receiving benefits.

The program currently covers about 6 million children whose parents earn too much to qualify for Medicaid, the federal health insurance program for the poor, but who can't afford private insurance. Democrats want to extend the program to another 4 million, paying for it with a 61-cent-per-pack increase in the federal tax on cigarettes.

Bush said Congress knows the current version of the children's health bill "does not have a chance," to get enough votes to override another veto.

Hoyer accused Bush of breaking a promise he made in 2004 to extend coverage under the SCHIP program. "Now, Congress must do what the president said he would do," he said in his statement.

The Senate could vote on the bill as early as Tuesday.

Bush also threatened to veto a "three-bill pileup."

"There are now reports that Congressional leaders may be considering combining the Veterans and Department of Defense appropriations bills, and then add a bloated labor, health and education spending bill to both of them," he said.

"Congress should pass each bill one at a time in a fiscally responsible manner," he said.

Bush also urged Congress to send him a "clean defense appropriations bill and a war supplemental bill."

"They ought to get me a bill that funds among other things bullets and body armor," he said.

Bush also criticized Congress for trying to "hold hostage" funding for troops.

"It would be irresponsible to not give our troops the resources they need to get their job done because Congress was

***

(CNN) -- Real Madrid defender Christoph Metzelder fully expects to be leaving the  Spanish giants next summer.



Metzelder, whose contract is up at the end of the season, has played just one Spanish Primera Liga match all campaign.



And the 29-year-old admits the Bernabeu giants are unlikely to offer him a new deal.



"All us players have hope but you also have to be realistic and I don't think the club will renew my contract," the Germany international told reporters.



"These have been two-and-a-half complicated years for me, but I don't want to talk about that. It is the coach who makes these decisions and as a player I have to accept it.



"I am professional and for that reason I will work until the end of the season and we'll see if I return to playing or not."



Metzelder insists, however, that whatever happens he will not be leaving Madrid in the winter transfer window.



"I don't think it's the right date to change clubs," he added. "Moreover, in Germany the teams will not pay a transfer for a player who five months later will be free. In any case, I am a player who always completes his contracts."



Meanwhile, Real Madrid have denied they have received a mega-offer from Manchester City owner Sheikh Mansour bin Zayed Al Nahyan to buy them out.



Reports in Spain suggested the Sheikh was set to shell out one billion euros for Madrid and was due to meet club president Florentino Perez early in the new year for discussions.



However, Madrid insist the story is completely unfounded.



"Real Madrid wishes to inform that Real Madrid president Mr. Florentino Perez has had a great friendship for many years with his Highness, Sheikh Mansour bin Zayed Al Nahyan," read a statement on the club's official Web site.



"And that the so-called interest and the existence of any offer to acquire Real Madrid are false.



"His Highness has always shown tremendous respect for the club and understands that Real Madrid belongs to its members."



Sheikh Mansour, who is reportedly a Real Madrid supporter, is president of Abu Dhabi's Al Jazira Club, where he set up a twinning agreement with the Spanish giants in 2005.

***

Mexico City (CNN) -- A Mexican mayor campaigning for the president's sister in a gubernatorial race was fatally shot in the southeastern state of Michoacan, the state attorney general's office said.





The killing of La Piedad Mayor Ricardo Guzman Romero on Wednesday is the latest in a number of mayoral killings dating to last year. According to CNNMexico, 18 mayors have been killed in 2010 and 2011.





But Guzman's death garnered extra attention because he was killed in President Felipe Calderon's home state, and because he was campaigning for the president's sister, gubernatorial candidate Luisa Maria Calderon. She is running as a candidate for the National Action Party, or PAN, the same party to which the president belongs.





The attack came just 11 days before the state elections, where in addition to a governor, 40 lawmakers and 113 mayors will be chosen.





Guzman was elected mayor in 2008, and his term was to end in January.





"At the moment, the federal authorities and military are in charge (of the case)," Michoacan attorney general's office spokesman Armando Soto La Marina said.





According to authorities, Guzman was participating in a campaign event, walking down one of his town's boulevards, when a black vehicle approached and a gunman shot from inside.





The shooter escaped, and the mayor was taken to a hospital, where he died, authorities said.





Luisa Maria Calderon said she was saddened by the killing, but that "we're not going to stop our fight for Michoacan."





Michoacan has long been a center of drug cartel violence. It was where President Calderon initiated his campaign against the cartels in 2006.





Last year, the PAN and an allied party declined to run candidates in at least 20 mayoral races in Michoacan because of insecurity.

***

Tokyo, Japan (CNN) -- An anti-whaling activist jumped aboard a Japanese security ship on Monday in a bid to make a citizen's arrest of its skipper over the sinking of their boat, an animal rights group said.





Pete Bethune was captain of the "Ady Gill" boat, which sank after a Japanese whaler rammed into it in January, the Sea Shepherd Conservation Society, which owned the boat, said on its Web site.





The New Zealander climbed aboard the Japanese ship "Shonan Maru 2" in the middle of the night from a jet ski to arrest its skipper, the animal rights group said.





"His first attempt failed when he fell into the frigid waters," the group said. "But despite this, the crew of the 'Shonan Maru 2' failed to see him and he successfully boarded the whaler without detection."





After the incident, Bethune complained of a minor injury to his thumb, according to Japan's ministry of fisheries.





The 20 crew members of the Japanese ship were not harmed and their vessel was not damaged, the ministry said.





Japanese authorities called the incident the latest "publicity stunt" from the animal rights group and said they have not decided what to do with the activist.





Two years ago, Sea Shepherd activists boarded another Japanese ship and handcuffed themselves to the vessel with plastic ties, according to the Institute of Cetacean Research, a branch of Japan's fisheries ministry that deals with whaling.





At the time, an Australian vessel helped return the two activists back to the Sea Shepherd, ICR said.





Sea Shepherd has accused the Japanese ship "Shonan Maru 2" of destroying their vessel during the skirmish in the Southern Ocean -- a term used to describe parts of the Indian, Pacific and Atlantic oceans that surround Antarctica.





However, Japanese authorities deny their ship intentionally hit the catamaran and have said the activists were harassing their whaling fleet.





The incident highlights an ongoing feud between Japanese whaling fleets and conservation agencies -- especially Sea Shepherd.





CNN's Kyung Lah contributed to this report

***

(CNN) -- Sure David Copperfield can make the Statue of Liberty vanish in front of a live audience, but what can he do with an iPad?





In a YouTube video posted by "salarymagician," Shinya -- who identifies himself as a magician at the beginning of the video -- incorporates the iPad in his sidewalk magic act, which just happens to take place in front of an Apple store.





I'm not sure what's more impressive: How well he knows his way around an iPad, or how entertaining his magic tricks are. Different versions of the YouTube video have already been viewed more than 700,000 times.





It doesn't really matter that many of Shinya's tricks probably wouldn't be possible without long sleeves and quick hands -- at one point he takes too long to pull a piece of cheese out of his sleeve.





He redeems himself twice over when he makes a live dove appear in his hand moments after showing a video of it on the iPad screen.





Another highpoint of Shinya's act is when he pretends to pour a glass of milk onto his iPad. Despite the fact that the contents of the glass are clearly staying put, it appears as though the milk has filled the virtual glass on the screen. Is this really magic? Probably not, but it looks pretty darn cool.





Another cool, yet subtle, part of the video is when Shinya covers his face with the iPad. His moving face appears on the screen, but he's wearing glasses. When he removes the iPad, the same glasses are on his face.





We should have seen this coming. Apple CEO Steve Jobs deemed the iPad "a truly magical and revolutionary product" when he unveiled the tablet-style computer in January.





What can you do with your iPad?

***

(CNN) -- Mourners gathered Saturday in a California church to remember slain Yale graduate student Annie Le, 24, whose body was found on the day she was to be married.



Yale student Annie Le's family said in a statement that "her laughter was infectious."



"You were born in my loving embrace," said Le's mother, Vivian Van Le, reading a poem she'd written in Vietnamese to those gathered for the funeral at Holy Trinity Catholic Church in El Dorado Hills, California.



Chris Le -- her son and Annie Le's brother -- provided a translation.



"The most wonderful gift that God had sent to me. ... You left life at too young an age, at the beginning of many great things. All the dreams and hopes of your future gone with you to your resting place," Vivian Van Le said, according to her son.



Le, a pharmacology graduate student, was last seen alive on September 8, the day she appeared in a surveillance video as she entered the four-story lab at 10 Amistad St., about 10 blocks from Yale University's campus.



Her body was found inside the basement wall of the building on September 12, the day she was to be married.



Authorities have charged Yale lab technician Raymond Clark, 24, with Le's murder. Bond has been set at $3 million, according to police.   See timeline of case »



Vivian Van Le addressed her daughter's fiance, Jonathan Widawsky, on Saturday at the funeral, saying, "Even now, Annie is gone. But I still have you and love you very much, like my son, Christopher."



Widawsky is a graduate student in physics at Columbia University, according to  Yale.  Watch loved ones say goodbye to Le »



Monsignor James C. Kidder told the mourners that "the worth of Annie's life was not its length, it was its intensity of love."



Yale released a statement Friday, saying that a university memorial service would be held on October 12. The university is also establishing a scholarship in Le's memory.



It released a statement from her family, saying "Annie was loved by everyone who knew her and special to all those who came in contact with her. ... Her laughter was infectious and her goodness was ingenuous. ... We will always remember her beautiful smile, her fun-loving spirit, and the joy that she brought to us all."

***

Kabul, Afghanistan (CNN) -- An explosion outside the home of Afghanistan's former vice president killed at least eight people Tuesday, government officials have said.



The explosion was near the Kabul residence of former vice-president Ahmad Zia Massoud, Afghan President Hamid Karzai told reporters.



Massoud was not harmed in the attack.



Among those killed were one of Massoud's guards and an assistant, the former vice president's aide said. Forty others were wounded in the blast.



The explosion broke windows in a hotel a few blocks away.



Tuesday morning's explosion occurred as the Afghan president was at a nearby anti-corruption convention.



Karzai issued a statement condemning the attack, calling it inhumane and cowardly. The president called for a full scale investigation.



Massoud is a notable figure in Afghan politics. Not only was he a vice president of the county under Karzai, but his brother the late Ahmed Shah Massoud was heralded as a leader in the fight against the Taliban.



Ahmed Shah Massoud, the leader of the Northern Alliance, the Taliban's main opposition, was killed September 9, 2001, by a bomb inside a video camera during an interview at his headquarters with Tunisian al Qaeda operatives posing as journalists.



Meanwhile the International Committee of the Red Cross visited three Afghan security forces being held captive by the Taliban for the first time, the agency said Tuesday.



The two visits occurred in late November in Badghis province in northwestern Afghanistan, the agency said. "This is the first time since the beginning of the current conflict that the ICRC has visited people detained by the armed opposition," said Reto Stocker, head of the ICRC's delegation in Kabul.



"We plan to conduct and repeat visits in other regions, and hope to visit people held by other armed opposition groups, with the aim of ensuring that everyone detained in relation to the armed conflict is treated humanely."



The ICRC says it regularly visits detained people in conflict zones to assess their conditions and treatment.



The agency say it currently currently visits 136 places of detention in Afghanistan.



-- CNN's Tim Schwarz and Fred Pleitgen contributed to this report

***

(CNN) -- President Obama, Vice President Joe Biden and other top Democrats are heading back to school Tuesday, in hopes of convincing first-time voters from the 2008 election to vote again in 2010.





The president is scheduled to headline a Democratic party rally at the University of Wisconsin in Madison while the vice president is the main attraction at a similar event at Pennsylvania State University in State College, Pennsylvania.





The idea is to fire up "surge" voters and motivate them to go to the polls again in this November's midterm elections. According to national exit polls from 2008, 11 percent of people who cast ballots in the presidential contest said they were first time voters, and seven out of 10 of those new voters said they backed Obama in the election. Many of those people were young voters, and exit polls indicated that two-thirds of people age 18-29 voted for Obama.





In advance to Tuesday's rallies, the president held a conference call with college and university journalists.





"You can't sit it out. You can't suddenly just check in once every 10 years or so, on an exciting presidential election, and then not pay attention during big mid-term elections where we've got a real big choice between Democrats and Republicans," Obama said.





There's no mistake in the locations for the Obama and Biden rallies. In Wisconsin and Pennsylvania, the Democrats face tough odds in holding onto open Senate seats and governorships. Polls also indicate that Republicans have a good chance of grabbing back a bunch of House seats.





Also on the road Tuesday: Democratic National Committee Chairman Tim Kaine, at a rally at the University of Delaware in Newark, Delaware; Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius at the University of Maryland in College Park, Maryland; Labor Secretary Hilda Solis at California State University in Los Angeles; and United States Trade Representative Ron Kirk at North Carolina Central University in Durham, North Carolina.





Obama's speech at the University of Wisconsin is the first in what Democratic Party officials say will be a series of "Moving America Forward" events by the president over the next couple of weeks.

***

(CNN Student News) -- Students will examine Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.'s famous "I Have a Dream" speech. Also, they will compose responses to Dr. King in which they compare his historic vision of racial equality in the United States to the reality of present-day life.

Procedure

In class discussion, have students define the following terms: racism, prejudice and discrimination. Have them give examples of each. Inform students that, on August 28, 1963, Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. shared his vision of racial equality in America in his historic "I Have a Dream" speech. Then, point out that in his speech, Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. spoke of being judged not by the color of one's skin, but by the content of his or her character.

Direct your students to read or watch Dr. King's famous "I Have a Dream" speech and discuss its content in class. Then, challenge each student to compare Dr. King's dream to the reality of life in the U.S. in the year 2009. Direct each student to compose a response to Dr. King, explaining what life is like in the U.S. today and to what extent his dream has been realized. (Encourage students to be creative in their responses. For example, students could write a letter, a speech, a song or a poem, or produce a brief video.) After students share their responses to Dr. King, pose the following questions for class discussion:

Correlated Standards

Social Studies

II. Time, Continuity and Change Social studies programs should include experiences that provide for the study of the ways human beings view themselves in and over time.

X. Civic Ideals and Practices Social studies programs should include experiences that provide for the study of the ideals, principles, and practices of citizenship in a democratic republic.

The Curriculum Standards for Social Studies (http://www.socialstudies.org/standards/strands/ ) are published by the National Council for Social Studies (http://www.socialstudies.org/ ).

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN)  -- Fifteen first ladies from African nations will attend a two-day summit in Los Angeles on health, women's issues and HIV/AIDS, organizers said Friday.



Actors Billy Zane and Sharon Stone, with Ted Alemayhu and Jean Stephane Biatcha, help announce the summit.



The conference, which begins Monday, is organized by U.S. Doctors for Africa (USDFA) and African Synergy Against AIDS and Suffering, a nonprofit organization formed by 22 first ladies from Africa. Sponsors include the RAND Corporation, General Electric, the World Health Organization and others.



"Empowering Africa's first ladies is an innovative approach to bettering the lives of millions of Africans," USDFA Chairman Ted Alemayhu said in a written statement. "The summit will pair these leaders with U.S. experts, key political figures and important organizations to create ongoing partnerships."



The event will include a summit, a gala and a private party.



Expected attendees include the first ladies of Angola, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Kenya, Lesotho, Mozambique, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Tanzania, Swaziland and Zambia.



Maria Shriver, the wife of California Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger, will give opening remarks, according to a USDFA statement.



Other celebrities expected to attend include Maria Bello, Diane Lane, Jessica Alba, Sharon Stone, Blair Underwood, Joely Fisher, Kristin Davis and Camryn Manheim, USDFA told CNN.



Grammy award-winning singer Natalie Cole will perform at the gala, the organization said.

***

(CNN)  -- First trip to Malmo? Here's some insider advice to help you get the most out of your visit.

Locals like to take a cold dip after a sauna at Ribersborgs Kallbadhus.

Getting around town Most of Malmo's attractions are reachable by foot, but flat terrain and an abundance of cycle paths also make the city ideal to explore by bike. Rentals run around 120 kronor. You can also jump on the eco-friendly buses that criss-cross the city. Visit the tourist office at Central Station for maps. If you opt for a taxi, be sure to set the price of the trip with the driver before setting off.

Ice cool  For more than a century, locals have been visiting the Ribersborgs Kallbadhus for a steam in the sauna followed by a dip in the Baltic. The swimming baths are open year-round. If you want to blend in with the locals, brave the elements and hit the baths in the winter for an icy plunge. A better time to visit for the less adventurous is in the summer, when the baths are open for sunbathing.

Living green  As part of its post-industrial transformation, Malmo has become a leader in environmental design. The city's green achievements are reflected by the Bo01 housing development, a waterfront regeneration project with a focus on environmentally-friendly living. For the latest in green design, visit the Western Harbor and Augustenborg neighborhoods. For a more informed look, contact the local Environmental Department, which occasionally offers free guided tours of the city's ecologically sustainable areas.

Around the Sound  Malmo is located just 35 minutes by train from the Danish capital of Copenhagen, and every day thousands travel between the two cities via the Oresund Bridge. Trains leave from Malmo every 20 minutes for most of the day. After midnight, service is less frequent.

The two cities are part of Scandinavia's Oresund region -- the transnational area made up of southern Sweden and eastern Denmark. The best way to explore the Oresund region is with an "Around the Sound" ticket, which gives you access to all the trains you need to travel around the area, including the ride across the Oresund Bridge. You can make as many stops as you want as long as you travel in one direction. Tickets are good for two days and also get you discounts to the major attractions in the region. Prices depend on how far you travel and start from 199 kronor.

Feasting on crayfish  Swedes are crazy about crayfish, and outdoor festivities celebrating the crustacean are held across the nation to mark the end of summer. In Malmo, head to Stortorget, the city's main square, for one of the biggest crayfish parties in the world. The massive celebration is held annually to kick off the popular Malmo Festival. Swedes like their crayfish cooked in salty water infused with dill. Blend in with the locals by eating it cold with toast and beer. To really get into the tradition, wash down the crayfish with akvavit, a Scandinavian kind of vodka.

***

ATLANTA, Georgia (CNN) -- Authorities arrested two high school students in suburban Atlanta on Thursday after they were warned that one of the students planned to "do harm" at the school with a weapon, police said.



Several schools in Woodstock, Gerogia, were on lockdown after authorities found a gun in a bathroom ceiling.



Sgt. Jay Baker of the Cherokee County Sheriff's Office said Woodstock Middle School, Woodstock High School and Etowah High School were put on lockdown -- meaning no one could enter or leave the buildings -- after authorities learned of the threat.



Police arrested Forrest Busby, 17, at Woodstock High School and found a revolver he is said to have brought to school and hid in the bathroom ceiling, authorities said.



A subsequent search of Busby's home turned up an AR-15 semi-automatic rifle and a Mini-14 assault rifle, as well as 200 rounds of ammunition, Baker said in a statement. Six marijuana plants were discovered in the student's closet.



A 15-year-old student was also arrested in connection with the incident, the statement said.



Baker said another student is being interviewed by authorities but has not been charged in the case.



Busby has been charged with possession of a weapon on school grounds, carrying a concealed weapon and manufacturing and distributing a controlled substance, among other counts.



He's being held without bail at the Cherokee County Adult Detention Center, the sheriff's statement said.



The 15-year-old has been charged as an accomplice on various weapons violations and is being held at the Paulding Youth Detention Center.



The lockdown orders for the schools were lifted after the weapons were recovered, Baker said.



Woodstock is about 30 miles north of downtown Atlanta.

***

(CNN) -- A timeline of events leading to the April 20 explosion on the Deepwater Horizon oil rig in the Gulf of Mexico, according to documents from congressional investigators and testimony from witnesses to the disaster:





^12:35 a.m.





Oilfield services contractor Halliburton completes cementing on BP's Mississippi Canyon 252 well. In the hours leading up to midafternoon, crews conduct three positive pressure tests, in which fluid weight is placed on the seal.





^11 a.m.





BP and Transocean executives argue over changes in the drill plan for the well at a meeting aboard the rig.





^5:05 p.m.





An unexpected loss of fluid is observed in the riser pipe, suggesting there are leaks in the blowout preventer, a critical piece of equipment designed to shut down the well in the event of an emergency.





^5-7 p.m.





Negative pressure tests, in which crews reduce fluid pressure to test for leaks through the cement or well casing, show unexpected results. One draws 15 barrels of liquid out of the well instead of the expected five, raising more concerns about leaks. In a second, pressure on the rig's "kill line" -- a high-pressure pipe used to cut off the flow of oil -- falls to zero, while rising to 1,400 pounds per square inch in the drill line, indicating a buildup of natural gas.





^8 p.m.





BP ends testing and proceeds to replace remaining drill fluids with seawater. A BP investigator later suggests this is a "fundamental mistake."





^9:00 p.m.





More fluid is reported flowing out of the well than is being pumped in.





^9:10 p.m.





Well pump is shut down for a "sheen" test, but the well continues to flow. Drill pipe pressure unexpectedly increases.





^9:30 p.m.





Abnormal pressures and more fluid returns are observed. The well pump is abruptly shut down.





^9:50 p.m.





Gas surges from the well and up the riser. The supply ship Damon B. Bankston, which is tied up alongside Deepwater Horizon, reports drilling fluid spilling onto its deck and is told to move back 500 meters from the rig. Seconds later, the first explosion occurs.





^9:52 p.m.





Deepwater Horizon issues distress call. The order is given to abandon the rig. Eleven of the 126 on board are lost at sea when the platform sinks two days later.

***

(CNN) -- Suspected Somali pirates hijacked a Greek-owned bulk carrier Wednesday with 22 crew members aboard, according to the European Union's Naval Force for Somalia.



MV Filitsa was seized in the early morning about 460 miles (740 kilometers) northeast of the Seychelles as it headed toward Durban, South Africa, according to a news release from EU NAVFOR Somalia.



The Marshall Island-flagged carrier -- with three Greek and 19 Filipino crew members -- "has now turned around and is heading north," it said. The bulk carrier has a deadweight of more than 23,000 tons.



There have been more than 100 pirate attacks and at least 39 hijackings off the east Africa this year, according to EU NAVFOR.



In late October, Somali pirates seized a private yacht in the Indian Ocean, taking Paul and Rachel Chandler hostage. They have demanded a $7 million ransom for the British couple's release, but the government has refused to pay as a matter of long-standing policy.



Two vessels were attacked the day after the Chandlers set sail. One of them -- a cargo ship -- was successfully boarded and seized off the Seychelles, while the other fought off its attackers near the Kenyan coast.



Pirates are still holding a Spanish fishing boat, the Alakrana, which they seized on October 2 off Somalia's coast. Days later, they transferred three of the fishing boat's 36 crew members to land.



Two pirate suspects had left the Alakrana in a small vessel heading toward land, authorities said, and the Spanish military swooped in to stop them on the high seas. They were later brought to Madrid, where a judge has charged them with piracy and kidnapping.



The pirates holding the crew have demanded Spain release the two suspects.



Spain is part of the European Union task force against piracy in the Indian Ocean off Somalia. The Spanish parliament last January agreed to increase Spain's presence with up to 395 troops and assets, including a frigate and aircraft.



CNN's Al Goodman contributed to this report

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- He's the man who has just rejected offers of up to $700,000 a week in wages -- but who really is Kaka? And what has he done to deserve so much money?



Wanted man: Kaka overcame a spine fracture before getting to the top of world football.



Born in Brazil in 1982, Ricardo Izecson dos Santos Leite, or "Kaka" as he is more commonly known, is a footballer with Italian club AC Milan.



His name, Kaka, is believed to come from a brother, who began calling him that due to his inability to say his proper name -- Ricardo.



Said to be an amazing talent from a very young age, the attacking midfielder began his career with Sao Paulo at the tender age of eight, and had signed his first contract before his 16th birthday.



Do you think Kaka should have stayed at AC Milan or taken the money at Manchester City? Tell us in the Sound Off box below.



However, when all seemed set for a perfect career, Kaka suffered a serious, potentially paralyzing injury from a swimming pool accident in 2000. The then 18-year-old fractured a vertebra in his spine -- an injury that many thought could have ended his career and even prevented him from walking again.



Kaka did recover though, and it's something that the deeply religious Brazilian has put down to the help of God, and ever since has given some of his income to his Church.



Once recovered, he didn't waste time in getting his career restarted.



By January 2001 he had made his debut in the Sao Paulo senior team and led the team to its first Torneio Rio-Sao Paulo championship.



The following year he was a part of the Brazil team which won the 2002 FIFA World Cup, and in 2003 his talents had attracted the interest of European clubs and he signed to AC Milan for euro 9 million ($12 million) per season, and remains under contract with them through 2013.



Since then he's won the Serie A, UEFA Champions League and FIFA Club World Cup with AC Milan, while on a personal level he won the 2007 Ballon d'Or Award for the best player in Europe and the FIFA World Player of the Year 2007 -- among many other awards.



His international performances have continued to be strong -- and he has now scored 23 goals for Brazil.



Such is his influence inside and outside of football, that Kaka was named in the Time 100 most influential people in 2008.



Outside of the game Kaka has continued to be a devout Christian. He married his long-time partner Caroline Celico in 2005, and they had their first child in June 2008.



Oddly, the current season (in which he finds himself being offered the biggest football salary ever) hasn't been as profitable for Kaka.



The 26-year-old has struggled with a groin injury and has not managed to combine as smoothly within the AC Milan team compared to previous seasons.



Still, that did not seem to worry Manchester City -- or Real Madrid, and for now at least, the $150 million transfer effort remains the biggest in football's history.

***

Washington (CNN)  -- President Obama said he wouldn't pat himself on the back for his first year in office, but said Wednesday he showed he can make tough decisions that were unpopular.



In a year-end interview with PBS, Obama said he was "entirely dissatisfied" with the high unemployment rate still facing Americans as the economic recession ends.



"I don't pat myself on the back," Obama said. But his administration deserved credit for making good decisions on major problems it inherited, including the recession, wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and other issues, he said.



Without specifying any issue, Obama said he demonstrated that his administration was willing to face tough decisions.



"I think I've shown this year that I can make hard decisions, even when they're not popular," the president said.



Last month, Obama decided to send an additional 30,000 U.S. troops to Afghanistan to bolster the counterinsurgency strategy favored by military commanders on the ground. The move was criticized by some fellow Democrats and favored by most Republicans.



Obama also moved forward on plans to shut the Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, detention facility and bring some suspected terrorists held there to a U.S. prison in Illinois. The plan has been heavily criticized by Republicans.



In addition, the president made health care reform his domestic priority for 2009 and endorsed sweeping provisions contained in a bill passed by the House and on the verge of final passage by the Senate.



Republican opposition to the health care legislation has been almost unanimous, and concessions made during the Senate debate have caused some Democrats to question the value of the measure scheduled for a final vote on Thursday.



Obama rejected criticism from some liberals that a final bill would be too watered down, saying in the PBS interview that the bill delivered most of the benefits he listed when the debate began back in January.



"This notion that somehow this health care bill that's emerging should be grudgingly accepted by Democrats as half a loaf" is wrong, Obama said. "This is 95 percent of the loaf."

***

(CNN)  -- John Daly dazzled the galleries at the Italian Open with his garish clothing but stayed in contention for the title after a second successive 69 in Turin.



Daly rolls a putt during his second round of 69 at the Italian Open.



Sporting a lime green top with a pair of psychedelic trousers, Daly was looking to improve on his tie for 31st in the Spanish Open.



The two-time major champion is playing on the European Tour after being handed a six-month ban in the United States after a series of lurid headlines.



But clearly showing the benefits of losing 20kg after having a gastric band fitted, Daly has shown glimpses of his best form.



"Yesterday could have been really low, but today could have been really high," he told the official European Tour Web site www.europeantour.com.



"I didn't hit it that great and one-putted the first five greens."



Daly was partnering home hope and 2007 champion Francesco Molinari and while struggled early on,  the Italian packed an eagle and two birdies into his first four holes to go joint leader.



But he then slipped back to five-under as he matched Daly with a 69.



Daniel Vancsik of Argentina was setting the pace on the second day after carding a six-under 65 for a halfway total of nine-under 133.



Daly, who had not played for four months before teeing up in Spain, will look to continue his improved form in lucrative upcoming events.



It was confirmed on Friday that he is to extend his stay by playing in the European Open at the London Club from May 28-31.



It will be a first appearance in the tournament by the "Wild Thing" who is promoting a new range of clothing to match his more slimline figure.

***

(CNN) -- Acoustic rocker John Mayer has bowed out of a series of concerts after suffering from "something next to my vocal cords called a granuloma," he said in a statement released Friday.





The singer and songwriter said he had undergone months of monitoring, but the condition -- a small area of tissue inflammation that most often occurs in the lungs -- had prevented him from going ahead with the performances.





"I'm bummed to have to bow out of both the iheartradio Music Festival in Las Vegas and an appearance with Tony Bennett in Los Angeles," he said in the statement. "I know there were people depending on me to be there and I'm sorry that I can't be on those stages."





Mayer's soon-to-be-released album "Born and Raised" also will be delayed.





It's "complete as far as music recording, song selection, and in some cases mixing," he said. "But because of this condition I couldn't finish singing on several of the tracks."





The album, as a result, will be released next year "instead of this fall or winter."





"This is a temporary setback, though I'm not sure how long or short a period of time it will be," he said. "I've got the best doctors in the country looking after me and I will be singing and touring again as soon as I get the all clear."





Mayer said he plans to spend the down time writing and composing, and "kicking an empty soup can around the West Village."

***

BERLIN, Germany (CNN) -- U.S. officials urged American citizens in Germany to keep a low profile and remain wary of their surroundings after the terrorist organization al Qaeda posted a video message threatening attacks in the country.



German special police patrol in Berlin last month during a visit by Israeli Prime Minister Benajmin Netanyahu.



A State Department travel alert, issued Wednesday, remains in effect until November 11 -- two weeks after Germany holds its federal elections on Sunday.



Al Qaeda posted its video threat on the Internet on September 18, vowing attacks if the elections do not come out the way it wants.



The same day, the German government reacted to the video by raising its own alert level and heightening security.



The British Foreign Office has also issued an advisory to its citizens living and traveling to Germany.



The State Department travel alert asks Americans to keep abreast of news reports and consider the security procedures in place when they visit public places or pick hotels and restaurants.



Germany's interior ministry said earlier this month that the country has noted an increase in threats by al Qaeda and other Islamist groups since the beginning of the year.



In the nearly 26-minute video statement, a man identified as Bekay Harrach, using the pseudonym Abu Talha and speaking in German, said that, if the September 27 elections vote into power parties that do not pledge to pull German troops from Afghanistan, there will be a "rude awakening."



The speaker called on Muslims living in Germany to stay away from public life during the first two weeks after the elections, implying that any attacks would take place then.



The speaker repeatedly criticized German Chancellor Angela Merkel and her support of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.



He also criticized Merkel's rivals, the Social Democrats, but offered the possibility of a "peace offer."



"If the German people vote for peace, then the Mujahedeen will choose peace with Germany as well," he said. "And with the withdrawal of the last German soldier from Afghanistan, the last Mujahed will also leave Germany. Al Qaeda gives you their word."

***

(CNN) -- In a case that drew national attention because it was to be videotaped, convicted murderer Andrew Grant DeYoung was executed by lethal injection Thursday night, a corrections department spokeswoman said.





DeYoung was declared dead at 8:04 p.m. at the Georgia Diagnostic and Classification Prison in Jackson, said Joan Heath, the spokeswoman. His last words were: "I'm sorry for everyone I've hurt," according to the Atlanta Journal-Constitution, which was one of the media outlets granted access to the execution.  The execution occurred after the state Supreme Court denied DeYoung's motion to take another look at a lower court judge's decision Tuesday allowing the state to replace sodium thiopental with pentobarbital as the anesthetizing agent in the execution, the court's statement said.





That lower court judge's ruling, however, did approve the rare videotaping of the execution at the request of DeYoung's attorneys, who argued that the substitution of drugs would cause needless pain and suffering.





For the first time in Georgia, a videographer was present in the execution chamber to document DeYoung's death and his reaction to a new three-drug lethal injection that anti-death penalty activists said caused unnecessary pain and suffering, according to reports in the Atlanta Journal-Constitution.  On October 13, 1995, DeYoung was convicted in Cobb County of fatally stabbing his parents, Kathryn and Gary DeYoung, and his 14-year-old sister, Sarah.





His final meal was an institutional one -- chicken and rice, Heath said.





DeYoung's special request for pizza, breadsticks, all-fruit strawberry preserves, Concord grape juice and vanilla ice cream was carried out on Wednesday, Heath said.





With Thursday's execution, Georgia has put to death 51 men since the U.S. Supreme Court reinstated the death penalty in 1973. DeYoung was the 28th inmate put to death by lethal injection, the state corrections department said.





CNN's Bill Mears and Michael Martinez contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Caroline Wozniacki has earned a career-high world No. 2 tennis ranking after winning through to the final of the BNP Paribas Open at Indian Wells in California.





The second-seeded Dane will move above the injured Dinara Safina and close the gap on No. 1 Serena Williams when the latest standings are released on Monday.





The 19-year-old will play former world No. 1 Jelena Jankovic in the final of the Californian outdoor hardcourt tournament after defeating close friend Agnieszka Radwanska 6-2 6-3 on Friday night.





Wozniacki, who reached the U.S. Open final last year before losing to comeback queen Kim Clijsters, will be seeking her seventh title on the WTA Tour.





She dominated against fifth seed Radwanska, winning the first five games of the opening set and then taking the final four points off the Pole's serve in the match-clinching game.





"We know each other so well. We know each other's strengths and weaknesses," Wozniacki told the tournament's official Web site.





"Agnieszka is a great fighter. She doesn't give up. I knew that I had to fight till the last point to win this match.





"She actually owes me an ice cream. She thought we were going to play first match, and I said, 'No, we're going to play late, or 7:30.' Then we made a bet, as well, and I won, so at least I get an ice cream. But I have to buy dinner."





Wozniacki has lost all four previous encounters with sixth seed Jankovic, who defeated Australian eighth seed Samantha Stosur 6-2 6-4 earlier on Friday.





The Serbian, now ranked ninth, has reached the final at Indian Wells for the first time in nine appearances, and will be looking to emulate compatriots Ana Ivanovic and Novak Djokovic by clinching the title there.





"I thought the key to today's match was my return," Jankovic said. "Samantha has an unbelievable serve, one of the best serves in women's game, and I was able to return a lot of her first serves.





"I was putting a lot of pressure on her second serve. So I think that was the key, because I was able to break her quite a few times. And then it made everything easier for me."





Stosur, who knocked out defending champion in the fourth round, will break into the top-10 following her exploits this week.





"Today was a bit disappointing, but it's still my best result in a tournament like this. I think there's a lot to build on," she said.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN)  -- While nearly all maritime activity on the Potomac River will be halted on Inauguration Day, a handful of Mall-goers will sail from Virginia to Washington on water taxis.



Some people will cross the Potomac River via water taxi on Inauguration Day.



Working closely with the United States Coast Guard, the Potomac Riverboat Company, based in Alexandria, Virginia, plans to ferry up to 3,200 passengers from across the frigid Potomac on seven climate-controlled boats.



The service is partially a response to the closure of all bridges from Virginia to D.C. on Inauguration Day, a measure that prompted an uproar among Virginia residents.



According to maritime authorities in charge of the region, PRC is the only company being allowed to taxi across the river on the 20th.



"Because the taxi service provided us with a security plan that we examined and deemed adequate to provide good security, I granted them a waiver to operate at an increased security level," National Capitol Region Port Captain Brian Kelley says.



"The taxis are going to operate on a strict schedule and a strict route."



The Coast Guard established a temporary security zone on waterways in the National Capitol Region, stepping up restrictions day-by-day leading up to 11 p.m. on January 19. At that point, all vessels must be docked and only boats with an approved sail plan will be allowed to operate.



John Lake, a ship captain and the general manager of the company, said the sail plan he submitted was approved only a week ago and details nearly every move taxis will make.



"All the departures are scheduled times. And those departures are supposed to leave on-time," Lake said. "We have to call in on each departure to the Coast Guard, let them know we're preparing to get under way, and get the permission, basically, to get under way."



The boats depart the Alexandria Marina for the 40-minute trip beginning around 6 a.m. and must be docked on the southwest D.C. shore by 10 a.m. From there, it's a cold, mile-long walk to the Mall, so Lake has some advice for passengers.



"Show up early to get through the security check and dress warm," he said. "It's going to be nice and toasty on the boat, but not so much outside."



Return trips, tentatively scheduled for around 6 p.m., are not allowed to depart D.C. until after the inaugural parade events have concluded and President Obama is secured.



In keeping with the Coast Guard's security measures, Lake says all passengers must arrive at least an hour early for a full screening. Passengers that want to stay in D.C. after the early evening departures will have to find other transport back across the Potomac.



PRC Vice President Charlotte Hall says tickets went on sale Monday and the initial response from customers has been enthusiastic.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- A backlog in processing education benefits has forced the Department of Veterans Affairs to authorize millions of dollars in emergency funds for veterans who need the cash to pay for school.



The Veterans Affairs department will give up to $3,000 to students who haven't received funds from education bills



The department announced Friday that it will issue up to $3,000 to students who have yet to receive the funds that the VA's various education bills -- including the recently passed Post-9/11 GI Bill -- provide to help veterans pay for college.



"This is an extraordinary action we're taking," VA Secretary Eric Shinseki said in a statement. "But it's necessary because we recognize the hardships some of our Veterans face."



The VA estimates there are 75,000 veterans eligible for the emergency funds, including 25,000 veterans who have served since September 11.



VA statistics show more than 27,500 vets have already received benefits for housing or books under the new Post-9/11 GI Bill, and hundreds of thousands more have gotten benefits under its other programs.



The delay in processing the benefits has created much consternation among veterans, with some worried they would have to drop out of school because of a lack of funds. The lag was caused because some schools have not yet filed for the tuition and because of a backlog at the Veterans Affairs offices, according to a department official.



Any money given to eligible veterans will be deducted from the education benefits they are scheduled to receive and can be used for housing and books. The VA has been speaking to schools to ensure that veterans do not get kicked out if their tuition has not yet been paid, said VA spokeswoman Katie Roberts.



"Veterans were having a lot of financial issues, and we needed to address them," she said.



To help with the influx of applications, the department has hired more than 700 extra processors.



Veterans groups said the emergency funds were much needed.



"AMVETS is very happy with the swift action taken by the secretary. We suggested a similar solution earlier this month so we are happy to see they're listening," said Ryan Galluci, a spokesman for AMVETS, a veterans' service organization.

***

(CNN) -- A Florida court has approved the divorce of the father of Haleigh Cummings, a Florida girl who disappeared in February, and the girl's stepmother, a key witness in the case.



Ronald Cummings divorced his wife, Misty, who was the last person to see his daughter, Haleigh.



Ronald Cummings, 25, cites irreconcilable differences in ending his short marriage to his 17-year-old wife, whom he married more than a month after Haleigh went missing from her father's home in Satsuma, Florida, on February 9. Cummings has made several public pleas for information in her disappearance.



Misty Cummings, then known as Misty Croslin, was the last person known to have seen Haleigh the night she disappeared from the family's rented mobile home. The teenager said she tucked Haleigh and her 4-year-old brother into bed about 8 p.m. and went to sleep herself two hours later, but awoke at 3 a.m. to find the girl missing and a cinder block propping open a back door.



Ronald Cummings called police and reported his daughter missing when he returned from work at dawn.



Investigators have said they do not feel Misty Cummings has told them everything she knows.



"The police have been telling me that I've been keeping Misty under my wing and that's why she hasn't talked to the cops," Ronald Cummings told a HLN's "Nancy Grace" producer earlier in October. "So now, here you go, I divorced her. So now go find my baby."



The Putnam County Sheriff's office said in August that "the evidence and investigatory effort has minimized the likelihood that Haleigh's disappearance is the work of a stranger." Ronald Cummings and Crystal Sheffield, Haleigh's mother, are not considered suspects, police said.



"Investigators believe that Misty Croslin-Cummings continues to hold important answers in the case," the sheriff's office said in a written statement. "She has failed to provide any sort of detailed accounting of the hours during the late evening and early morning of Haleigh's disappearance. Furthermore, physical evidence at the scene contradicts Misty's sketchy account of her evening activities."



Croslin has not been named a person of interest or suspect in the case. In televised interviews, Croslin has said she does not know what happened to the little girl, while also saying she believed "the other side of the family" knows where she is.



The couple lived together for about six months before marrying in March.



Under the divorce settlement approved Thursday by a St. John's County court, both sides permanently and irrevocably waive any rights to alimony and other types of financial payments.

***

San Bernardino, California (CNN) -- A man accused of shooting and paralyzing a U.S. Army soldier at a homecoming party pleaded not guilty to all charges at his arraignment Thursday.





Ruben Jurado, 19, faces a charge of attempted murder in the shooting of Army Spc. Christopher Sullivan on Friday night at a homecoming party in Sullivan's native San Bernardino, California.





Jurado also faces four "special allegations involving premeditation and the use and discharge of a firearm, causing great bodily injury," said Christopher Lee, spokesman for the San Bernardino County District Attorney's Office.





"Special allegations" can add to a convict's sentence in California.





Jurado entered court Thursday in an orange jail jumpsuit, with his hands and ankles shackled. The arraignment lasted only a few minutes.





Three of Sullivan's relatives attended.





The next court date is scheduled for January 9.





The defense team expects to receive "initial discovery of police reports and any other evidence that the district attorney has," defense attorney Michael Holmes said Wednesday. He noted that the court "allows video arraignment" but said Jurado "wanted to be present in court during the entire process."





The party in Sullivan's honor was to celebrate his recent return to California from Kentucky, where he was stationed while recovering from wounds sustained in a suicide bombing a year ago in Afghanistan. That bombing killed five members of his unit and left him with a cracked collarbone and brain damage, according to the San Bernardino County Sun. Sullivan received the Purple Heart.





At the party, Sullivan was shot twice after an argument and physical confrontation with Jurado, who fled the scene, according to police and witnesses.





The fight broke out after Jurado and Sullivan's younger brother began arguing about football, the brothers' mother, Suzanne Sullivan, said.





Jurado turned himself in to authorities in Chino Hills, California, on Monday afternoon, said Lt. Gwendolyn Waters.





Suzanne Sullivan said her family is having a difficult time coming to terms with what happened.





"He once told me that if defending this country takes his life, so be it," she said. "But to see he survived that, and now for this to happen to him, just breaks my heart."





CNN's Stan Wilson, Stella Chan, Adam Blaker, Carey Bodenheimer, and Josh Levs contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Jury selection in the case of a deadly 2007 Connecticut home invasion was postponed Monday because the suspect was hospitalized, his defense attorney said.





Steven Hayes was in intensive care, attorney Thomas Ullmann said.





Jury selection in Hayes' murder trial was delayed. A status conference was scheduled for Wednesday, Ullmann said.





"We have no idea how long this is going to take," the attorney added.





Hayes, 46, is one of two men charged with offenses including felony murder, kidnapping, sexual assault and arson in the July 2007 home invasion in Cheshire, Connecticut.





Prosecutors allege that Hayes and Joshua Komisarjevsky, 29, broke into the home of the Petit family. They say the two beat up Dr. William Petit; strangled his 48-year-old wife, Jennifer Hawke-Petit; and set the home ablaze. The couple's two daughters, 17-year-old Hayley Petit and 11-year-old Michaela Petit, died from smoke inhalation.





Trial's start stirs painful memories in Cheshire





Ullmann said he did not know why Hayes was hospitalized, but the Hartford Courant, citing unnamed sources, said he apparently overdosed on medication he receives daily. Superior Court Judge Jon C. Blue said in court Monday that Ullmann told him Hayes was found unconscious in his cell and may be in a medically induced coma.





The University of Connecticut Medical Center referred questions Monday to the Connecticut Department of Correction. The department declined comment, citing a court-imposed gag order in the case.





Authorities allege that during the Petit home invasion, one of the attackers drove Hawke-Petit to a bank to withdraw money. She was able to alert a bank teller that the family was being held captive, and the teller alerted police, authorities said.





Media reports said that Hawke-Petit and Michaela Petit were sexually assaulted during the seven-hour ordeal. Prosecutors have declined to confirm details because of the gag order.





The motive in the case remains unclear. Hayes and Komisarjevsky, who is set to be tried separately, could face the death penalty if convicted.

***

(CNN) -- Chelsea manager Andre Villas-Boas has defended Fernando Torres after the striker missed an open goal during the club's 3-1 defeat to Manchester United on Sunday.





Villas-Boas, 33, saw his team fall 3-0 behind in the first half at Old Trafford, through goals from Chris Smalling, Nani and Wayne Rooney, before Spain international Torres clawed one back for Chelsea with his first goal of the season early in the second half.





But former Liverpool forward Torres spurned a golden opportunity after 83 minutes, as he fired wide from close range having rounded United goalkeeper David de Gea.





Despite his error, Villas-Boas stood by Torres, 27, and pointed to England international Rooney's second-half penalty miss as proof that even the best strikers can be unlucky.





"Two of the best world strikers missed crazy opportunities," the former Porto coach told a post-match press conference.





"It happened to Fernando, but it also happened to Rooney. It's nothing dramatic, sometimes these balls go in. I think luck didn't fall on our side."





Former Atletico Madrid star Torres has struggled for form since joining Chelsea from English Premier League rivals Liverpool in January, with his goal on Sunday only his second for the London outfit and his first since a 4-1 win over West Ham in April.





If Torres had converted his late opportunity the score would have stood at 3-2, and Villas-Boas was left to wonder what might have been.





"I think 3-2, in that period of the game, could have given us the mental edge ... It would leave us completely exposed at the back, but we would take the risk trying to get the draw."





Chelsea had numerous attempts at goal during an open match, with Brazil midfielder Ramires also guilty of spurning a good opportunity while the score was only 1-0.





"We are pretty happy with how the team reacted to such a negative impact at half time, when the team was playing well. We cannot say the team was playing awful and that 3-0 at half time was a fair result."





Villas-Boas also bemoaned the officiating in the match, claiming English champions United scored their opening two goals from offside positions.





"It didn't fall our way in every kind of the word, not only in terms of goalscoring opportunities but in terms of refereeing decisions or the linesman's decisions ...They influenced the game, it's 2-0 instead of 0-0."





The defeat was Chelsea's first under Villas-Boas and the four-time English title winners have collected 10 points from their first five matches.





Their next Premier League fixtures will see them entertain newly-promoted Swansea City at Stamford Bridge on Saturday.

***

ADDIS ABABA, Ethiopia (CNN) -- African leaders have chosen Libyan President Moammar Gadhafi as chairman of the African Union, according to Ethiopian and Libyan official news agencies.



Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi will chair the African Union for one year.



At a closed session on Monday, the 53-member Assembly of the African Union Heads of State and Government elected Gadhafi to replace the Tanzanian President, Jakaya Kikwete, who held the position for the last year.



Chairmanship of the AU went to the northern African nation because the post is a rotating position held by heads of state for one year.



According to Libya's official news agency, Gadhafi will attempt in his new role "to take a decision on establishing an executive instrument for the AU, to push Africa forward to become African united states, such as the United States of Africa."



U.S. State Department spokesman Robert Wood answered only in general terms about how the United States would deal with its former adversary as the AU president.



"In terms of our working with the AU, we're going to continue, because we have a lot of interests and joint interest in terms of trying to bring peace and stability and economic development and delivery of humanitarian assistance to the continent where it's needed," Wood said.



"And so the AU is an important partner for us. It will continue to be. And we'll just have to see how it goes."



The United States named Libya a state sponsor of terrorism in 1979 and severed diplomatic relations in 1981 after years of strained relations following a 1969 coup that left Gadhafi as head of the government.



But the two countries moved closer after Libya agreed to pay restitution to families of victims of the 1988 bombing of a Pan Am jet over Lockerbie, Scotland, and announced its decision to abandon a weapons of mass destruction program.



The United States removed Libya from the list of state sponsors of terrorism and restored full diplomatic relations in 2006.

***

(CNN) -- Myanmar's pro-democracy leader Aung San Suu Kyi is "ready to cooperate" with the government and is committed to pursuing a dialogue with the ruling junta, according to a statement the United Nations' special envoy to Myanmar read Thursday on her behalf.



Activists display a portrait of detained democracy leader, Aung San Suu Kyi, in Myanmar.



"It is my duty to give constant and serious considerations to the interests and opinions of as broad a range of political organizations and forces as possible," Ibrahim Gambari said, reading the statement from Suu Kyi.



On Friday Suu Kyi was able to meet with three executive members of her National League for Democracy and a party spokesman -- the first time they have met in more than three years.



Members of her party said Suu Kyi was "very optimistic" about prospects of the process for reconciliation, the Associated Press reported.



The Nobel Peace Prize winner has said she will continue to be "guided by the policies and wishes" of the opposition political party she heads -- the National League for Democracy.



In the statement, Suu Kyi also welcomed the appointment of Aung Kyi as the minister of relations, a position the junta created last month to be a liaison between government and Suu Kyi, whom the junta has under house arrest in Yangon.



She has been confined to her home for the better part of almost two decades.



Aung Kyi -- viewed as a moderate -- was appointed as the liaison officer amid international pressure following September's bloody crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrations.



As many as 110 people are believed to have been killed in the violence, including 40 Buddhist monks.



Video smuggled out of the country showed unarmed protesters being beaten by the military regime's security forces, and one man -- believed to be a Japanese journalist -- was shot and killed at close range.



The protests were sparked by a huge fuel price increase imposed by the military government, and quickly escalated.



Myanmar's military junta said in mid-October that it had detained more than 2,900 people during the crackdown. Many of them are still believed to be in custody.



Suu Kyi described her October 25 meeting with the liaison officer as "constructive," said the statement read by Gambari. "I look forward to further regular discussions."



Gambari said he will return this week to New York to brief U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon on the five-day trip to Myanmar, also called Burma.



The situation in the secretive Asian nation is not what it was "a few weeks ago," said a U.N. statement released in conjunction with the end of Gambari's trip.



"We now have a process going which would lead to substantive dialogue between the government and Daw Aung San Suu Kyi," the statement said.



"The sooner such a dialogue can start, the better for Myanmar."



During his trip, Gambari met with Myanmar's prime minister, Gen. Thein Sein, and other government officials, as well as Suu Kyi, the United Nations reported. E-mail to a friend

***

ATLANTA, Georgia (CNN) -- Even though she was born without arms, Jessica Cox never says "can't."

Jessica Cox, 25, uses her life story to inspire young people to face challenges head-on.

She was determined to become a pilot, and she did.

Not only has she mastered flying with her feet, but she also earned a black belt in tae kwon do and can legally drive a car.

Cox also conquered otherwise mundane challenges like putting in contacts, text messaging, and applying makeup.

Instead of saying she can't do something, Cox prefers to say, "I haven't figured it out yet."  Watch more of the interview with Jessica Cox Â»

CNN's Nicole Lapin spoke to Cox about her determination to overcome obstacles. The following is an edited transcript of the interview:

Nicole Lapin: [Your dad] said to us he never shed a tear for you.

Jessica Cox: He never saw me as a victim. I never had that as an excuse, that I was a victim of my condition. This is just who I am and I'm not a victim of anything.

Lapin: We have a question from our Web site that said, "What motivated you to become a pilot, Jessica?"

Cox: Actually, flying was my greatest fear. Eleanor Roosevelt once said, "Identify your greatest fear and walk directly at it." And that's how it has been for me as a student pilot and learning how to fly an airplane.

The first time, a fighter pilot, he came up and asked me if I would like to fly, and I didn't answer right away because it was my fear. But, when [someone] offered to take me up in a Cessna for the first time, I thought about it for a while and said what great opportunity, to attempt to fly an airplane.

Lapin: You use your right foot on the throttle, left foot on the yoke and up you go.

Cox: Yes.

Lapin: We have another question in from [a viewer] who wants to know, "What do you think could be different if you had both arms?" You wouldn't want anything different?

Cox: I mean, I would have a whole different life. So there is really no way to know where to start on that, because this is my life and I wouldn't trade it for the world, to be honest with you. And so, to think about that, I don't even know if I'd want to waste the time to even think about how my life would be different, because I enjoy it as it is now.

Lapin: What kind of advice would you give young people today?

Cox: Well, I think that it's important to not allow our fears to stand in the way of our opportunities. And for me, I had this great fear of flying. And I knew I couldn't pass up the opportunity. Three and a half years later, after confronting my fear and saying I'm going to do it anyway, I'm now certified.

[However] just because you confront your fear doesn't necessarily mean that you can overcome it, because I still have a little bit of fear, and fear is a good thing.

Lapin: We all do.

Cox: Yes. So, I think that it is important not to allow our fear to stand in the way of any opportunity and stand in the way of achieving whatever we set out to accomplish.

***

Cancun, Mexico (CNN) -- The storm known as Rina fizzled Friday as it moved over the Yucatan Channel, the strait between Mexico and Cuba, the National Hurricane Center said.





No coastal watches or warnings were in effect after Rina lost much of its punch. The storm had diminished in strength from a Category 2 hurricane that raised fears in and around some of the most popular resort communities in Mexico.





It was classified as a remnant low Friday afternoon, with maximum sustained winds of 30 miles an hour, the hurricane center said.





Rina's eye was about 75 miles west of the western tip of Cuba and 110 miles north-northeast of Cozumel, moving east-northeast at 5 mph.





"A turn toward the southeast is expected on Saturday, with a turn toward the south expected on Sunday," the hurricane center said in what was its last public advisory on the system.





Continued weakening is forecast for the next two days.





Rina had been expected to drop between 3 to 6 inches of rain over the eastern part of the Yucatan Peninsula and Cozumel through Friday, with isolated amounts of up to 10 inches, according to the Miami-based weather agency.





A storm surge of as much as 1 to 2 feet above normal tide levels along the coast was also expected, "accompanied by large and dangerous waves," forecasters had said.





Authorities took precautionary measures ahead of the storm, while numerous businesses in Cancun and elsewhere shut down.





"First we're thinking, we're stranded in Cancun; there could be worse things," said Amelie Jarvis, a tourist from Canada. "But then we noticed that everything is closed. I don't know what we're going to do."





CNN's Ed Payne contributed to this report.

***

Khartoum, Sudan (CNN) -- Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad lashed out Monday at "the powers of arrogance," saying that both Sudan and Iran were subject to "pressures" from the West because of their political positions.





"They pressure Sudan and Iran; why? Because we stand against the powers of arrogance," Ahmadinejad said during a visit to Khartoum.





Speaking to a crowd of cheering youths, students and supporters in Khartoum's Friendship Hall, Ahmadinejad criticized Europe and the United States for what he described as the "stealing" of Africa's wealth.





"They stole the riches of Africa," he said.





"Despite this wealth, we see poverty and deprivation."





Ahmadinejad arrived in Khartoum Monday morning on his way back to Iran after speaking to the United Nations General Assembly in New York, and after a brief stop in Mauritania.





Western delegates walked out of his speech at the U.N.after he repeatedly condemned the United States and said some countries use the Holocaust as an "excuse to pay ransom... to Zionists."





"They don't want to see Sudan strong so they pressured it into a referendum," he said, in reference to the South Sudan referendum that led to the independence of South Sudan last July.





"Could there be a referendum in Europe, in the Basque (region of Spain) and other areas?" he asked.





"I am sure if there was a neutral referendum in the U.S., some states would secede from the U.S.," he continued.





"The waves of consciences have started especially in the Muslim lands," he said, in reference to the popular revolutions that have sprung out in the Arab world.





Earlier, Ahmadinejad and Sudanese president Omar al-Bashir met, along with a large team of ministers from both countries.





"We are looking for more economic cooperation with sisterly Iran," al-Bashir said in a meeting.





"We confirm our support for Iran's right to develop its nuclear technology for peaceful purposes," he added.





In a joint statement by both governments, Iran stated that it was "ready to transfer its experience in the science and manufacturing sectors, especially technical and engineering services, to improve Sudan's infrastructure."

***

(CNN) -- On Easter Sunday, the day before the explosion that would take his life, Joshua Napper got saved while attending church with his family, his mother said.





When he left her home in Ohio to go work in West Virginia's Upper Big Branch South Mine, Napper left behind letters for his girlfriend and small daughter.





According to his mother, Pam Napper, the letters told them, "If anything happens to me, I'll be looking down from heaven at you all." He told his girlfriend he loved her and asked that "my baby girl" be taken care of, Pam Napper said.





"He grabbed my hand and he said, 'Mom, I love you,' " she said. "I said, 'I love you too, Josh, I'll always love you.' "





Were you and your family affected by the blast? Share your story





Joshua Napper died in the mine Monday, along with his uncle, Timmy Davis, and his cousin, Corey Davis, Timmy Davis' son. At least 22 others are dead following the explosion.





"I just think he knew what was going to happen," Pam Napper told CNN's John Roberts.





She said she knew that day that something had gone wrong in the mine. "I was just sitting on the couch that morning, Monday, and I just felt in my heart and my stomach that something was definitely wrong," she said.





Joshua Napper had been working in the mine for eight weeks. When he asked his mother if he could, she initially said no but gave in after he begged her.





"He said, 'Please, mom,' " she said. "I said, 'OK, you're 25. I have to let you go. I have to let you make your own decisions in life.' "





She said her son called her one day last week at 3:30 p.m., long before he should have gotten off work. "Bad ventilation in the mines," he told her. "They sent us home early."





"They sent the whole crew home," Pam Napper told CNN's Roberts. "It scared me, because I've been raised all my life with coal mines. But you know, we've never heard of explosions and things like this, that's going on in the mines now."





In the aftermath of Monday's blast, some have pointed to numerous citations -- including some for ventilation issues -- issued to Massey Energy Co., which owns the mine.





Asked if she had any questions for Massey, however, she said no.





"I just know there were things there that weren't right," she said, but added her brother would never have endangered her son or his son if he believed the work was unsafe.





"I think it was just a freak accident," she said. "I think something just happened. I don't really know."





She is grappling with losing three members of her family.





"I've been in a coal miner family," she said. "This is not the only one we've lost. We've lost younger ones, too."





Such losses are part of life in a West Virginia mining family, she said.





"It's their living; that's how they make a living," she said. "That's just West Virginia, and when something bad happens, we come together."

***

(CNN) -- British boxer Amir Khan has retained his WBA light-welterweight title after winning the much-hyped "battle of the faiths" by stopping challenger Dmitriy Salita in the first round on Saturday night.





Khan, a devout Muslim, knocked down his Jewish opponent three times before the referee stopped after just one minute and 16 seconds.





Salita, an American citizen who was born in Ukraine and is nicknamed "Star of David", was unable to follow up his bold claims made in the build-up to the fight, which took place in Newcastle in the north-east of England.





The 22-year-old Khan was successful in his first defense of the belt that he won in defeating Andreas Kotelnik in July.





He is trained by American Freddie Roach, who also guides Filipino star Manny Pacquiao, considered by many to be the best pound-for-pound boxer in the world.





"It was very explosive. The fight was just what we asked for, what Freddie asked me to do. We had too much power for this guy," a delighted Khan told reporters after the fight.





"I'm a growing young man and developing as a man. Freddie said to take it easy, pick the right shots and you'll take this guy out and we did.





"Freddie is a great trainer, he's like a father figure to me and to have him in my corner means a lot. Everyone knows I'm a hard-working fighter and if you put the hard work in you're going to get the benefits.





"After the first shot I could see his legs buckling and I just had to take my time. I knew he was going."





Roach has helped the Olympic silver medal winner to rebuild his career after a humiliating defeat by unknown Colombian Breidis Prescott last year.





"It was a blessing in disguise what happened against Prescott, I got beat and came back stronger," Khan said.





Roach was equally impressed with his young charge.





"I would give him an A+. I said if you hurt him, finish him. We've been working on that power and the fight was really over after that first punch," he said.

***

SEATTLE, Washington (CNN) -- A 16-year-old girl was found dead and another girl was found unconscious in an Army barracks at Fort Lewis near Tacoma, Washington, during the weekend, a base spokesman said Monday.



"Neither of the two women had any outward signs of trauma on them," said Fort Lewis spokesman Joseph Piek.



He said that an Army solider who was "allegedly an acquaintance" of the two 16-year-olds was questioned by investigators, but no arrests had been made.



The spokesman said the name and rank of the soldier who had been questioned was not being released.



According to an Army news release, the names of the two girls "are not being released due to their ages, their civilian status, and the nature of the ongoing investigation."



The Fort Lewis Criminal Investigation Division is trying to determine why the two girls were in the barracks, where soldiers live, and what led to their conditions when they were found.



Emergency personnel from the base responded to a 911 call about 3:30 a.m. Sunday and found the two girls in one of the barracks. A doctor declared one of the girls dead on the scene, and the second girl was transported to Madigan Army Hospital, where she was in stable condition Monday.



The Office of the Armed Forces Medical Examiner is conducting an autopsy, Piek said, and it will be at least a week before results are complete.



Both girls are from the nearby South Puget Sound area but were not related to anyone living on base, Piek said. Both girls' families had been notified, he said.



Although Fort Lewis is not open to civilians, they can be escorted in by a soldier living there if they have identification and a reason for coming onto the facility.



The circumstances of how the girls came unto the base are under investigation, Piek said, but there was no evidence that security had been compromised.



About 30,000 military personnel are based at Fort Lewis. Barracks where soldiers live are usually split into rooms for one to three soldiers, Piek said. Details about the barracks where the girls where found were not released.

***

(CNN) -- Hungary awoke Monday to a new political landscape after the center-right opposition Fidesz party took decisive election victory, ending eight years of Socialist rule.





Fidesz won two-thirds of the votes in Sunday's second round of parliamentary elections, gaining 263 of the 386 seats -- enough to allow it to govern without forming alliances.





Fidesz leader Viktor Orban characterized the vote -- which also saw gains by the far-right -- as a "revolution" in the Eastern European country that was under Soviet control from 1945 to 1991.





"Today there was revolution in the polling booths," Fidesz leader Viktor Orban told a crowd of supporters, according to Hungary's MTI news agency.





"Hungarians have overthrown the system and created a new one. The old system of leaders misusing their power was replaced by one of national unity."





While the Socialist party took second place with 59 seats, it was closely followed by the far-right Jobbik party, making its parliamentary debut.





Jobbik has come under international criticism for what many perceive as anti-Semitic statements and for its verbal attacks on the country's gypsy, or Roma, minority.





Ahead of the vote, the Socialists has seen their support dwindle as they struggled to push through a broad reform program, tackling the country's education and health care systems.





Their problems were compounded when the global recession hit Hungary hard. In late 2008, it had to borrow $27 billion from the International Monetary Fund as unemployment climbed into the double digits and the economy shrunk.





The party was also derailed by scandals and accusations of corruption.





In 2006, Hungarian radio played a leaked tape where former Prime Minister and Socialist Party member Ferenc Gyurcsany admitted that his party lied to the public to win that year's general election.





Journalist Fanny Facsar contributed to this report.

***

TOKYO, Japan (CNN)  -- The U.S. military in Japan has charged a Marine with rape and other violations of the Uniform Code of Military Justice in the alleged sexual assault of 14-year old girl in Okinawa.



A civic group member protests against Hadnott near the U.S. Embassy in Tokyo on February 13.



Staff Sgt. Tyrone Luther Hadnott, 38, has been charged with the rape of a child under 16, abusive sexual contact with a child, making a false official statement, adultery and kidnapping, the Marines said Friday.



No dates for the court-martial have been set.



In February, Japanese authorities released Hadnott after the girl dropped the allegations against him, but the Marine Corps conducted its own investigation to see if Hadnott violated codes of military justice. It held him at a Marine facility.



The rape accusation against Hadnott stirred memories of a brutal rape more than a decade ago and triggered outrage across Japan. Prime Minister Yasuo Fukuda deplored as "unforgivable" the allegations against Hadnott.



The incident also led to tight restrictions, for a time, for American troops and their families at the U.S. base on Okinawa.



The U.S. military in Japan also formed a sexual assault prevention task force after the incident.



More than 40,000 U.S. troops are stationed in Japan, most of them on Okinawa. The troops were placed there under a security alliance after Japan was defeated in World War II and was renounced its right to a military.



The U.S. military presence has at times bred resentment among some Japanese, who have long complained about crime, noise and accidents. Anti-American sentiments boiled over in 1995 after three American servicemen kidnapped and gang-raped a 12-year-old Okinawan schoolgirl.



Two years ago, a U.S. civilian military employee was jailed for nine years for raping two women. E-mail to a friend

***

Atlanta (CNN) -- A number of states, including Georgia, already are putting things in place to opt out of the controversial No Child Left Behind Law, following President Barrack Obama's announcement Friday that states can now apply for waivers.





The law, passed in 2001, requires, among other things, that public schools meet targets designed to make all students proficient in math and reading by 2014 or face penalties. The administration will begin reviewing applications to waive some of the demands the law places on states, Obama said Friday.





Top education officials in Georgia said Friday that it should be up to each individual state to decide how best to evaluate student performance in the classroom. Following the president's announcement, Georgia State School Superintendent Dr. John Barge described his state's alternative to closing the achievement gap.





The College and Career Ready Performance Index, "lets states determine how they approach the guiding principles," Barge said Friday. Georgia is one of a handful of states, including Kentucky, Delaware, and Wisconsin that have expressed interest in waivers seeking flexibility from No Child Left Behind (NCLB).





Barge and U.S. Senator Johnny Isakson (R-Ga.) personally delivered Georgia's request for a waiver to U.S. Secretary of Education Arne Duncan Tuesday.





Barge said the waiver will give schools more flexibility. "It will not be a matter of the entire accountability label hinging on a single test," he said.





Under the administration's new guidelines, states will be encouraged to devise standards of accountability that do not treat all schools the same.





"The purpose is not to give states and districts a reprieve from accountability, but rather to unleash energy to improve our schools at the local level," Obama said in a statement.





In order to gain approval for waivers, states must present the U.S. Department of Education with credible alternative plans to measure performance.





Georgia's proposal focuses on several indicators to measure student performance, including reading, language arts, math, science, and social studies, offering an index that will vary based on grade level.





"With NCLB, science and social studies teachers were not measured to determine adequate yearly progress," Georgia Department of Education Communications Director Matt Cardoza said. "Many times, those teachers would feel their subjects were not as important. Now, there are multiple indicators, including science and social studies."





States that do not apply for waivers will still be expected to meet the guidelines set out by No Child Left Behind. States may submit official applications for waivers by mid-November. Waivers could be granted in early 2010.





CNN's Lesa Jansen contributed to this report

***

On CNN's "State of the Union," host and chief national correspondent John King goes outside the Beltway to report on the issues affecting communities across the country. This week, King traveled to New Hampshire, where diner patrons shared their thoughts on President Obama and the economy.





The Tilt'n Diner hosted all the major presidential candidates during the primaries in 2008.





TILTON, New Hampshire (CNN)  -- Kate O'Leary voted for Barack Obama and began the year full of energy. But her hope is giving way these days to a sense that some things never change.





"I trust his motives," she said of President Obama. "I feel like he is an honorable guy, I am not sure if he can do it. That's the problem."





Too much too soon is one of her worries. Too much politics as usual is another. Add in too much bailout money and Kate O'Leary is more sober now than she was when Obama took the oath of office.





Across from O'Leary sat Debbie Lurvey, who took a job at the Tilt'n Diner after losing her job in the mortgage business.





"It was a forced unemployment because of the economy," Lurvey said. "So, you know, I decided that it was best to move on to something a little more stable."





O'Leary and Lurvey are among those who think the economy is going to get worse before it gets better. But our third guest for our weekly diner conversation, Jim Wells, isn't so sure.





"I think most of it is psychological," said Wells, a Republican who believes consumers need to be more confident. "The secret out of a recession like this is to spend money. And you have got to spend your own, you can't expect somebody else to spend it for you."





He makes the distinction between consumer spending and what he sees as too much government spending.





"We are going to have to pay the bill in another two or three years and it is going to be scary when it happens," Wells said.





All three agreed one thing missing from Washington is a spirit of cooperation and compromise.





Lurvey said the pain of losing her job and dealing with foreclosure have taught her there are some things the government can't do.





"It is a good time to get back to what this country was made on -- it's the family," she said. "And you know I think for awhile we were all going crazy and overspending and living beyond our means and this has kind of been a reality check for most people."

***

(CNN) -- Illinois will become the 17th state on Thursday to ban texting while driving, a safety worry that has caught the attention of the federal government.



Texting poses a greater risk than talking or dialing while driving, a study says.



Gov. Pat Quinn will sign an amendment to the Illinois Vehicle Code that prohibits writing, sending or receiving text messages while driving, said the governor's spokeswoman, Marlena Jentz. The bill does make texting exceptions for drivers who pull over to text or shift their car into park or neutral to message while stopped in traffic.



Illinois will join a growing list of states looking to curb accidents linked to texting. Oregon and New Hampshire banned texting drivers in July, and Alaska, Arkansas, California, Colorado, Connecticut, Louisiana, Maryland, Minnesota, New Jersey, North Carolina, Tennessee, Utah, Virginia, Washington and the District of Columbia already have laws in place. Four U.S. senators announced their plan to push for a federal ban on July 29. U.S. Department of Transportation Secretary Ray LaHood said the Obama administration will convene a summit to discuss how it can end accidents caused by distracted drivers.



Despite the ongoing efforts to address the dangers of texting while driving, studies have not shown whether the laws affect accident rates, said Jonathan Adkins, communications director at the Governor's Highway Safety Association.



The nonprofit association comprised of appointees from each state's governor's office has closely followed the texting while driving saga. But Adkins said that because of several factors that potentially play a role in an accident, to know whether texting caused an accident would require a subpoena or an admission by the driver.



In New York and New Jersey, the impact has been measured by an increase in driving tickets, but too few states track that data, Adkins said.



"With drunk driving it was important to pass tough laws, but the laws won't really have any effect unless they're enforced and the public knows about it and it's properly adjudicated," said Barbara Harsha the association executive director. "So passing a law isn't the solution, it's only part of it."



Studies have shown that those who text while driving have an exponentially greater risk of an accident or near accident.



A Virginia Tech Transportation Institute study found that truck drivers who texted while driving were 23 times more likely to crash or nearly get into wrecks than undistracted drivers.



Compared with dialing, talking, listening or reaching for an electronic device, texting posed the greatest accident risk, the study found -- most likely due to the almost five seconds researchers found the drivers' eyes were off the roadway while texting, said Rich Hanowski, the director of the Center for Truck and Bus Safety at the transportation institute.



The focus on texting while driving comes after a some high-profile accidents.



In September, a California commuter train engineer missed a stop signal while trading text messages with a friend, leading to a collision with a freight train that killed 25 people, according to federal investigators.



A mass-transit accident in Boston, Massachusetts, injured 62 people in May. The operator of a Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority trolley was later charged with gross negligence after he admitted he had been texting seconds before the collision with another trolley, according to the Suffolk County district attorney and a National Transportation Safety Board official.

***

(CNN) -- NASA's Kepler space telescope has already made a discovery, and its science operations aren't even officially under way yet.



The planet used in the test is a giant gas planet about the size of Jupiter that orbits a star called HAT P-7.



NASA scientists who put the telescope through a 10-day test after its March 6 launch said this week that Kepler is working well. Its ability to detect minute changes in light has enabled scientists to determine that a planet orbiting a distant star has an atmosphere, shows only one side to its sun and is so hot it glows.



Kepler's ability to take measurements that precise at such a great distance "proves we can find Earth-size planets," William Borucki, Kepler's principal science investigator told reporters at a recent briefing.



The powerful scope is looking at thousands of stars in its vision field in the Milky Way on a 3½-year mission to find planets the size of Earth and to determine how common these planets are.



The planet used in the test, a giant gas planet about the size of Jupiter, orbits a star called HAT P-7 in just 2.2 days and is 26 times closer than Earth is to the sun, according to NASA. It is called an exoplanet because it orbits a star outside the solar system.



Kepler detected the planet's atmosphere, demonstrating the telescope's capabilities and giving astronomers what NASA says is "only a taste of things to come."



"It learned that this planet is like 4,000 degrees Fahrenheit. That is so hot. And it's 4,000 degrees Fahrenheit just on one side only. The other side would be closer to 1,000 degrees Fahrenheit, " said Sara Seager, a professor at Massachusetts Institute of Technology and a Kepler science team member.



"This particular planet showed an unusual change in brightness," she said. "As the planet is orbiting the star, it goes through phases just as the moon goes through phases as seen from Earth."



"Kepler learned something new about an old planet," she said. "The new discovery was that planet is extremely hot, very, very hot. And it's very, very hot on one side, compared to the other."



Borucki compared it to "an element in your toaster or stove."

***

(CNN) -- Aruban authorities questioned Joran van der Sloot in the Netherlands about the disappearance of Natalee Holloway, the Aruban prosecutor's office said Friday.



Joran van der Sloot awaits transfer from the Netherlands to Aruba in November. He later was released.



It happened less than a week after a Dutch television program aired video footage showing the young man saying he was with the missing Alabama teenager when she died.



During the two-hour interview with Aruban investigators, van der Sloot again denied any role in Holloway's vanishing, the prosecutor's office said in a written statement.



Van der Sloot said that he was under the influence of marijuana when he was secretly videotaped saying that he was with Holloway when she died, and that he arranged for a friend to dump her body in the ocean, the statement said.



On the video, which aired Sunday, van der Sloot also says that he wasn't sure Holloway was dead before a friend disposed of her body.



Patrick van der Eem, a man who feigned friendliness toward van der Sloot, recorded the conversations on hidden cameras installed in the Range Rover he was driving, according to the report that aired Sunday.  Watch how the video has renewed interest in the case »



Shortly after the video was made public, an investigative judge said that enough evidence exists to reopen the inquiry against the Dutch college student, but denied a prosecution's request that van der Sloot be detained.



Hans Mos, the Aruban prosecutor, is appealing that decision, and a three-judge panel will rule on it "after this weekend," Mos said.  Watch Holloway's father say van der Sloot should 'come clean' »



Earlier this week, Dutch authorities executed several search warrants at van der Sloot's current and former residences, a source close to the investigation said. They took a hard drive and a laptop computer, the source said.



Van der Sloot's attorney, Joe Tacopina, told CNN that the video did not show a "confession" and said that van der Sloot is innocent.



The college student is willing to answer "any questions" investigators ask, Tacopina said.



Earlier this week, he told ABC that much of what was on the video is "easily disprovable based on corroborative evidence. ... The fact of the matter is he still is not responsible. The evidence -- not Joran, the evidence -- says he's not responsible for Natalee's death."



Holloway, 18, was last seen in the early hours of May 30, 2005, leaving an Oranjestad, Aruba, nightclub with van der Sloot, Deepak Kalpoe and his brother, Satish. Mos dropped charges against the three men in December, saying he couldn't be sure of a conviction.  See a timeline of the case »



Holloway was visiting Aruba with about 100 classmates celebrating their graduation from Mountain Brook High School in suburban Birmingham, Alabama.



Holloway failed to show up for her flight home the following day, and her packed bags were found in her hotel room. E-mail to a friend



CNN's Tracy Sabo contributed to this report.

***

BEIJING, China (CNN) -- Walking through a maze of narrow streets south of Tiananmen Square, Nick Frisch appeared unfazed by the sight of drastic changes -- traditional courtyard houses that once lined up these hutongs, or alleys, now in different stages of being knocked down.



Nick Frisch's underground exploration in Beijing has attracted the attention of a Singapore TV crew.



While the Qianmen area is going through an extreme makeover -- a restoration of its Qing dynasty flavor ahead of the Olympics -- Frisch's destination is safe from the city's ubiquitous wrecking balls. Upon reaching the entrance to the Underground City, however, he was told it was closed for "renovation," just like the surrounding neighborhood.



"It's like they're trying to literally bury this place before the Games," said Frisch, a recent graduate of Columbia University in the United States, with a major in history and Chinese language.



This place is a vast network of tunnels built beneath Beijing's city center during the 1970s in anticipation of a nuclear war with the Soviets. Covering an area of 85 square kilometers and containing 1,000 anti-air raid structures, the subterranean complex was said to have been mostly hand-dug by 300,000 local residents.



"The plan was to move half of Beijing's population underground and the other half to western hills in the event of a nuclear attack," Frisch explained.



The 22-year-old New York native has lived in China on and off for a year and is fascinated by the bomb shelter and its history. After the authorities opened part of the Underground City as a tourist attraction to woo foreigners, he turned a routine visit to an adventure in 2006.



Armed with a flashlight, Frisch veered off from the mandatory guided tour. Moving sandbags and unchaining doors, he explored the off-limit area and found rooms with bunk beds and decayed cardboard boxes of water purifiers.



"It's more than just propaganda posters down there -- it really is a parallel universe, with street signs stenciled on the wall," Frisch said.



Since then, Frisch has discovered other shelters linked to the network -- many of them turned to cheap hostels -- on busy streets. Not surprisingly, the time-warped part of the Underground City remains his favorite.



"I sometimes wish I was born earlier to witness the Cold War unfold -- and the tunnels have given me a unique vantage point to look into that period of history," Frisch said.



"While Beijing is transforming itself for the Olympics, it's just amazing to see this space in such a sharp contrast to the city aboveground." E-mail to a friend



Steven Jiang is a Beijing-based freelance writer and former CNN producer.

***

Beijing, China (CNN) -- A court in eastern China sentenced a man to death Saturday for attacking 29 kindergarten students and three teachers with a knife, state-run media said.





The Taixing Intermediate People's Court found Xu Yuyuan, 47, guilty of intentional homicide after a half-day trial, Xinhua news agency said.





Xu told the court that his rage against society motivated him in the April 29 attacks, according to Xinhua. But he appealed the death sentence, arguing that the punishment was too severe since no one died in the attacks, Xinhua said.





Chinese penal code says a person can be convicted of intentional homicide for acting on an intent to kill, the news agency reported.





A police probe found Xu had been unemployed since 2001, when he was fired by a local insurance company. He told police he carried out the attack because he was angry about a series of business and personal humiliations, Xinhua said.





About 300 people attended Saturday's open trial, according to Xinhua.





Xu's sentence was the second death penalty conviction after a recent spate of school attacks that have prompted public outrage across China.





Zheng Minsheng, 42, was sentenced to death and executed on April 28 for attacking students in front of an elementary school in Fujian province, killing eight and wounding several others. Zheng also used a knife in the attacks, Xinhua reported.





Authorities said Zheng carried out the attack because he was frustrated at "failures in his romantic life," the news agency said.





At least four other such attacks on school children in China have been reported since March.





Guns are strictly regulated in China, but until recently large knives were not. Chinese authorities have recently issued a regulation requiring people to register with their national ID cards when they buy knives longer that 15 centimeters.





Other measures have been put in place.





In April, the Ministry of Education ordered kindergartens, elementary and secondary schools to restrict strangers from entering the campuses. The ministry instructed schools across the country to hire security guards, install security facilities and ensure that pupils were escorted home. Schools were also urged to teach pupils to how to protect themselves.





In some schools, security guards have been armed with "forks," long poles with semi-circular prongs that can be used to fight assailants.

***

Editor's note: Campbell Brown anchors CNN's "Campbell Brown: No Bias, No Bull" at 8 p.m. ET Mondays through Fridays. She delivered this commentary during the "Cutting through the Bull" segment of Tuesday night's broadcast.

CNN's Campbell Brown says "having no life" isn't a requirement for a man to get a job.

(CNN) -- How many times have politicians been warned about the dangers of an open microphone? And yet, on Tuesday, the lectern mic at the National Governors Conference picked up this little nugget from Pennsylvania's Democratic Gov. Ed Rendell.

He's having a conversation near the lectern about President-elect Barack Obama's choice for to lead the Homeland Security Department, Arizona Gov. Janet Napolitano. Here is what Rendell said about Napolitano:

Rendell: Janet's perfect for that job. Because for that job, you have to have no life. Janet has no family. Perfect. She can devote, literally, 19-20 hours a day to it

Wow. Now, I'm sure Gov. Napolitano has many qualifications for the job beyond having no family, and therefore the ability to devote 20 hours a day to the job.  Watch Campbell Brown's commentary Â»

But it is fascinating to me that that is the quality being highlighted here as so perfect. C'mon. Homeland Security Secretary Michael Chertoff is married with two grown children. His predecessor, Tom Ridge, had a family. Anybody remember a debate about whether they would have trouble balancing the demands of work and family?

Now, I am a fan of Gov. Rendell. He has been on this show many times. I like him for his candor. In our attempts to cut through the bull, he delivers far less bull than most politicians. But it is his frankness here that raises so many questions.

1. If a man had been Obama's choice for the job, would having a family or not having a family ever even have been an issue? Would it have ever prompted a comment? Probably not. We all know the assumption tends to be that with a man, there is almost always a wife in the wings managing those family concerns.

2. As a woman, hearing this, it is hard not to wonder if we are counted out for certain jobs, certain opportunities, because we do have a family or because we are in our child-bearing years. Are we? It is a fair question.

3. If you are a childless, single woman with suspicions that you get stuck working holidays, weekends and the more burdensome shifts more often than your colleagues with families, are those suspicions well-founded? Probably so. Is there an assumption that if you're family-free then you have no life? By some, yes.

Again Gov. Rendell, I don't mean to rake you over the coals. I know what you meant to say. But your comments do perpetuate stereotypes that put us in boxes, both mothers and single women.

In government and beyond, men have been given the benefit of the doubt when it comes to striking the right work-life balance. Women are owed the same consideration.

The opinions expressed in this commentary are solely those of Campbell Brown.

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN) -- As Ryan O'Neal walked the red carpet at the premiere of "Farrah's Story," he stopped every few feet to answer reporters' questions about Farrah Fawcett's battle with cancer.



Farrah Fawcett was diagnosed with cancer three years ago. 'Farrah's Story,' a documentary on her battle, will air Friday.



CNN's Douglas Hyde was at the end of the line and the last to interview the actor, who was almost in tears after a string of intense explanations about his longtime companion's condition.



"She was OK in the first interview, but now I'm worried," O'Neal said, visibly drained after focusing on Fawcett's battle.



The documentary, which airs Friday night on NBC, is not a celebration of Fawcett's career, but an intimate look at her life since being diagnosed with anal cancer three years ago.



"Basically, it's a gonzo trip," O'Neal said.



It was shot by Fawcett's close friend, Alana Stewart.



"It shows you every detail, how she found out and how she dealt with it," O'Neal said.



Early in 2007, Fawcett said she was told her cancer had gone into remission. Her official Web site has posts from February 2007 celebrating the news.



But the cancer returned later that year.



Anal cancer affects more women than men, and the illness is usually found in people who are in their early 60s. The American Cancer Society estimates that 5,000 new cases of anal cancer are diagnosed each year and about 680 people die from it annually.



While cancer keeps Farrah in her bed, a legal fight has begun over the documentary.



Producer Craig Nevius filed a lawsuit this week against O'Neal and Stewart, claiming they stole creative control of the film from him.



Nevius told CNN he was kicked off the project more than two months ago.



"I have been banned from talking to or seeing Farrah for about ten weeks, which is highly unusual, considering that healthy or sick, I spoke to this woman at least twice a day from the time of her diagnosis on," Nevius said.



Nevius said his goal was to do the film "based on Farrah's artistic visions that are a reflection of her and while at the same time maintaining and protecting her privacy to the extent that she wants it maintained and protected."



"I take no joy in this," Nevius said. "I tried to avoid this, but I am doing it for Farrah."



A spokesman for O'Neal called it "horrific" that Nevius would file the lawsuit.



"We hope and we pray that Farrah Fawcett does not find out about this lawsuit, because we know it would impact her health even more so," said O'Neal spokesman Paul Bloch.



CNN's Douglas Hyde and Marc Balinsky contributed to this report.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Washington police told the mother of slain congressional intern Chandra Levy that an arrest is imminent in her daughter's 2001 death, Susan Levy told CNN on Saturday.

Washington intern Chandra Levy's body was found a year after she disappeared in 2001.

"I got a call from the Washington police department, just to give me a heads up that there's a warrant out for the arrest," Levy said.

Police Chief Cathy Lanier of the Metropolitan Police Department did not reveal the suspect's name when she contacted the parents on Friday, Levy said.

She said police told her they have "enough evidence to convict somebody."

A source close to the investigation told CNN the suspect was Ingmar Guandique, who is serving a 10-year prison sentence for two assaults in Washington's Rock Creek Park that occurred around the time of Levy's disappearance. Levy's remains were found in the park.  View a timeline of her disappearance Â»

The source would not speak on the record because the investigation is ongoing and the arrest warrant had not been finalized.

A California native working as an intern for the Federal Bureau of Prisons, Levy, 24, disappeared May 1, 2001. Her remains were found in May 2002 by a man walking his dog in a remote area of the park.

The source said authorities are working to finalize the arrest warrant. Asked about reports that Guandique, a laborer from El Salvador, told a fellow inmate he killed Levy, the source said Guandique "was running his mouth."

Guandique has been imprisoned at the Federal Correctional Institution - Victorville, a medium-security facility north of San Bernardino, California, an official there confirmed to CNN on Saturday.  Watch CNN's Mike Brooks discuss Guandique's background Â»

He has denied any involvement in her death, the Washington Post reported Saturday. Guandique was mentioned last year in a Washington Post article about the killing.

"It's a bittersweet situation for me as the mother of a daughter who is no longer here. I want justice. I want to know that the person who did it is in jail and will not do it to anybody else," Levy said.

"Every day the elephant is there. Every day you get a knot in your stomach. It doesn't go away. It's a life sentence for the families and relatives that miss their loved ones. We have a life sentence of hurt."

Referring to the impending arrest, Chandra's father told CNN affiliate KXTV that Lanier didn't say when an announcement would be made, but "she said it would be really soon."

"She didn't say the name yet, but we think we know who it is. I don't want to say until it's official, though," the father said.

The search for Levy and massive publicity that accompanied it stemmed largely from her connection to Rep. Gary Condit, D-California.

Condit and Levy, who was from Condit's district, had an affair, and police questioned Condit many times in connection with her disappearance. Police never named Condit as a suspect.

Condit, a member of Congress since 1989, lost the 2002 Democratic primary and left office at the end of his term. He later reportedly moved to Arizona.

"For the Levy family, we are glad they are finally getting the answers they deserve. For my family, I am glad that their years of standing together in the face of such adversity have finally led to the truth," Condit told WJLA on Saturday.

Condit's lawyer, Abbe Lowell, blamed police and media attention on Condit for delays in the arrest. Police never named him as a suspect.

"It is a tragedy that the police and media obsession with former Congressman Condit delayed this result for eight years, and caused needless pain and harm to the families involved," Lowell said.

"This should give the Levys the answer and closure they deserve, and remove the unfair cloud that has hung over the Condits for too long."

CNN's Carol Cratty,

***

MIAMI, Florida (CNN)  -- A Fort Lauderdale official said that only one person was on a plane that slammed into a vacant house Friday, a crash called "not survivable" by a fire official.



Bystanders watch the flames after the plane crash Friday in Fort Lauderdale, Florida.



The twin-engine Cessna crashed about 11:15 a.m. in a neighborhood not far from Fort Lauderdale Executive Airport, from which it took off, the city official said.



Video from the scene showed a small house virtually cut in two as firefighters poured water on smoking debris.



Chaz Adams -- spokesman for the city of Fort Lauderdale, which owns the airport -- said that there was only one person aboard and that a previous report of four passengers was incorrect.



The Federal Aviation Administration also said the flight plan listed one person on board, and witnesses at the airport have told the FAA that only one person boarded the aircraft.



Adams said three people live in the house that was hit, but "the house was vacant when the plane down."



He said the plane was headed to Fernandina Beach, north of Jacksonville, Florida. Seconds after takeoff, the pilot reported trouble.



"The tower cleared it to come back and try to land at Fort Lauderdale Executive Airport. The plane crashed attempting to return to the airport," Adams said.  Watch an iReporter describe the crash »



Donald Widing, chief of fire rescue for Oakland Park, said, "the crash was not survivable."



"The fire is under control. The emergency is contained," he said a little more than an hour after the crash. "What we're doing now is making sure that the scene is safe enough to introduce our first responders to do a complete primary and secondary search of the aircraft wreckage itself and the occupancy."



He added, "we are concerned with the plane's fuel tanks and have to save the house and the scene before we can conduct any further search-and-rescue operations."  Watch firefighters tackle the blaze »



Asked whether more than one home in the area was impacted, Widing said, "we're still assessing the damage."



He said "the majority of the fire" was "contained on the property that was affected." However, he said, there may be minor fire damage and some heat damage elsewhere.



Nation Transportation Safety Board officials were going to the scene.



CNN's Rich Phillips contributed to this report .

***

(CNN) -- Dubai could lose its place on the Women's Tennis Association Tour calendar after Israeli Shahar Peer was denied entry to compete at this week's event, the WTA supremo warned Monday.



Shahar Peer told CNN she learned of her visa ban Saturday, just before her scheduled flight to Dubai.



Peer was scheduled to fly into the United Arab Emirates on Sunday, but was informed Saturday night by telephone that she would not be granted a visa.



WTA Chairman and CEO Larry Scott said the Sony Ericsson WTA Tour "will review appropriate future actions with regard to the future of the Dubai tournament."



Scott added: "The Sony Ericsson WTA Tour believes very strongly, and has a clear rule and policy, that no host country should deny a player the right to compete at a tournament for which she has qualified by ranking."



Peer, who had just finished playing in the Pattaya Open in Thailand, where she reached the semifinal, said she is "very, very disappointed" to have been denied the opportunity to play in Dubai.



"They really stopped my momentum because now I'm not going to play for two weeks and because they waited for the last minute I couldn't go to another tournament either," Peer said from Tel Aviv. "So it's very disappointing, and I think it's not fair." Watch Peer describe her disappointment »



Scott, meanwhile, confirmed: "Following various consultations, the Tour has decided to allow the tournament to continue to be played this week, pending further review by the Tour's Board of Directors.



"Ms. Peer and her family are obviously extremely upset and disappointed by the decision of the UAE and its impact on her personally and professionally, and the Tour is reviewing appropriate remedies for Ms. Peer."



Scott said Peer's visa refusal has precedence: Last year an Israeli men's doubles team was denied entry to Dubai. He said the Emirate cited security reasons following recent unrest in the region.



"At that time I was in Dubai. I made it clear to the authorities, the representatives of the government, that next year when our top players wanted to play this very prestigious tournament all of them had to be allowed to play," Scott said.



"They had a year to work on it and solve it. We've spent time through the year discussing it. We were given assurances that it had gone to the highest levels of government," Scott said.



"I was optimistic they would solve it. And we've made crystal clear to the government, to the tournament organizers that there could be grave repercussions not just for tennis in the UAE but sports beyond that."  Watch CNN's interview with Larry Scott »



The Dubai government issued a short statement through the state-owned news agency, saying that Peer was informed while in Thailand that she would not receive a visa.



The agency quoted an official source in the organizing committee saying, "The tournament is sponsored by several national organizations and they all care to be part of a successful tournament, considering the developments that the region had been through."



Earlier an official source who did not want to be named, said, "We should check what happened in New Zealand, when Peer was playing there with all the demonstrations against Israel during the attacks on Gaza. We have to consider securing the players and the tournament."



In January, a small group of about 20 protestors waved placards and shouted anti-Israel slogans outside the main entrance to the ASB Classic tournament in Auckland.



They were moved on before Peer played her match.



The Israeli player said she's received phone calls of support from her fellow players.



"'All the players support Shahar," world No. 6 Venus Williams told The New York Times, adding, "We are all athletes, and we stand for tennis."



Peer is uncertain of her next move. She said the last-minute decision had left her at a loose end. She said she was concerned about her points and ranking and may go to the

***

(CNN) -- Andriy Shevchenko's agent admits it is highly unlikely the AC Milan striker will stay at the San Siro beyond the end of the season.





Shevchenko has made just two Serie A appearances in a disappointing season for Milan.





Shevchenko returned to Milan on loan from Chelsea last summer but has disappointed since his move back to Italy.





The Ukraine striker has found himself mainly on the substitutes' bench, making just two league appearances this season, and agent Fabio Parisi believes his client will not be in Italy next season.





"Shevchenko is a player on loan at Milan from Chelsea and I think he will return to London," he told www.Calciomercato.it.





"Frankly, I don't think it's possible that the Rossoneri will decide to keep him. I don't know what kind of rapport he has found with  coach(Carlo) Ancelotti and his team-mates, the only problem is that he is a player on loan and, given how the season has gone, I think Andriy will return to Chelsea.





"It does depend on who will be the coach and what he wants to do -- but I don't think the doors of Italy will re-open for him next season.





"Anyway, Sheva will decide on his own, he's quite calm, he doesn't need anyone's help. However, another country seems to me the more likely option."





Shevchenko admitted at the end of March that he would probably return to London but, after scoring for Ukraine against England and providing a crucial assist against Lecce, the 32-year-old claimed earlier this month that he hoped to still be at the San Siro next season.

***

CRANWELL, England (CNN)  -- Britain's oldest man and the oldest living veteran of World War I was celebrating his 112th birthday Friday with a party and a fly-past at an air force base.



Henry Allingham at a 90th anniversary celebration of the Royal Air Force this year.



Henry Allingham is the last surviving member of the Royal Naval Air Service, which he joined in 1915. He saw action at the Battle of Jutland off Denmark the following year, according to the Ministry of Defense.



Allingham is also the last surviving founding member of the Royal Air Force, which was created in 1918, nine months before the end of the war. He left the service a year later, the defense ministry said.



Friday's events were happening at the Royal Air Force base in Cranwell, England, about 120 miles north of London. Friends of his at the base said Allingham, who arrived in a wheelchair, was looking "fresh."



After a birthday lunch, aircraft from the Battle of Britain Memorial Flight, an aerial display team, planned to fly overhead, the base said. Members of the Falcons Parachute Display Team then planned to drop in and present Allingham with a birthday card from the chief of Britain's air staff.



Allingham is Britain's oldest man and the oldest surviving member of the armed forces, according to Guinness World Records.



The former aircraft engineer still travels and makes public appearances at military events and commemorations.



In July, Allingham had a private audience with Queen Elizabeth and attended a garden party at Buckingham Palace. In November, he laid a wreath in St. Omer, France -- where he was stationed during the war -- to celebrate Armistice Day, the end of World War I.



Allingham said last year that he remains active to emphasize the importance of remembering the conflict.



"I don't do these things because I enjoy doing them but to keep the memory alive of all my comrades who fought and died in the First World War," he told the Ministry of Defense.

***

ATLANTA, Georgia (CNN) -- The Script didn't follow the script.



The Script includes, from left to right, Glen Power, Danny O'Donoghue and Mark Sheehan.



In the standard showbiz treatment, a group -- say, three plucky, working-class music-mad young men from Dublin, Ireland -- travel to the grand shores of the U.S. of A.



They form a band, grab the ear of a noted producer and, with a lucky break or two, are soon opening for the stars who inspired them so many years before.



If the story needs a rousing climax, they return as conquering heroes to their homeland, pick up the local paper and find that their new single has gone straight to No. 1.



Applause, joyful tears, roll credits.



Well, it wasn't quite like that.



In the case of The Script -- vocalist/keyboardist Danny O'Donoghue, multi-instrumentalist Mark Sheehan and drummer Glen Power -- O'Donoghue and Sheehan traveled to the States and spent several years as struggling writers and producers.



Drummer Power, another Dubliner, had bummed around music scenes for years; he'd met O'Donoghue and Sheehan not long before the pair packed it in and returned to Dublin, plying their trade and looking for breaks.



Descriptions of the trio as "an overnight success" thus leave them skeptical.



If that's the case, said Sheehan before a concert at Piedmont Park in Atlanta, Georgia, "It was the longest night of our lives."  Watch an interview with The Script »



On the other hand, when success did strike, it struck hard and relatively quickly.



When O'Donoghue and Sheehan returned to Dublin, they decided to form a band. They recruited Power, noting their "great strength together" -- in Power's words -- after jamming together. The Script's first single, "We Cry," hit the UK Top 20 in the spring of 2008, and the second, "The Man Who Can't Be Moved," hit No. 1. The group's self-titled debut came out in August 2008 in Britain.



In December 2008, they played the Nobel Peace Prize Concert, and, in March of this year, opened for U2. (Their album was finally released in the U.S. that same month.) They've spent this summer as Paul McCartney's opening act, which was what brought them to Piedmont Park.



Touring with the former Beatle "feels like a master class for us," said Sheehan.



The three, all around 30, finish each other's sentences like the old friends they are and display a savvy about the music business. That's only fitting, as O'Donoghue and Sheehan spent their years in America learning the trade alongside producers such as Teddy Riley and the Neptunes.



Sheehan says the group is looking for the sweet spot between the "rock climate" they grew up in and the hip-hop and R&B sounds that dominate American popular music.



"[With our experience,] we're hashing it out, and I think we've found it," he said. (Asked about their own influences, they rattle off hip-hop artists such as Missy Elliott, Jay-Z and Kanye West.)



The Script appears to have a happy ending, just as an old tale of rising stars would have it. But the three are quick to point out that aspiring musicians should, well, write their own story.



"If there's a message to younger musicians, to me, it's 'don't give up,' " says O'Donoghue. "Magic can happen."

***

(CNN) -- A 47-year-old Virginia man was charged Monday with interfering with a flight crew during a flight last week in which he allegedly became intoxicated and unruly, leading authorities to scramble fighter jets and the pilot to make an emergency landing.





The incident occurred Friday when Muhammad Abu Tahir, a Pakistani national and lawful permanent U.S. resident of Glen Allen, Virginia, was aboard AirTran Airways Flight 39 from Atlanta, Georgia, to San Francisco, California.





During the flight, a flight attendant served Tahir, seated in coach, three airplane-serving-sized bottles of wine, then refused to serve him more, according to a two-page affidavit filed Monday by the FBI.





He appealed to the senior flight attendant, who granted him a fourth, then a fifth bottle, both of which he downed quickly, it said.





Tahir then went to a bathroom in the rear of the plane and closed the door, opening it a few minutes later and placing his shoes and socks outside the door, then retreating back inside, the affidavit said.





"A short time later, Tahir again opened the lavatory door revealing that he was shaving with no shirt on," it added.





When a flight attendant knocked on the door and encouraged him to leave the bathroom so others could use it, Tahir refused "and started yelling at the flight attendant that he was being disrespected," it said.





Notified of the passenger's behavior, the captain advised the senior flight attendant to enlist the help of a passenger to stand outside the lavatory in case help was needed, it said.





But Tahir continued yelling and refused to obey the crew, at one point grabbing the senior flight attendant by her arms and hands, releasing her only after a passenger interceded, the affidavit said.





By this time, a fire extinguisher had been carried to the rear of the plane for possible use against the man and a beverage cart was repositioned to contain Tahir, according to the affidavit .





While Tahir remained inside the lavatory, the pilot made an emergency landing in Colorado Springs, Colorado, where police officers took Tahir to the El Paso County Jail, where he remained Monday.





Tahir told the FBI that he felt he was being disrespected when the flight attendants denied his request for food, which was being served in business class, the affidavit said.





The charges Tahir faces will be read Wednesday in U.S. District Court in Denver and a detention hearing and preliminary hearing are to be scheduled for later in the week.





"It is crucial that the flying public obey the commands of the flight crew," said U.S. Attorney David Gaouette.





If convicted, Tahir faces up to 20 years in federal prison and a $250,000 fine, or both, as well as restitution to the airline.





The incident was the second in three days in which North American Aerospace Defense Command fighter jets were scrambled in response to a passenger deemed disruptive.





On Wednesday, NORAD escorted a Hawaii-bound plane back to its origination city of Portland, Oregon, after a passenger gave a flight attendant a note that was interpreted as being threatening.





The passenger, Joseph Hedlund Johnson, 56, told the FBI he hadn't intended to scare anyone with the note, which began, "I thought I was going to die," and referenced the television show "Gilligan's Island."

***

MAMMOTH LAKES, California (CNN) -- A small amount of human remains has been found in the wreckage of the plane that adventurer Steve Fossett was flying when he disappeared last year, a National Transportation Safety Board official said Thursday.

The wreckage of adventurer Steve Fossett's plane was found in California's Sierra Nevada on Thursday.

A search team that was examining the wreckage, which was found Wednesday at an altitude of about 10,000 feet in the Sierra Nevada near Mammoth Lakes, found "very little" remains among the debris, acting NTSB Chairman Mark Rosenker said.

Asked whether the remains were enough for an identification, Rosenker said, "I believe the coroner will be able to do some work."

Earlier Thursday, Madera County Sheriff John Anderson said the single-engine Bellanca appeared to have crashed into the side of a mountain in the Sierra Nevada in eastern California, and the damage was "so severe I doubt someone would've walked away from it."  See a map of the crash site Â»

Fossett was last seen the morning of September 3, 2007, when he took off from the Flying-M Ranch outside Minden, Nevada, on what he said would be a pleasure flight over the Sierra Nevada.  Watch how searchers located the wreckage Â»

Investigators homed in on the area near Mammoth Lakes on Wednesday after hikers there found a sweatshirt, cash and identification cards with Fossett's name.

The hikers did not find any wreckage; an aerial search discovered the airplane parts about a quarter-mile away, Anderson said.

Ground crews confirmed Wednesday night that the wreckage was Fossett's plane. The sheriff said authorities were not certain whether the cash and sweatshirt belonged to Fossett.

The engine was about 300 feet higher on the mountain than the fuselage and the wings, Anderson said.

An NTSB team arrived Thursday to investigate the crash. Rosenker said investigators, based on examinations of the debris, believe that the plane struck the mountain horizontally but not necessarily head-on.

It may take "weeks, perhaps months to have a better understanding of what happened on that mountain that day," he said.  Watch NTSB say crash was "nonsurvivable" Â»

Fossett's disappearance prompted a search that ultimately included thousands of volunteers, hundreds of officials and dozens of aircraft poring over an area more than twice the size of New Jersey.

The search was officially suspended a year ago Friday, and a Chicago probate court judge declared Fossett dead in February.

Fossett made his money in the financial services industry but became renowned for his daredevil exploits. He was the first person to circle the globe solo in a balloon, accomplishing the feat in 2002, and the first to fly a plane around the world solo without refueling, which he did three years later. He also set world records in round-the-world sailing and cross-country skiing.  Browse a list of his achievements on land, sea and air Â»

CNN's Chuck Afflerbach contributed to this report.

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN) -- Striking Hollywood writers will be back at their keyboards Wednesday after voting overwhelmingly to end a 100-day walkout that essentially shut down the entertainment industry.



Writers Guild of America member Steven Binder shows his approval as he votes Tuesday in Beverly Hills, California.



More than 92 percent of the Writers Guild of America members who cast ballots Tuesday in Los Angeles and New York voted to end their work stoppage over residuals for writing in the digital age, including new media and the Internet. The new deal is for three years.



"The strike is over. Our membership has voted, and writers can go back to work," said Patric Verrone, president of the WGA's West chapter.



Michael Winship, president of WGA's East guild, said, "The success of this strike is a significant achievement not only for ourselves but the entire creative community, now and in the future."



WGA members walked off the job November 5 after talks broke down over how writers are paid for the use of their material on the Internet and DVDs, among other issues.



"It is not all that we hoped for, and it is not all we deserve," Verrone said when a tentative deal was announced Saturday.



But he added, "This is the best deal this guild has bargained for in 30 years."



Leslie Moonves, chief executive officer of CBS Corp., told The Associated Press, "At the end of the day, everybody won.



"It was a fair deal and one that the companies can live with, and it recognizes the large contribution that writers have made to the industry."



The Alliance of Motion Picture and Television Producers, which represents production companies and media conglomerates, has had no comment on the agreement.



The vote meant that the Academy Awards ceremony on February 24 will be the usual scripted gala, the AP reported.



"I am ecstatic that the 80th Academy Awards presentation can now proceed full steam ahead," without "hesitation or discomfort" for the nominees, Sid Ganis, president of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, which stages the Oscars, told the AP.



As long as the strike continued, the traditional Oscars spectacular was in doubt since many Hollywood stars would not cross WGA picket lines.



It's unclear how soon new episodes of scripted programs will start appearing, because production won't begin until scripts are completed, the AP reported.



It will take at least four weeks for producers to get the first post-strike episodes of comedies back on the air; dramas will take six to eight weeks, the AP said.



Verrone said the WGA achieved two of three goals through negotiations with the studios.  Watch Verrone explain what he thinks the strike accomplished »



The first goal relates to writers' "jurisdiction" in new media, Verrone said, meaning that any content written by guild members specifically for new media, such as the Internet or cell phones, will be covered by their contract.



The second goal relates to reuse of content in new media, Verrone said.



The agreement bases payment for reuses on a distributor's gross formula for residuals, "so that when they get paid, we get paid," he said.



It is the "first time in our history that a new delivery system pays on a residual formula superior to the prior existing system," Verrone said.



The third goal, which Verrone said the guild did not achieve, was to shore up writers' shares of the revenue from animation and reality television.



"Giving up animation and reality was a heartbreaking thing for me personally," he said. "But it was more important that we make a deal that benefited the membership, the town as a whole, that got people back to work and that solved the biggest problems in new media." E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- An early goal from Theo Walcott gave Arsenal a vital 1-0 victory over Udinese in the first leg of their Champions League final qualifying round tie at The Emirates.





England international Walcott timed his run into the area perfectly to volley home Aaron Ramsey's fourth-minute right-wing cross from close range, to give Arsene Wenger's side a vital advantage to take into the second leg in northern Italy next week.





Arsenal came into the match on the back of a trying week, which saw captain Cesc Fabregas leave for Barcelona and more rumors surface of Samir Nasir's impending transfer to Manchester City.





What now for Arsenal and Fabregas?





The Gunners had to field a make-shift side with Nasri and new captain Robin Van Persie both suspended and key midfielder Jack Wilshere injured.





To compound matters, Wenger himself had to watch from the stands because of a one-match UEFA ban.





But despite a few nervy moments, primarily when Udinese captain Antonio Di Natale struck the crossbar with a long-range strike, Arsenal held on.





And Walcott nearly added a second goal late on, forcing a superb save from goalkeeper Samir Handanovic.





There were four other matches played on Tuesday evening, with Lyon coming from behind to beat Russian side Rubin Kazan 3-1 at the Stade de Gerland.





Rubin are looking to reach the group stages for a third successive year and they took a third minute lead when Vladimir Dyadyun turned in Bebras Natcho's right-wing corner.





However, the French side levelled seven minutes later when Bafetimbi Gomis got in between two defenders to finish a Michel Bastos cross.





And they went ahead five minutes before half-time when a Gomis cross-shot from the left found the net off defender Saba Kvirkvelia.





Lyon sealed their victory 19 minutes from time when Jimmy Briand headed home a Kim Kallstrom corner.





Meanwhile, an entertaining match in the Netherlands saw FC Twente draw 2-2 at home to Benfica, a result that leaves the Portuguese giants favorites to reach the group stage.





Luuk de Jong fired the hosts in a sixth minute lead, but Benfica leveled when Paraguay striker Oscar Cardozo curled home a superb equalizer.





Benfica led at the break after a fine flowing move saw Nolito score from close range but, with 10 minutes left, Bryan Ruiz headed home for Twente as the match finished all-square.





The other two matches saw BATE Borisov of Belarus draw 1-1 at home to Austrian side Sturm Graz, while Czech champions Viktoria Plzen secured a superb 3-1 win at FC Copenhagen of Denmark.

***

(CNN) -- A 93-year-old World War II medic who froze to death last month in his Bay City, Michigan, home left his entire estate to a local hospital, an estate attorney told CNN Wednesday.

Martin Schur poses with his wife, Marian, in 1976. Local and state officials agree that Schur's death was avoidable.

The attorney would not disclose the exact amount left behind by Martin Schur. But his nephew said his uncle indicated to family members two years ago that he had saved up more than a half-million dollars over the years. Schur and his wife, Marian, who died more than a year ago, did not have any children.

"I just know at one time he said he had over $600,000 in savings," said William Walworth. "That's what he told me and my brother, and he was proud that he was able to save and build his estate up to that."

Cathy Reder, an attorney negotiating on behalf of Bay Regional Medical Center and the Schur family, said she was filing paperwork in probate court Wednesday for the court to determine the validity of the will. A hearing has been set for March 17.

Reder would not specify the amount left to the hospital, other than to say it's more than $1.

"The will leaves everything to Bay Medical Center," she said.

The hospital had no immediate comment.

Walworth said his uncle was a frugal man who hadn't eaten at a restaurant for over 30 years. "He was very tight, and he was very frugal. But he did manage to save a lot of money."

He said it's possible his uncle's estate could be less than $600,000, but he believes it's still "sizable."

"Knowing my uncle, that's him," Walworth said. "He loved his community. He loved Bay City, Michigan."

He added, "Hopefully his death is not in vain and we can learn from this, and he's still able to save lives. ... He was a very unique, special person in my life. I'm proud of what he was able to do in his life."

He said he hopes his uncle's message will spur others to "look out for their neighbor."

The size of the estate -- if it's as large as the nephew believes -- adds another tragic twist to Schur's death. The power company limited his electricity because he owed about $1,000.  Watch neighbor say the death is "unforgivable" »

Schur's death last month shocked Bay City, a town of about 37,000 on Lake Huron's Saginaw Bay.

The World War II veteran's frozen body was found in his home January 17, just four days after a device that regulates how much power he uses -- installed because of failure to pay -- shut off his power. A medical examiner said the temperature was 32 degrees in the house when Schur's body was found.

The medical examiner told The Bay City Times that Schur died a "slow, painful death." "It's not easy to die from hypothermia without first realizing your fingers and toes feel like they're burning," Dr. Kanu Virani told the paper.

The Michigan State Police launched an investigation into Schur's death for possible criminal violations. "We have to do everything we can to make sure this doesn't happen again, whether it's Bay City or in any one of the cold weather states," Bay City Mayor Charles Brunner said last week.

The death has prompted a review of Bay City Electric Light & Power's rules and procedures for limiting or cutting off power. It also resulted in Bay City residents protesting Monday to the city about its handling of the whole situation.

A neighbor who lives down the street called Schur's death "unforgivable."

"This can't be allowed to happen in this country," said Jerome Anderson.

Walworth said he believes his uncle's death was "preventable."

"It should never have happened.

***

NEW DELHI, India (CNN) -- The collective cry throughout India of "Jai ho" (May you win) received a resounding answer when composer A.R. Rahman took home two Oscars for the movie "Slumdog Millionaire."

Composer A. R. Rahman, "The Mozart of Madras," celebrates his double Oscar win -- for Best Score and one for the song "Jai Ho" from the film.

Rahman's wins -- one for the song "Jai Ho" and the other for Best Score -- were just two reasons for Indians to erupt in boisterous celebrations Monday morning.

"Slumdog," which was shot in the streets and slums of Mumbai bagged eight golden statuettes in total, including one for Best Sound Mixing. Indian Resul Pookutty shared it with fellow sound editors who worked on the film.

"This is the finest hour of Indian cinema in the global scenario," said Anand Sharma, the country's junior external affairs minister.

Indians crowded around television sets in dorm rooms, restaurants and homes, exhaling in relief as Rahman's name was announced as the winner. They high-fived each other, hugged, shrieked and wept.

"I cannot describe this feeling," said Nikhil Jyonti, a Mumbai resident. "I'm bursting with pride for India."

In the Mumbai slum of Dharavi, where many of the scenes in "Slumdog" were shot, a television  was set out for the street children to watch the ceremony. Few in the teeming slum of one million people had heard of the Oscars, but they knew Rahman's win was a source of pride for the country.

Danny Boyle's rags-to-riches film tells the story of a tea-boy at a Mumbai call center who earns a spot in the Indian version of the quiz show "Who Wants To Be a Millionaire?" He raises the suspicion of the show's host when, despite the lack of a formal education, he begins to answer the increasingly difficult questions with ease.

The movie also won four Golden Globes and a host of honors at other award shows.

While the overwhelming sentiment was one of pride Monday, the movie has faced backlash from many Indian movie critics who took exception to its depiction of Mumbai's underworld without highlighting any of the city's achievements.

Among the most notable criticisms was one offered by Amitabh Bachchan, considered the most successful movie star in Bollywood history, and a former real-life host of the Indian "Millionaire."

The film," he said, "projects India as the third world's dirty underbelly ... and causes pain and disgust among nationalists and patriots."

But most Mumabikers, still reeling from a terrorist attack in their city in November, embraced the movie while looking for something positive to root for.

They found that in Rahman, a composer who has consistently broken barriers in his musical scores for dozens of Bollywood hits and is known as the "Mozart of Madras." Rahman has sold more than 200 million albums worldwide -- more than the Beatles -- but has remained relatively unknown in Europe and the United States.

Director Spike Lee used one of his songs in his 2006 heist film, "Inside Man."

Many hope the Oscar win will bring Rahman greater exposure. Rahman and Pookutty, however, aren't the first Indians with Academy Awards to their names.

In 1992, legendary Indian filmmaker Satyajit Ray received an honorary award for his contribution to world cinema. And in 1982, Bhanu Athaiya shared an Oscar for costume design for the movie "Gandhi."

CNN's Saeed Ahmed and Harmeet Shah Singh contributed to this report

***

ISLAMABAD, Pakistan (CNN) -- Pakistani authorities have arrested two top leaders of the Islamic militant group India blames for the November massacre in Mumbai, Pakistan's prime minister confirmed Wednesday.



Prime Minister Yousuf Raza Gilani said Pakistani security forces had rounded up a number of militant figures.



The top military officer in the U.S. on Wednesday said he is "encouraged" by Pakistan's recent arrests of "significant players" in the Mumbai attacks.



U.S. Joint Chiefs Chairman Adm. Mike Mullen said the arrests amount to "first steps" toward determining who plotted the three day siege last month that killed 160 people in Mumbai, India's financial capital.



"There are more steps to follow," he noted.



He also thanked India for showing restraint against Pakistan, which it has accused of harboring the terrorist groups behind the November massacre.



Zarar Shah, a top operational commander of Lashkar-e-Tayyiba, and Zakir Rehman Lakhvi, whose arrest had been reported Tuesday, were among the militant figures rounded up in recent days, Prime Minister Yousuf Raza Gilani told reporters.



Gilani would not confirm the detention of Masood Azhar, the leader of another militant group, Jaish-e-Muhammad. But he said his government has launched its own investigation into India's allegations that the gunmen who killed more than 160 people in Mumbai had links to Pakistan.



The acknowledgment came three days after Pakistani security forces raided an LeT camp near Muzaffarabad, the capital of Pakistani-controlled Kashmir, in the first sign of government action against Lashkar-e-Tayyiba since the three-day siege of India's financial capital.



Both LeT and Jaish-e-Muhammad were formed to battle Indian rule in the divided Himalayan territory of Kashmir, and both were banned after a 2001 attack on the Indian parliament that brought the South Asian nuclear rivals to the brink of war.



The United States has listed LeT as a terrorist group with ties to Osama bin Laden's al Qaeda network. According to the U.S. government, Lakhvi, 47, has directed LeT's military operations in southeast Asia, Chechnya, Bosnia and Iraq.



Pakistan's Defense Minister Choudhry Mukhtar Ahmed told CNN's sister network in India, CNN-IBN, that Lakhvi and Azhar had been arrested on Monday. Azhar has been in Pakistan since 1999, when he was released from an Indian prison in exchange for hostages aboard a hijacked Indian airliner.



Indian authorities say the sole surviving gunman in the Mumbai attacks told investigators that he was trained at an LeT camp near Muzaffarabad, along with the nine other attackers who were killed in the three-day siege. A Pakistani security official said the terror raids on banned militant groups are ongoing and have resulted in at least 15 arrests.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- A British businessman jailed in Dubai after being convicted with a female companion for having sex on a beach said he had acted naively as he spoke publicly Monday for the first time since returning to the UK.





Vince Acors said he had been "extremely naive" about Muslim law.





Vince Acors, 34, and Michelle Palmer, 36, were arrested on a Dubai beach in July and convicted to three-month jail terms in October on charges of public indecency and for having sex outside marriage. Their jail sentences were suspended on appeal and both returned to the UK last week.





Acors, a telecommunications executive, admitted being drunk at the time of the incident after an afternoon of drinking but denied that sex between the couple had occurred and said that worldwide media interest in the case had given authorities no choice but to convict them.





"Sex in this country (the UK) is not the same as sex in Dubai," Acors told a news conference, adding that there was "physical contact but intercourse did not take place."  Watch as Acors gives his side of the story »





But Acors admitted he had been "extremely naive" about Muslim law in the Middle Eastern country.





He described how drinking was commonplace in the Emirate's Western hotels, and how his "champagne glass was never empty" during a Friday afternoon "all-you-can-drink" reception where he met Palmer.





Acors said the Dubai authorities had confiscated his passport during deportation proceedings that took three months. He returned to Britain on Christmas Eve and is now looking to sell his story.





He said he and Palmer had since spoken only to discuss the case and don't have a relationship. She was not at the news conference.

***

(CNN) -- Baseball legend Barry Bonds is scheduled to be sentenced Friday for his obstruction of justice conviction.





The hearing at 11 a.m. (2 p.m. ET) will take place in a San Francisco federal courtroom less than two miles from the ballpark where Bonds broke Hank Aaron's major league home run record in August 2007.





Federal prosecutors want Bonds, 47, to serve 15 months in prison, according to a sentencing memo filed in court earlier this month.





Defense lawyers argued in their filing that the judge should accept the probation office's recommendation that Bonds be sentenced to two years' probation, fined $4,000 and ordered to perform 250 hours of community service.





Jurors who found Bonds guilty in April said he was "evasive" in his testimony to the federal grand jury investigating illegal steroids use by pro athletes.





"Because Bonds's efforts were a corrupt, intentional effort to interfere with that mission, a sentence of 15 months imprisonment is appropriate," the prosecution said in its memo to U.S. District Judge Susan Illston.





But jurors, who were deadlocked on three perjury counts, said that it was not proven that Bonds lied when he testified that he had not knowingly used steroids. Prosecutors decided not to pursue a retrial.





Prosecutors still argued in the sentencing memo that Bonds' denial that he was "taking steroids and human growth hormone were patently false."





Bonds' testimony in December 2003 was part of the investigation that targeted Bonds' personal trainer Greg Anderson and employees of the California drug testing laboratory known as the Bay Area Laboratory Co-operative (BALCO).





The testimony that led to Bonds' conviction came when a grand jury prosecutor asked Bonds if Anderson ever gave him "anything that required a syringe to inject yourself with."





Bonds told the grand jury that only his personal doctors "ever touch me," and he then veered off the subject to say he never talked baseball with Anderson.





Defense lawyers argued that Bonds thought the creams and ointments Anderson was giving him were made of flax seed oils.





Sentences for other athletes convicted in connection with the BALCO investigation have not included prison time.





CNN's Greg Morrison and Alan Duke contributed to this report.

***

ESTERO, Florida (CNN)   -- Alana and Joe Consolo should have had the excitement of a young couple enjoying their first house, but the South Florida pair was walking through it recently with a healthy dose of fear.

Alana and Joe Consolo tour their Florida house after it was gutted because of concerns about the drywall.

They've been caught in a maelstrom of headline news events that would make your head spin. Both were laid off as the economy soured. The nation's housing crisis cut their Florida house's value in half.

And now their home's interior is being rebuilt because it contained Chinese-made drywall that they say has made them sick.

The Consolos are among homeowners in several states who allege Chinese drywall has emitted corrosive gases they believe have given them headaches and upper respiratory problems and caused household systems such as air-conditioning units to fail.

"I'm holding back tears," Alana Consolo said as she walked through the house, which is in the middle of the reconstruction project. "I have chills and I'm angry -- really, really angry -- and really sad, too."

The Consolos moved into the home in Estero, near Fort Myers, less than three years ago. But they moved out six weeks ago, and even though it's being rebuilt, they doubt they'll return there to live because they've yet to be convinced they'd be healthy.

"The last time that we saw the house in this condition," Alana said, looking at the gutted interior, "we came in excited, holding our hands, planning on where we were going to put our [baby] room for our new family."  Watch the Consolos tour the gutted home »

Concerns about Chinese-made drywall emerged in Florida last year but by now have spread to other states. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission said it's investigating complaints in Florida, Virginia, Alabama, Louisiana, Washington and North Carolina. And class-action lawsuits are lining up against Chinese manufacturers as well as suppliers and builders.

The Florida Department of Health said complaints it received -- more than 180 as of Thursday -- generally involve homes built between 2004 and 2007, around the time that a building boom and post-hurricane reconstruction caused a U.S. drywall shortage and spurred imports from China.

A study done for the Florida department by private laboratory Unified Engineering Inc. found that samples of certain Chinese drywall gave off a sulfurous odor from "volatile sulfur compounds" when exposed to extreme heat and moisture. It also found that vapors "in the residential atmosphere created a corrosive environment in the presence of moisture," according to Unified's report.

But state and federal officials said they're still testing to determine whether the drywall poses health risks.

The Consolos, who now have a 4-month-old daughter, said they first noticed a problem in December when their smoke detectors kept going off inexplicably. An inspection revealed that copper wiring inside the house had turned black.

And the couple said they suffered from headaches and upper respiratory problems while living in the house. So they moved out.

Now the house, which had Chinese-made drywall, has been stripped. The builder, Lennar Homes, is footing the bill for the reconstruction and a nearby rental house for the Consolos.

Moving out came at a trying time for the family.

Both were laid off about a year ago by Countrywide Bank, where they were mortgage loan originators. Joe Consolo is now a restaurant manager.

Also, the nation's housing crisis hit their home. Purchased for $528,000, it has recently been appraised for $280,000. Trying to get out from under a bad investment, they went to their bank to do a short sale.

"The value had decreased so much, we were throwing money out the window," Alana Consolo said.

Two offers for $250,000 and $255,000 were rejected. So, they made a business decision: They stopped paying their mortgage and declared bankruptcy.

The Consolos are now three months behind in their payments. They're not sure yet if

***

Washington (CNN) -- The Supreme Court for the third time this year has stopped the pending capital punishment of a Texas inmate, giving lawyers for the man more time to file their appeals.





The justices on Tuesday issued an order granting a stay of execution for Cleve Foster, about 2 1/2 hours before his scheduled lethal injection. The Gulf War veteran was convicted along with another man of the 2002 murder of Nyanuer "Mary" Pal, a Sudanese immigrant he met at a Fort Worth bar.





The court indicated it would need more time to rule on the inmate's claims of prior ineffective assistance of counsel, and related claims of innocence of the murder.





This is the third time Foster, 47, has been granted a high court reprieve. His previous scheduled execution was stopped in January and April, once after he had already been given his last meal.





His April procedure was to be the state's first execution using a new sedative, the first in the lethal drug cocktail. A nationwide shortage of sodium thiopental forced corrections officials to announce they would use pentobarbital, a barbiturate that has alternately been used to put animals to sleep. Foster's lawyers had challenged that change, saying Texas foisted the new protocols so late, with little time for legal or medical review.





The state has since executed several inmates with the new drug mixture, without noted complications.





Foster has blamed his co-conspirator for the murder. His lawyers in their Supreme Court appeal presented letters from three fellow inmates who said co-defendant Sheldon Ward told them he acted alone in Pal's murder. The state countered Ward's statements to a psychologist implicating Foster as the mastermind behind the killing. They also said DNA from both men were found in the victim.





Texas has a planned lethal injection Wednesday. Lawrence Brewer, 44, was one of two white men convicted in the 1998 dragging death of James Byrd Jr., an African-American. That widely reported crime led to national movement to step up prosecutions and penalties for hate crimes.





Brewer has no pending appeals. It would be the 11th execution this year in Texas, the most active death-penalty state.





The current case is Foster v. Texas (11-6427).

***

(CNN) -- Huge crowds assembled in Pyongyang on Thursday at a national memorial service for the North Korean leader Kim Jong Il, the second day of state-orchestrated ceremonies to mourn the dictator who died earlier this month.





The authoritarian regime used a mixture of somber music, hyperbolic speeches, booming artillery fire and blaring horns to honor the man who oversaw 17 years of despotic rule in the secretive nation.





The ceremony took place a day after a funeral procession for Kim spent three hours winding through the snow-laden streets of Pyongyang lined with thousands of wailing mourners.





Once again, the regime placed Kim Jong Un, the son and chosen successor of Kim Jong Il, at the center of proceedings, proclaiming him the "supreme leader" of North Korea -- a fresh indication that the leadership transition is progressing smoothly.





The footage broadcast Thursday by North Korean state television showed thick rectangular blocks of people gathered in the snowy expanse of Kim Il Sung Square -- named after Kim Jong Il's father, the founder of North Korea.





Kim Jong Un and other senior members of the regime stood solemnly on a viewing platform overlooking the square.





During the ceremony, a string of top officials took to the microphone to praise Kim Jong Il's life and reinforce Kim Jong Un's leadership credentials.





"Kim Jong Un is the supreme leader who has inherited Kim Jong Il's beliefs, leadership, courage and guts," said Kim Yong Nam, the president of the North Korean parliament.





Read about the funeral for Kim Jong Il





"Kim Jong Il's great achievements will shine forever," said Kim Ki Nam, a senior official in the powerful Worker's Party. "Following our party's supreme leader, Kim Jong Un, we are converting our sadness to courage and we will achieve great things."





Under Kim Jong Il, the country suffered a devastating famine even as it built up its million-strong army, expanded its arsenal of ballistic missiles and became the world's eighth declared nuclear power.





He died on December 17, reportedly from a heart attack. News of his death, announced two days later, put the region on edge and set off speculation around the world about the country's stability and future direction.





For the time being, Kim Jong Un appears to be rallying support within the regime, despite his young age -- he is thought to be in his late 20s -- and relative inexperience.





After the speeches Thursday, a row of heavy guns fired off a salute. Then, a cacophony of horns and sirens went off, drawing the service -- and the last day of official mourning -- to a close.





CNN's Tim Schwartz contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- President Obama's economic stimulus plan cleared its first hurdle, but it was hardly the bipartisan victory he hoped for -- not a single House Republican broke ranks to support it.



The stimulus bill now moves to the Senate, where GOP members want less spending and more tax cuts.



In fact, 11 Democrats also voted against the $819 billion package.



But a win is a win, and so the White House strategy is to take the long view: Maybe the Senate will take out more of the controversial pork projects and tweak the tax cuts to win over more Republicans.



The full Senate will vote on its version next week. Should the Senate and House pass different versions, the two bills would have to be conferenced together. Then both chambers would have to vote on the new conference version in the coming weeks.  Watch what's next for the stimulus »



"I do think it is so important that we slow this bill down in order to do it right," said Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchison, R-Texas.



Senate GOP sources report that there is a "real split" in the GOP caucus about the best way to proceed in the wake of Wednesday's vote in the House.



The sources say Sen. Mitch McConnell, the Senate minority leader, wants a "smaller, narrower" bill. Another group of Republicans including Sen. John McCain of Arizona and Sen. Susan Collins of Maine is working to craft a larger package that would include more infrastructure spending.



Generally, the sources say, the party is looking for more concessions from the White House on spending.



The Senate has already made some changes in its version of the bill, which is approaching $900 billion.



The Senate Finance Committee added about $70 billion to fix the Alternative Minimum Tax, which was intended to place a tax on the wealthy but now hits many middle class families.



The Senate bill adds more direct money for seniors, with a plan to send $300 checks to social security recipients and disabled veterans. Smaller changes in the Senate version include $108 million to extend worker retraining programs and a provision to block any taxes on the first $2,400 of unemployment benefits.



Aides say housing relief is also going to be a big issue for some Republican senators. The main concerns are similar to those of their House counterparts. They want more tax cuts and less spending.



"We look forward to offering amendments to improve this critical legislation and move it back to the package President Obama originally proposed -- 40 percent tax relief, no wasteful spending and a bipartisan approach," McConnell said.



Obama has made it clear that he's not willing to budge on some of the big ticket items, like how the tax cuts are structured.



The version passed in the House is two-thirds spending and one-third tax cuts.



Much of the $550 billion in spending is divided among these areas: $142 billion for education, $111 billion for health care, $90 billion for infrastructure, $72 billion for aid and benefits, $54 billion for energy, $16 billion for science and technology and $13 billion for housing.



Those opposed to the bill say it includes too much wasteful spending, pointing to things like $335 million in funding for education on sexually transmitted diseases and $650 million for digital TV coupons.  Watch why some say there's too much pork »



A growing number of Republicans and Democrats say measures such as those don't create jobs.



The Democratic rationale is that healthier Americans will be more productive. And on the millions for digital television coupons, the hope is that money will go to new call centers explaining how the technology works.



"There's something in there for literally every interest. It's a pent-up wish list of spending programs that many around here have wanted to implement for a really long time," said Sen. John Thune, R-South Dakota.



Congressional leaders did drop some of the controversial provisions, like one that provided $200 million worth of contraceptives to low-income families

***

(CNN) -- A pair of Georgia men faced more than a half-hour of skeptical questions from reporters Friday as they defended their claim that they stumbled upon the body of Bigfoot while hiking in a remote North Georgia forest.



The thawed body of a creature reputed to be Bigfoot reportedly weighs more than 500 pounds.



Introduced by a publicist and beside a man who promoted what turned out to be a fake Bigfoot discovery in 1995, Matthew Whitton and Rick Dyer repeatedly said that their claim is not a hoax and that scientific analysis will prove it.



"We were not looking for Bigfoot. ... We wouldn't know what we were doing if we did," said Whitton, a police officer on leave after being shot in the hand while making an arrest. "I didn't believe in Bigfoot at the time. ... But you've got to come to terms with it and realize you've got something special. And that's what it was."



The men say they were hiking in early June when they discovered the body of a 7-foot-7, 500-pound half-ape, half-human creature near a stream. They also claim to have spotted about three similar living creatures -- and showed reporters video stills of what they say is one of those creatures shadowing them through the woods.  Watch report of scientist skeptical of Bigfoot claim »



The announcement, which the men first made on the Internet radio show "Squatch Detective" several weeks ago, has been greeted with healthy skepticism, even among some Bigfoot enthusiasts.



Scientists, including the head of North Georgia College and State University's biology department, have said it's unlikely a tribe of 7-foot-tall creatures would have avoided discovery in a region popular among hikers, hunters and vacationers.



Several Web sites have popped up questioning the claim and comparing a photo that the men say is the creature's body inside a freezer to a widely available Bigfoot costume.



On Friday, Whitton acknowledged creating a pair of videos posted on the Internet video site YouTube, one in which his brother poses as a scientist and another in which Whitton briefly seems to admit that the body is a fake.



"It seems that the stalkers have busted us in a hoax," he says in the video. But then adds, "we still have a corpse. We just wanted to give you something to do for the weekend."



At Friday's news conference, Whitton first said that no video existed in which he calls the discovery a hoax.



But after speaking to Tom Biscardi, the self-described "Real Bigfoot Hunter" who has been searching for the creature of legend since 1971, he said the video was made "to have a little fun with it" and was originally intended to throw off the "psychos" who had stalked him and his family since the men first made their claim. iReport.com: Have you seen 'Bigfoot'?



The two also promoted a Web site registered to Whitton on June 16 and said they plan to write a book about their experience.



Friday's news conference was held in Palo Alto, California, near the home of Biscardi. About 100 reporters and onlookers attended the event, in a hotel banquet room, including a man who shouted questions while wearing a gorilla suit.



Dyer and Whitton said they were carrying a video camera during their hike to film wildlife.



They said they handed the body over to Biscardi, who is keeping it at an undisclosed location until a team of scientists can examine it.



One of the two photographs the men gave to reporters Friday showed what appears to be the creature's mouth, an effort to disprove allegations that what's in the photo is a costume.



"I want to get to the bottom of it," Biscardi said. "I'll tell you what I've seen and what I've touched and what I've felt, what I've prodded was not a mask sewed onto a bear hide, OK?"



Biscardi acknowledged that he promoted a fake Bigfoot discovery in 1995, saying the woman who claimed to have the body convinced his staff members before

***

DETROIT, Michigan (CNN)  -- A defiant Mayor Kwame Kilpatrick addressed Detroit on Thursday night listing what he said the city had accomplished under his leadership just hours after announcing his resignation amid a sex and perjury scandal.



Detroit Mayor Kwame Kilpatrick has agreed to resign from office, a prosecutor said Thursday.



"The city is much better shape than the city I received seven years ago," said Kilpatrick. "We in Detroit have done amazing things together."



During the speech Kilpatrick also jabbed city officials and Michigan's governor, telling them to continue to work for the people of Detroit as hard as they did to get him out of office.



Kilpatrick told the crowd his marriage is better than it has ever been and kissed his wife to end the speech, an act that brought thunderous applause. Kilpatrick said he decided to step down so the city could continue to move forward.



"Sometimes standing strong means stepping down," Kilpatrick said. "But Detroit you have set me up for a comeback."



The embattled Kilpatrick pleaded guilty Thursday to charges resulting from a sex scandal and submitted his resignation to the governor -- effective in two weeks.



Under a plea deal, Kilpatrick will serve four months in the Wayne County Jail and the rest of his five-year sentence on probation, said Wayne County Prosecutor Kym Worthy.



He will enter jail on the day of his formal sentencing, October 28, she said.



Kilpatrick, 38, also agreed not to run for public office during his probation, to pay $1 million in restitution and to forfeit any future pension.



He was accused of blocking a criminal investigation into his office and firing a police deputy to cover up an extramarital affair and other possible illicit activities.



After the deputy, Gary Brown, lost his job, a mayoral bodyguard, Officer Harold Nelthrope, left his job voluntarily when the atmosphere became too tense, said his attorney in the whistle-blower suit trial.



Walt Harris, another former mayoral bodyguard, filed his own whistle-blower suit, contending he was punished for supporting Nelthrope's reports of wrongdoing by Kilpatrick and his bodyguards.



The city of Detroit paid $8.4 million to settle the lawsuits, but legal fees have pushed that figure to at least $9 million.



Prompted by the judge to recount his wrongdoing, Kilpatrick admitted Thursday, "I lied under oath in the case of Gary Brown and Harold Nelthrope versus the city of Detroit. ... I did so with the intent to mislead the court and the jury and to impede and obstruct the fair administration of justice."  Watch Kilpatrick in court »



When Circuit Court Judge David Groner asked Kilpatrick if he understood that by pleading guilty he was giving up the right to be presumed innocent until proven guilty, the mayor said, "I think I gave that up a long time ago, your honor. Yes."



Kilpatrick had faced eight felony counts. As part of the agreement, six counts related to misconduct in office were dropped, and a perjury count was changed to a second obstruction of justice charge.



In a separate case against Kilpatrick, Groner on Thursday accepted a no-contest plea on an assault charge brought against the mayor in July after he allegedly shoved a police officer trying to serve a subpoena on a friend of Kilpatrick's who was a potential witness in his perjury case.



Groner set an October 28 sentencing date for both cases.



Also Thursday, Michigan Gov. Jennifer Granholm adjourned a hearing on whether to remove Kilpatrick from office after he notified her of his pending resignation.



"Today, this sad but historic story is coming to an end," Granholm said.



"It's very important for us as a state and as a city to turn this page together. There is much work to do. It is my profound hope that we can now write a new history for this great but embattled city."  Watch Granholm call for a new chapter »



The governor set the hearing after the Detroit City Council voted in May to ask her to remove Kilpatrick, alleging he had misled the council by

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Congress passed a $300 billion farm bill over President Bush's veto for a second time Wednesday, a step made necessary by a clerical error when the original bill passed.



Congress overrode President Bush's second veto of a $300 billion farm bill.



The Senate voted 80-14 to approve the measure over Bush's objections, following a 317-109 vote in the House of Representatives. Both votes were well above the two-thirds majority needed to override the veto, which Bush delivered Wednesday morning.



Congress overrode an earlier veto of the farm bill last month, even though lawmakers had discovered that 34 pages were missing in the version originally sent to the White House. In spiking the latest version, Bush said he objected to its continued subsidies for the wealthy and its use of budget gimmicks to hide a $20 billion increase in spending.



But Sen. Kent Conrad, the chairman of the Senate Budget Committee, said the measure actually saves the government $110 million.



"This bill does not add to the deficit or debt, because this bill is paid for," he said. "That is not my claim. That is the finding of the Congressional Budget Office."



The discovery of the missing section, Title III, prompted concerns from House Republicans that the override vote was improper.



House Speaker Nancy Pelosi said the sections of the bill that were originally sent to the president had become law after Congress voted to override Bush's first veto.



But to put Title III into effect, Congress re-passed the entire legislation, including the missing pages, and resent it to Bush. The House voted 306-110 at the end of May. The Senate voted 77-15 for the bill at the beginning of June.



Two-thirds of the $300 billion in spending for the farm bill will go for nutrition programs such as food stamps. Another $40 billion will go toward farm subsidies, and $30 billion is allocated for payments to farms to keep land idle and other environmental programs.



After vetoing the latest version of the farm bill, Bush scolded Congress on Wednesday for not "modifying certain objectionable, onerous and fiscally imprudent provisions. ... I am returning this bill for the same reasons as stated in my veto message."



When he vetoed the first version of the farm bill, Bush said it "continues subsidies for the wealthy and increases farm bill spending by more than $20 billion, while using budget gimmicks to hide much of the increase."



The president said it would hurt efforts to improve American farmers' access to overseas markets.



Congress has passed one other bill over Bush's objections: legislation for a $23 billion water project that the president vetoed in 2007.



CNN Capitol Hill producer Deirdre Walsh contributed to this report.

***

DENVER, Colorado (CNN) -- Investigators in Colorado say they have broken up a massive methamphetamine ring in the Denver area that distributed pounds of the dangerous drug every week and laundered the profits using collectible comic books.



Aaron Castro and his brother were the leaders of the methamphetamine ring, authorities say.



"To launder the money you have to use something that is quick and convenient," Colorado Attorney General John Suthers said at a news conference Monday. "And in this case, they used classic comic books."



While arresting the alleged ringleaders, brothers Aaron and Alfonzo Castro, law enforcement officers seized about 100 boxes of first-edition collectible comic books. Investigators say one title alone is worth $3,500 and the total collection of comics is worth half a million dollars.



"It appeared they were working on a startup company for high-end comic books," said Don Quick, the district attorney in Adams County near Denver.



Quick said the seized comic books included some first-edition Superman and Batman titles. The fragile, vintage comics were stored in plastic bags for protection.



According to a grand jury indictment released Monday, the Castro brothers arranged for weekly, multiple-pound shipments of the meth from Phoenix, Arizona. The brothers then distributed the drugs to a network of runners that made deliveries to dealers around the Denver area.



Suthers says Castro brothers sometimes used females "as drug mules by having them hide methamphetamine inside their vaginal cavities." These women would then deliver the meth to a series of houses, and then lower-level dealers would distribute the drug.



"It's a tawdry piece of information, but it's a big part of what this group was doing," he said.



These same runners also collected money from dealers and delivered it to the Castro brothers. Suthers said the drugs most likely were manufactured in Mexico, and each month's shipments had a street value of about $2 million.



The indictment details 145 drug possession and distribution charges from October 2008 to earlier this month. The Castros and 39 other people are listed as defendants. The Castro brothers and their top runners are also charged with racketeering.



Of the 41 defendants, 40 are in custody. The Castros are being held in the Adams County jail on $1 million bail each. It is unclear if they have attorneys.

***

(CNN) -- A top United Nations official acknowledged Friday that the earthquake relief operation in Haiti was not progressing fast enough.





"You can't snap your fingers and make it happen just by magic," U.N. Emergency Relief Coordinator John Holmes said. But he promised, "We will do it, slowly and surely."





In an interview with CNN's Christiane Amanpour, Holmes said, "We have blockages at different points or bottlenecks of different points. The airport, coming in -- not as many planes as we'd like to get in there because of the landing blockages. It's happening, but it's happening not as fast as we would like."





Referring to the slow pace of aid deliveries, Holmes added, "We've got to unload it, get it into warehouses, then get it into trucks, then get it to distribution points, and then start to distribute it."





"There's a huge effort going in from huge numbers of countries and aid organizations, but it's not so visible on the ground because you can't quite get it there."





Get the latest developments in Haiti





Holmes said it was key to dig out survivors from ruined buildings as soon as possible. "There are something like 27 search-and-rescue teams now either on the ground or on their way, and that's beginning to make a difference," he said.





"Of course, with every day that passes, we know that the chances of finding somebody alive diminish, but that effort must continue, and we must continue to try and look after the injured."





Impact Your World





New York City Police Commissioner Ray Kelly, who was in Haiti just before the earthquake and served there in the mid-1990s, also emphasized the importance of saving the lives of people who are trapped and injured.





"I think there's still an opportunity even though it's almost 72 hours. I think that's got to be job number one," Kelly told Amanpour.





As far as aid distribution is concerned, Kelly said it was essential to move supplies from the airport into Port-au-Prince as fast as possible.





"It's about five miles for the most part, but it's a tough five miles. The roads are not good. Perhaps the helicopters from the USS Carl Vinson are going to be used to do precisely that."





The USS Carl Vinson, an U.S. Navy aircraft carrier, has recently arrived off the coast of Haiti with a fleet of 19 helicopters and several tons of aid.





Holmes expressed concern about the losses faced by the Haitian National Police during the earthquake. He said 300 officers died when the main police commissariat collapsed.





"It's not surprising they haven't been able to recover from the blow. But the prime minister, the president, are functioning now, and the ministry of interior."





He said so far it has been reasonably calm in Haiti. But the U.N. has thousands of police and soldiers in the country, and they will be able to maintain law and order with the help of American troops if necessary, Holmes said.





"It's really a peaceful country. I think it's gotten a bad reputation for certain outbreaks that did happen," Kelly said. "The people are in desperate straits. But I think everyone will be surprised at just how peaceful and orderly it will be."

***

(CNN) -- The ocean water around Chatham, Massachusetts, is playing host to some unwelcome guests this holiday weekend: sharks.



Only 41 unprovoked shark attacks have been reported in the U.S. since 2008.



At least one large shark sighting was confirmed Friday by Greg Skomal, shark expert for the state's Division of Marine Fisheries.



That sighting occurred off the eastern shore of Monomoy Island, a National Wildlife Refuge off the southern elbow of Cape Cod, according to Lisa Capone, Massachusetts Department of Energy and Environmental Affairs press secretary.



The species, though not confirmed, was "most likely" a great white shark, she said.



The sighting came a day after Skomal reported as many as five large sharks were seen near the island, about a mile or more away from Chatham's Lighthouse Beach, a public swimming area.



Capone said Skomal was searching the area of the island Friday afternoon, though weather conditions were "not ideal," with fog and wind.



Meanwhile, officials were advising residents and visitors to be cautious while visiting the beaches this weekend.



"It is the eve of the last holiday weekend of summer, and we want to make sure folks on the Cape are aware," Capone said.



Chatham's Harbor Master's office issued a public notice after the sightings Thursday, saying the waters surrounding Chatham are "now a year-round home to a few thousand seals." Seals are a main source of food for large sharks, and as recently as August 28, a large shark was seen feeding on the body of a seal near Chatham's waters, the notice said.



It advised people to avoid swimming near seals.



A statement issued Friday by Chatham town officials said "beaches will be closed immediately" if a shark is sighted.



Paul Zuest, general manager of the Chatham Bars Inn, said he and his staff also have been instructing their guests to be cautious. The hotel, about two miles away from where the sharks were spotted, has posted signs providing information on the sightings.



George H. Burgess, director of the Florida Program for Shark Research and curator of the Florida Museum of Natural History's International Shark Attack File, said that on average, sharks have killed four people annually worldwide for the past several years.



"The chances of us as individuals entering the sea and not coming back as a result of a shark attack are slim to none when you consider the millions upon millions of people that go into the sea each year," he said.



The museum's shark attack file lists 41 unprovoked shark attacks in U.S. waters in 2008, with one fatality, in California. Most of the attacks, 32, occurred in Florida.



Massachussetts has recorded only four shark attacks since 1670, two of which have been fatal. The last fatal shark attack in Massachussetts occurred in 1936.

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN) -- In its opening weekend, "The Haunting in Connecticut" scared and thrilled millions of moviegoers across the country.



In "The Haunting in Connecticut," Virginia Madsen sees strange things happen in her old house.



The film, which earned $23 million to finish No. 2 at the box office, emphasizes psychological horror over slasher film blood 'n' gore, which its audience apparently appreciated.



But Virginia Madsen, who plays Sara Campbell in the film, confessed that, while filming, fear was not just reserved for the screen.



"We all stayed in this big, old hotel which was kind of like the one in 'The Shining,' one of those turn-of-the- century big, old hotels," Madsen told CNN.



"I had a little chat with my room. I said, 'Just out of respect, if there are any entities around, I need to stay here, I have a lot of work to do, I have to sleep at night, so please leave me alone.' "



Yet, Madsen admitted, her belief in ghosts is not very strong.



"I do have an attraction to paranormal investigation and all those kinds of shows but I'm not sure if I really believe in ghosts," she said.



"The Haunting in Connecticut" is based on the true story of Sara Campbell, a mother who moves her family into an old house in Connecticut in order to be closer to the hospital where her son, Matt (Kyle Gallner), receives cancer treatment.



The house was once a funeral home and, shortly after their move, the family begins witnessing strange, supernatural activities.



"Something very powerful and very real happened to this family. Whether or not you believe it was some sort of demon or, you know, they're manifesting it -- whatever it is -- it changed their lives," Madsen said.



Madsen, 47, is probably best known for her Oscar-nominated turn in "Sideways" as Maya Randall, the restaurant waitress who gets involved in a romance with the prickly writer played by Paul Giamatti. Since that 2004 film, the actress has made several films, including "A Prairie Home Companion" and "The Number 23."



She and the rest of the cast developed a close relationship on the set and were much like a family behind the scenes.



"I was more like a mother bear with my young actors," Madsen said.



In fact, Madsen added, her close relationship with the younger actors made filming difficult at times.



"One scene in the movie that was the hardest for me to do was when [Matt] wakes up ... and his skin is all carved with these different incantations," she said. "And I open his shirt and he's just looking up at me with these big blue eyes with tears ... and he really felt like my boy, he really felt like my second son."



Madsen said the film, complete with ghosts, séances and creaking floorboards, is successful because it has all the elements of a good horror flick.



"The movie works ... because it plays on our most basic childhood fears. 'Something's under the bed, something's in the closet, something's in the mirror.' And all of us still have those same childhood terrors," she said.



The desire to experience those same terrors and to forget about everyday life, Madsen added, draws people to the theaters at an older age.



"I like things that go bump in the night, and scary things that are fun," she said. "That's really what this movie really is. I think horror movies are so popular because times are especially hard and I think a horror movie more than any other kind of movie is a true escape ... You're forgetting about your life because you're like, 'Oh my God!' "



CNN's Elham Khatami contributed to this story.

***

Moscow (CNN) -- President Dmitry Medvedev said Friday he had ceded his presidency bid to the country's powerful Prime Minister Vladimir Putin because the latter is a more popular politician in Russia, who has higher chances to be elected.





"Prime Minister Putin is definitely the most authoritative politician in our country and his rating is somewhat higher (than mine)," Medvedev said in a taped interview with Russia's national TV networks.





Public opinion polls in Russia have invariably indicated that Putin has been ahead of Medvedev in popularity ever since they constructed their ruling tandem almost four years ago. According to the most recent poll, conducted by independent Levada Center, the approval rating of Medvedev stood at 62 per cent in September, compared to Putin's 68 per cent.





In his Friday television interview Medvedev said that he and Putin belong to "the same political force" and have "very close positions on all strategic and tactical issues" and therefore shouldn't compete or quarrel.





"Can we possibly imagine, for instance, (U.S. President) Barack Obama competing with (Secretary of State) Hillary Clinton?" Medvedev asked. "Both of them were bidding for the presidential nomination ... Both were from the Democratic Party, and (the party) finally decided which of them should run to gain the best election result. Our decision was the same," Medvedev said.





"We want to achieve a political result, to win the elections -- the parliamentary elections in December and the presidential elections in March -- not to be nursing our ambitions," Medvedev said. "Any responsible person's ambition is to serve his country, and I insist on that," he said.





Commenting on the statements made by some people that the outcome of the Russian presidential elections is "predetermined", Medvedev said, "I consider such statements absolutely irresponsible, deceitful, and even provocative."





"The decisions made at the congress are only recommendations to the party to support two people in the elections, no more than that," he said.





Last Saturday Medvedev called on the ruling United Russia party to endorse Putin for president in 2012. Putin in turn suggested that Medvedev should take over the role of prime minister if the party wins parliamentary elections in December, in what would be a straight swap of their roles.





The announcement ended more than two years of speculation about whether Putin or Medvedev, his hand-picked successor, would seek to run for a second term.





Putin had stepped down as president in 2008 because the Russian constitution at that time limited the office to two consecutive four-year terms.





Under amendments to the constitution that came into force on December 31, 2008, the presidential term was extended to six years.





This means that if Putin is elected in March 2012 for six years, he would be eligible to run for another six-year term after that, potentially keeping him in charge until 2024.

***

(CNN) -- CNN is taking an in-depth look at contemporary Russia as part of the "Eye on Russia" series. We asked you to share your photos of Russia and tell us about your experiences in the country, and photos and stories poured in of beautiful places and ordinary places, and of hopes for Russia's future in the 21st century.



Anna Glubokina, 27, jumped at the opportunity to send photos of her country. A business analyst in Moscow, she has traveled through Russia and collected photos along the way.



Murray Gillis took this image of an ice sculpture during a trip to Gubkinsky, Russia.



"I think that Russia is like a mountain river: fast, dangerous and beautiful," Glubokina said.



"You will never know what is waiting for you in the future. But I love Russia very much. I will never be bored here. I know that tourists like Russia, because of its astonishing churches and palaces, because of Kremlin and Red Square, because of its great scenery."



Many of those who sent us photos were originally from other countries, like Justin Goney, originally from Urbana, Ohio. He now lives in Helsinki, Finland, but spent 14 months teaching English in Moscow. At the small Soviet-style grocery store where he sometimes shopped, he would tell the store clerk what he would like to purchase, rather than get the items himself.



The 26-year old said he thinks there are more tourists in Russia now than there would have been during Soviet times. He said he has very vivid memories of what it was like seeing the country on TV as a child.



"I guess that's sort of a defining element of who I am is growing up during the Reagan presidency and seeing the end of the Cold War on TV," Goney said.



Arturo Fortun, originally from Bolivia, has lived in Russia for six years. He said the Russian people will take time to become accustomed to democracy. He said life is different there, but after a time, your impressions may change.



"It's like a constant adventure," he said. "You cannot take anything for granted."



Volker Kleensang, of Hamburg, Germany, frequently visits Kaliningrad, Russia, a former German territory that lies between Poland, Lithuania and the Baltic Sea. Physically separated from the rest of Russia, Kaliningrad has a different character than other parts of the country, Kleensang said.



"Many people from Kaliningrad, they still use the old German name. For me it's a sign that they say, 'We are Russian, but we are more and more European-oriented than the people from Moscow or St. Petersburg.'"



Craig Dillon of Queenstown, New Zealand, visited the country after winning a contest through a New Zealand vodka company. He said he had a choice of taking an $8,000 prize or a trip to Moscow, and out of curiosity, he took the latter. It was his first trip out of the region, and he said it was a "major eye opener" to see the gap between the rich and poor: "Fast cars power past a begging woman on the streets of Moscow."



On a more mundane note, he visited a Russian McDonald's and found that the food was much the same as anywhere else. The only thing he noticed about edible items was that the water had a slightly different taste. E-mail to a friend

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- A chronology of bombings and attempted bomb attacks in the mainland UK since the 1970s:



Police close off streets around Haymarket, in London's busy theater district.



June 29, 2007: Police defuse a bomb consisting of 200 liters of fuel, gas cylinders and nails found in an abandoned car in Haymarket, central London. A second car packed with gas and nails was later found to have been parked just a few hundred yards from the first, before it was towed away by traffic wardens in the early hours of Friday for violating parking restrictions. Police say two vehicles clearly linked.



July 21, 2005: Two weeks after the deadly 7/7 bombings, four men are alleged to have attempted to carry out a second wave of attacks against London's transport network at three London underground stations and aboard a bus. But their alleged rucksack bombs fail to explode.



July 7, 2005: Four suicide bombers detonate themselves aboard three underground trains and a bus in a morning rush hour attack against London's transport network, killing 52 people and injuring around 700 more. Al Qaeda claims responsibility in a video statement.



August 2004: Anti-terrorist police disrupt a plot by Islamic militants to blow up targets including the Ministry of Sound nightclub and the Bluewater shopping center in southeast England using explosives packed into limousines and large vehicles. Seven men are convicted in May 2007 and sentenced to up to 26 years in prison.



March 2001: A car bomb explodes outside the BBC's London headquarters, wounding one man. Police blame the Real IRA, a republican splinter group opposed to the IRA's cease fire.



April 1999: Three people die when a nail bomb explodes in the Admiral Duncan pub in London's gay district -- the third in a spate of series of nail bomb attacks also targeting immigrant areas of the city that left dozens injured. A 23-year-old self-declared "Nazi", David Copeland, is sentenced to six life terms.



June 1996: A massive IRA bomb explodes in a shopping center in central Manchester, injuring more than 200 people.



February 1996: Two people die as IRA terrorists detonate a bomb in London's Docklands area, causing damage estimated at around $170m and ending the group's 17-month cease fire.



April 1993: An IRA truck bomb devastates part of London's financial district, killing one and wounding 44.



March 1993: Two boys aged three and 12 are killed and dozens are injured by two bombs left in litter bins in Warrington, northern England. The IRA admits planting the bombs.



April 1992: A huge IRA car bomb in London's financial district kills three people and wounds 91.



February 1991: IRA terrorists launch a mortar attack at Prime Minister John Major's Downing Street offices. No-one is injured.



September 1989: Eleven people die and 22 are wounded when an IRA bomb explodes at a Royal Marine music school in Deal, southern England.



December 1988: A Pan Am airliner explodes over the Scottish town of Lockerbie, killing 259 aboard and 11 people on the ground. Libyan agent Abdel Basset al-Megrahi, convicted of the attack in 2001, was this week granted the right to mount a fresh appeal. (Read about Lockerbie bomber)



October 1984: Five people die in an IRA bomb attack on a hotel in Brighton, southern England, where Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and her cabinet are staying for the Conservative Party's annual conference.



December 1983: An IRA bomb at London's Harrods department store kills six people.



July 1982: Two IRA bomb attacks on soldiers in London's parks kill 11 people and wound 50.



October-November 1974: A wave of IRA bombs in British pubs in Birmingham and Guildford kill 28 people and wound more than 200.



February 1974: A coach carrying soldiers and families in northern England is bombed by the IRA, killing 12 and wounding 14. E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- The power of the Mexican military was on full display Tuesday in Ciudad Juarez, where police reported the third consecutive day without a drug slaying.



A federal police officer guards a checkpoint earlier this month in Ciudad Juarez, Mexico



Ten drug-related killings in a single day were common before 9,500 army troops poured into the blood-soaked border town in the past few weeks, said Mauricio Mauricio, a spokesman for the Juarez municipal police.



"It's a much more secure city at this moment," he said. "We haven't had murders with the same regularity and frequency as before."



But as President Obama's administration announced plans Tuesday to beef up U.S. security along its border with Mexico, there are questions about whether increased military and police efforts in both nations can yield long-term results.



Mexico has been spiraling into a deepening pit of violence, with 6,500 people killed in 2008 and the body count continuing apace this year. Most of that violence is occurring along the border, which worries Washington.



Mexican President Felipe Calderon and others have said recently that the United States must share responsibility because the demand for drugs and most of the weapons used by drug cartels comes from north of the border.



The drug war and security will be a major topic when U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton visits Mexico on Wednesday and Thursday.



Andrew Selee, director of the Woodrow Wilson Center's Mexico Institute, called Obama's pledge on Tuesday to give $700 million in aid to Mexico and assign an additional 360 staff along the border a "substantive commitment" that shows the United States is serious about attacking the problem.



"It's an attempt to really put some substance behind the idea of shared responsibility," Selee said. "They finally committed some of the resources they said they would to this."



Success will depend on the follow-through, he said.



"Now is the hard part," he said. "It's not easy to follow the money trail or stop the weapons or the criminal networks."



Others say the Obama plan falls short.



Larry Birns, director of the Council on Hemispheric Affairs, a Washington policy institute, calls it a "militarized strategy" that isn't oriented toward finding solutions based on economic development or social justice programs.



"This is a feel-good strategy that is meant to produce the illusion of concrete developments taking place when it's actually just really more of the same," Birns said. "You're talking about a 2,000-mile border, so the odd 16 [agents] here or 12 there is not going to do the trick."



On the other hand, Mexico's major military commitment is certainly showing short-term benefits.



Before the army arrived in Ciudad Juarez, there had been more than 400 drug killings this year, police spokesman Mauricio said. Since the army arrived, slayings have dropped 95 percent, he said.



Peter Hakim, president of the Washington-based Inter-American Dialogue policy institute, says Mexico's use of the army in Juarez -- and its evident success -- "shows that Mexico is definitely not a failed state. Nobody is going to challenge the government for control of a certain area."



Selee sees it as "increased determination from the Mexican government to establish order."



But there are limitations to using the military in Mexico, Birns and Hakim said.



"There's bad blood that exists between local communities and the military," said Birns. "The Mexican military has not fought a war for years. It's enemy has always been the local population."



Hakim noted the cost in money, and to the daily fabric of life.



"That's not a cheap way of keeping law and order," he said. "It does a great deal of harm to civilian institutions. The military is not trained to respect human liberties and individual rights."



It's an ambivalence that many Mexicans feel: security versus liberties.



Polls consistently show that security is the top concern among a vast majority of

***

New York (CNN) -- Legendary and curmudgeonly TV commentator Andy Rooney offered his final remarks Sunday on the news show "60 Minutes," capping a career that has spanned more than six decades.





In his final essay, delivered around 8:15 p.m., Rooney said, "This is a moment I have dreaded.





"I wish I could do this forever. But I can't," he said. "But I'm not retiring. Writers don't retire, and I'll always be a writer."





CBS announced Tuesday that the upcoming program, five days later, would be the last one for the 92-year-old award-winning writer, essayist and commentator. He has been with the network -- first as a writer for "Arthur Godfrey's Talent Scouts" -- since 1949, and been part of the "60 Minutes" crew since 1978.





"There's nobody like Andy, and there never will be. He'll hate hearing this, but he's an American original," CBS News Chairman Jeff Fager said in a release announcing Rooney's exit.





The original essay offered Sunday was Rooney's 1,097th for the program.





In it, he described himself simply, not as a "television personality," but rather as "a writer who reads what he's written."





"A writer's job is to tell the truth," he said. "I know I've been terribly wrong sometimes, but I think I've been right more than I've been wrong."





Earlier in the show, Morley Safer -- himself a 79-year-old journalist and a "60 Minutes" staple since 1970 -- interviewed Rooney about his personal and professional life.





Rooney attended Colgate University until he was drafted into the Army in 1941. In February 1943, he was one of six correspondents who flew with the 8th Air Force on the first American bombing raid over Germany. Last year, Rooney received the Overseas Press Club of America President's Award for these reports.





The television commentator admitted Sunday that he doesn't sign autographs and rarely responds to fan mail, telling Safer he didn't "want to answer an idiot who would have the bad sense to write me a letter." Rooney has also engendered controversy, such as his weekslong suspension in 1990 from "60 Minutes" for remarks that offended some gay viewers.





But he's better known for his sharp commentaries and public persona as someone fed up with everything from desk clutter to chocolate chip cookies to door knobs.





In his time at "60 Minutes," Rooney also has contributed many deeper pieces in the wake of events like the 1986 space shuttle Challenger explosion, the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing and the "shock and awe" campaign to start the 2003 Iraq war -- a phrase he scathingly said "makes us look like foolish braggarts."





Safer described his longtime colleague as "America's favorite grouch-in-chief," saying Rooney used his "loud whiny voice ... speaking up for citizens fed up with everything."





"There have been many curmudgeons on television over its long history," Safer said affectionately. "None has been so long serving in that role as Mr. Rooney."

***

DUBAI (CNN) -- A court in Dubai sentenced two men Wednesday to 15 years in prison for the rape and kidnapping of a 15-year-old French boy.



Veronique Robert, mother of the 15-year-old French-Swiss teen, speaking outside a court in Dubai.



The boy's mother, Veronique Robert, was visibly upset after the sentence was read and promised to appeal.



Robert, a French journalist, brought the case to the media's attention in recent months in an effort to shed light on what she deemed to be injustices in the pro-Western emirate of Dubai.



Robert said Wednesday's sentence was too lenient for a crime that she believes is tantamount to attempted murder because one of her son's attackers was knowingly HIV-positive at the time of the rape.



She refrained from asking the death penalty for her son's attackers, but said she hoped the sentence would be much longer.



A spokesman for the Dubai government, Habib al Mulla, told CNN the sentence was in accordance with international standards and was not lenient.



"Today's verdict has proven that the system is efficient and is fair to all parties involved," al Mulla said.



The case began in July, when the two men, 36 and 18, kidnapped and raped the French teenager at knifepoint.



Robert contacted French diplomats, who took up the allegations with Dubai authorities. Al Mulla said police action was swift and arrests were made within 24 hours.



But Robert has said the case was botched from the start, beginning with her son's examination by a doctor who said her son was gay. Homosexuality in Dubai is illegal, and the teen could have faced as much as a year in prison.



Robert's son has since returned to France and was not in court for Wednesday's sentencing.



Robert has also said Dubai authorities repeatedly concealed evidence -- confirmed in court papers -- that one of the attackers was HIV-positive. Robert said her son, who is still awaiting test results to find out whether he has the virus, could have gotten treatment much sooner had they known.



Dubai authorities deny any evidence was concealed.



The case has shed light on Dubai's attitudes toward rape and homosexuality, which some Western observers have said is outdated. Al Mulla, however, said Wednesday's sentencing and the government's handling of the case proves the country's system works.



"It's today's verdict which proves that there is a system," al Mulla said. "The system is working properly. However, if there is any room for any improvement in the system, we'll definitely look into it, consider it, and if there's any room for improvement, we'll implement it."



The mother has already filed suit in courts in Paris and Geneva, Switzerland seeking compensation from Sheikh Khalifa, president of the United Arab Emirates, and the prime minister and vice president of Dubai, Sheikh Mohammed al Maktoum.



She is also suing others, including the Dubai police chief. Robert started a Web site over the summer, boycottdubai.com, demanding better treatment for children who suffer sexual assault there.



At a press conference last month, she proclaimed, "We are here because I just would like first justice for my son; and second for every girl and boy who was raped and even had no chance to speak."



Robert said she will drop all her pending cases if the government sets up rape clinics, recognizes the status of rape victims, and takes precautions after rape against sexually-transmitted diseases. In the wake of Wednesday's verdict, Robert said a Dubai government official told her the emirate plans to open its first rape clinic, which she said was a small victory.



The government has not yet officially announced its plans to open such a facility. Al Mulla told CNN that Dubai believes a reception center for rape victims is "a good solution."



"We are considering it," he said, regarding Robert's request. "We believe it's good. It's good for the victims, and it's good for the whole system

***

Joint Base Lewis-McChord, Washington (CNN) -- Army Staff Sgt. Calvin Gibbs has been sentenced to life in military prison with eligibility for parole in 10 years.





A military court-martial Thursday found Gibbs guilty of murdering three Afghan civilians, illegally cutting off pieces of their corpses to keep as "souvenirs" and planting weapons to make the men appear as if they were Taliban fighters killed in legitimate firefights.





He was reduced in rank to private and ordered to forfeit all pay and benefits. Whatever sentence Gibbs serves will be reduced by the 547 days he has already spent in prison.





"He said they were all dirty savages," prosecutor Maj. Andre Leblanc said at Gibbs' sentencing hearing.





"He is the savage, not the innocent Afghans he murdered. It is monstrous. What kind of savagery does it take to do this? To cut a finger off a victim and show it to people? This is a savage being"





Gibbs' attorney, Phillip Stackhouse, had asked the court for a sentence of life with parole so Gibbs would have the opportunity to be with his now-3-year-old son again.





"He has a long time to reflect on his life, what he has done and what he wants to do in the future," Stackhouse said.





Gibbs is the highest ranking of five soldiers charged with being part of a rogue "kill squad" that targeted civilians. Another seven soldiers also were charged with lesser crimes including abusing drugs, keeping "off the books" weapons and intimidating a fellow soldier not to speak out against the platoon's alleged killings.





Gibbs had pleaded not guilty.





A prosecutor described Gibbs as a "recruiting poster" soldier. But the tall, clean-cut Gibbs and the "kill squad" he was convicted of leading turned into a public-relations nightmare for the military.





"Sgt. Gibbs had a charisma, he had a 'follow me' personality," Maj. Robert Stelle, a prosecutor in the case, told the court in closing arguments Wednesday. "But it was all a bunch of crap, he had his own mission: murder and depravity."





The murders Gibbs is accused of committing took place over a period of five months last year, while Gibbs led the 3rd Platoon of the ArmyÂ¹s 5th Stryker Brigade in Kandahar Province, Afghanistan.





Gibbs' platoon was tasked with patrolling small villages in the area to build relationships with an Afghan population wary of the U.S. presence in their country. Instead, prosecutors said Gibbs and a small group of rogue soldiers allegedly plotted to murder civilians and then planted weapons on them so they appeared to be Taliban attackers.





"Selling a fake engagement as a real engagement, that's what they were doing," Stelle told the court.





In court testimony, Gibbs said he did not execute anyone. Prosecutors said Gibbs participated in the killings of three unarmed civilians: two farmers and a village cleric.





Gibbs said he killed one of the men, but he claimed it was in self-defense. However, the staff sergeant admitted to ripping and cutting off fingers of all three men he was charged with killing. He kept the body parts, he said, to give to soldiers he favored or to intimidate soldiers he disliked.





"I was numb to the situation," Gibbs told the court about why he had taken the body parts. "I wasn't thinking; it's sickening. I am embarrassed."





Gibbs also admitted to posing for photos with bodies against military regulations.





"People wanted to prove they were there," Gibbs replied when asked by his attorney why the soldiers took the photos. The Army later apologized after the photos were leaked to the press.





Gibbs appeared shocked after the verdict was read, and his wife, Army Spec. Chelsy Gibbs, began to cry. According to court records, she filed for divorce from Staff Sgt. Gibbs in August and asked for custody of their toddler son.





The panel of three officers and two enlisted soldiers started deliberating in a military courtroom near Tacoma shortly before 10 a.m.

***

Washington (CNN) -- Another massive snowstorm barreled into the mid-Atlantic region Tuesday, as residents still reeling from a paralyzing weekend blizzard faced more of the same.





Hundreds of flights were canceled, and airlines were waiting to see whether they would have to cancel more. No flights were expected to be operating Wednesday at Reagan National Airport or at Washington Dulles International, the Washington Airports Authority said.





Federal workers and schoolchildren in the nation's capital were told to stay home for a second consecutive day.





The National Weather Service predicted another 10 to 20 inches of snow for northern Virginia, eastern Maryland and Washington beginning Tuesday afternoon and continuing through Wednesday.





In last weekend's blizzard, a record 32.4 inches of snow fell on Washington's Dulles International Airport over two days, breaking the January 7-8, 1996, record of 23.2 inches.





Are you there? Share your winter weather photos, video





If as severe as predicted, the new storm will be the third major snowfall to hit the nation's capital and surrounding region in slightly more than seven weeks.





In Washington on Tuesday, out-of-towners Susan Martin and Robert Travers told CNN affiliate WJLA they had just flown to the city for a conference, but learned when they arrived that the conference had been canceled. Flights that would take them home from Reagan National Airport had been canceled, too.





"We probably won't get a flight back out of here until Thursday. That's what they're telling us," Martin told WJLA.





WJLA.com: People stranded at Washington airports, train stations





It was not expected to begin snowing in some areas until Tuesday night or Wednesday.





Forecasters said Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, could be slammed with 3 to 7 inches Tuesday and an additional 8 to 12 inches on Wednesday; Washington, 4 to 8 inches on Tuesday night and another 3 to 7 inches Wednesday; 5 to 8 inches Tuesday and 3 to 5 on Wednesday in Boston, Massachusetts; and 2 to 4 inches Tuesday and 6 to 10 inches Wednesday in New York.





Snow coverage from CNN affiliate WBAL





Delays of 30 minutes were reported for some flights at Chicago, Illinois', O'Hare International Airport, where more than 600 flights were canceled. Most of the flights at Midway Airport also were canceled, according to Gregg Cunningham, spokesman for the Chicago Department of Aviation.





Southwest Airlines was expecting to resume its normal schedule Wednesday at 10:30 a.m., he said.





Travelers should confirm the status of their flights by checking their airline's Web site before departing for the airport, he advised.





Delta Air Lines canceled 375 flights, including regional flights, in various locations Tuesday, spokesman Anthony Black said. He said a decision would be made Tuesday evening on any Wednesday cancellations.





American Airlines canceled 80 flights into and out of Washington and Philadelphia, spokesman Tim Wagner said. American and Delta said they had pre-emptively canceled 120 flights for Wednesday for both cities.





US Airways canceled 135 mainline flights and 307 US Airways Express flights systemwide, spokesman Andrew Christie said. He said the airline has canceled 380 mainline flights and 1,042 US Airways Express flights.





Snow causes more headaches for travelers





The storms were taking a financial toll on local governments.





Alexandria, Virginia, spent more than $1 million for the massive snowstorm that hit the region in December, budget analyst Morgan Routt said, and the city was still cleaning up after last weekend's storm.





"So, you can imagine, that's costing even more," he said. "We've had people working around the clock."





The city, whose fiscal year runs from July 1 to June 30, generally budgets $790,000 annually for snow removal. That covers the costs of equipment, personnel, contractors, materials and supplies.





For the 2009 year ending in July, Routt said, the city spent only $485,000.





Part of this year's costs are reimbursable by the federal government because the governor declared a snow emergency, he added.





All Washington National Guard full-time personnel were asked to report for duty Tuesday morning and

***

(CNN) -- Five years from now, there's an excellent chance you won't have the same health insurance you have (or don't have) right now. That's because members of Congress are gearing up to reform the U.S. health care system, and unlike in 1993 when then-first lady Hillary Clinton tried her hand at changing the medical system, this time  the important players -- doctors, insurance companies, pharmaceutical manufacturers -- seem to be on board. You heard a lot about health care reform this week, and you'll be hearing even more in the months to come. It's an incredibly confusing, complex issue, so in this week's Empowered Patient, we break it down for you with 10 frequently asked questions about health care reform.



Overhauling health care  is key to U.S. economic stability, President Obama tells doctors Monday.



1. Why is health care reform such a hot issue right now?



Fewer and fewer Americans have health insurance, and therefore cannot afford good medical care. Nearly 46 million Americans have no insurance, and 25 million more are underinsured. One major reason for this crisis is that many employers have stopped offering insurance to employees because of the high cost. In the United States, total health care spending was $2.4 trillion in 2007 -- or $7,900 per person -- according to an analysis published in the journal Health Affairs. The United States spends 52 percent more per person than the next most costly nation, Norway, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation. There's little debate that health care reform is necessary -- President Obama, Republican and Democratic members of Congress, the American Medical Association and America's Health Insurance Plans, which represents the insurance industry, all have agreed the system needs to be changed, although they disagree on how to do it.



2. So let's start with Obama. What are his plans for revamping the system?



A central point of the president's plan is to create a government-sponsored health insurance program that would be an option for all Americans, similar to how Medicare is now an option for Americans over age 65. He has also said he'd "like to see" prohibitions against insurers discriminating against people with pre-existing conditions, and incentives for people to use preventive services and wellness plans. Obama outlined this plan last week at a town hall meeting in Green Bay, Wisconsin, and on his Web site.



3. How does the president plan to pay for this?



Obama said he's already identified "hundreds of billions of dollars" worth of savings in the federal budget that could help finance health care reform, such as rooting out waste, fraud and abuse in Medicare and Medicaid. He's also proposed reducing tax deductions for high-income Americans.



4. What do the Republicans think of Obama's plan?



In particular, they don't like the idea of having a government-sponsored health insurance program for all Americans. They fear employers would opt for the government-run insurance over private insurance because the government option would most likely be less expensive, but Republicans say it would also be lower quality. For information, see House Minority Leader John Boehner's Web site.



5. Since they don't like Obama's ideas, how would Republicans like to reform health care?



Republicans think Obama's plan is costly and will make health insurance more expensive, not less. In a plan outlined this week, House Republicans proposed individual tax breaks for buying health insurance and "pools" of states and small business to get lower-cost health care plans. They also proposed increasing incentives for people to build health savings accounts, allowing dependent children to stay on parents' policies until age 25 and encouraging employers to reward employees for improved health.



6. I'm happy with the insurance I receive from my employer. What would health care reform mean for me?



If you receive high-quality health insurance from your employer, Obama said, his plan won't change that, and you can still keep your insurance and your doctors. Republicans, however, said that if Obama gets

***

NORFOLK, Virginia (CNN) -- Negotiators aboard a U.S. Navy warship are trying to secure the release of an American freighter captain who is being held by pirates on a lifeboat off the coast of Somalia, according to Maersk Line Ltd.

Capt. Richard Phillips of the Maersk Alabama is being held by pirates on a lifeboat off Somalia.

The crew aboard the destroyer USS Bainbridge could see the lifeboat where pirates have been holding Capt. Richard Phillips since Wednesday, the company said in a written statement issued at 5 p.m. ET.

Phillips has not been hurt, the statement said.

Phillips, who has received provisions and batteries for his radio, has been in touch with the crews of the Alabama and the Bainbridge, the statement said.

The pirates are the same four men who hijacked Phillips' vessel, the U.S.-flagged Maersk Alabama, early Wednesday hundreds of miles off the Horn of Africa.

The Alabama's 20-person crew later regained control of the ship, which is owned and operated by the Norfolk-based Maersk Line Ltd.

In a written statement, Maersk spokesman Kevin Speers noted that "there have been many questions about how the crew re-captured the ship and how the captain came to leave the ship."

But he would not clarify the matter.

"Our immediate focus has been to bring the current situation to a safe resolution," he said. "There will be time for due diligence and retrospective review once we have the safe return of all parties and the opportunity for a full de-briefing."

The U.S. Navy, which is in charge of the situation, requested the help of the FBI. FBI negotiators in the United States are in touch with the crew of the Bainbridge, which arrived on the scene earlier Thursday to assist, a senior U.S. defense official said.

According to Maersk's last communication with the Navy, the 28-foot lifeboat was disabled and "dead in the water," Speers said Thursday morning.

"We are encouraged that most of the crew is safe. They have been resilient and courageous throughout this crisis," Speers said. "But we will remain on watch, staffing our situation room and our family hot line until this situation is resolved and the captain is safely returned."

On Thursday, the Maersk Alabama resumed its journey to Mombasa, Kenya, with an 18-person armed security detail on board, according to Joseph Murphy, the father of the ship's first officer. Maersk and U.S. military officials confirmed the cargo ship had left the area on Thursday, but would not say where it was heading, citing security concerns.  See how pirate attacks have increased »

Gen. David Petraeus, chief of U.S. Central Command, said Thursday that the Bainbridge would be getting backup shortly.

"I can tell you, there are definitely going to be more ships in that area in the next 24 or 48 hours, because there are two more sailing to it right now," he said.

"Needless to say, we want to ensure we have all the capacity that may be needed over the course of the coming days."

Vice Adm. William E. Gortney, commander of U.S. Naval Forces Central Command, told CNN's Barbara Starr in Bahrain that, "We have been moving forces in that direction."

White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs said President Obama had been staying apprised of the situation.

"Obviously, his main concern is for the safety of the captain and the rest of the crew on the ship, and he will continue to receive those updates," he said.

Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said an international coalition of countries is working to address the piracy threat, but the area in question is immense.

"I think the ocean area we're referring to is three times the size of Texas," she told reporters. iReport.com: 'Stop the pirates, Obama!'

Referring to continuing problems with piracy in those waters, she said instability in Somalia has contributed to the flourishing of "an old scourge."

The Alabama was loaded with food aid when the pirates hijacked it Wednesday, 350 miles

***

(CNN) -- A North Carolina man charged with killing a pregnant Fort Bragg soldier was the father of her unborn child, authorities said Wednesday.



Sgt. Edgar Patino faces first-degree murder charges in the slaying of Megan Touma.



Army Sgt. Edgar Patino is linked to two anonymous "confession" letters sent in what police believe was an attempt to derail the investigation into Megan Touma's death, police said.



Patino, 27, was arrested at his Hope Mills, North Carolina, home Tuesday night without incident. Patino, who is stationed at Fort Bragg's JFK Special Warfare Training Center, faces first-degree murder charges in the slaying of Touma, 23, who was seven months pregnant.



Touma's decomposing body was found in the bathtub of a hotel room near Fort Bragg on June 21. Authorities said Wednesday that they believe she died late June 13 or early June 14.



Although her death has been ruled a homicide, authorities said Wednesday that the state medical examiner has not made a final determination of how she died.  Watch officials discuss the case »



Patino has admitted being in Touma's hotel room June 13, and investigators found that the room's electronic key card was last used on that day, police said Wednesday. However, Patino has not admitted killing Touma.



Patino wore red jail coveralls in his initial court appearance Wednesday afternoon. He spoke only to answer the judge's questions, acknowledging that he understood he was charged with first-degree murder and that the charge carries a maximum penalty of death or life in prison without parole. He also requested that an attorney be appointed for him.



Fayetteville, North Carolina, police Chief Tom Bergamine said Wednesday that Patino, who is married, was the father of Touma's fetus.



Police also said evidence links Patino to a letter received June 25 by the Fayetteville Observer newspaper. In it, the writer claimed to have killed Touma and said more killings were planned. The letter was signed with a circular symbol similar to one used by the Zodiac killer in California in the late 1960s.



At the request of police, the newspaper withheld information regarding the letters and delayed publishing a story for several days to allow police to conduct an investigation, Bergamine said.



Police also received a similar letter. Fayetteville police Sgt. Chris Corcione said both letters were postmarked June 24 and sent from Fayetteville. Patino purchased a typewriter the day before the letters were sent, Corcione said. That typewriter is now in police custody.



Police, however, stopped short of saying Patino wrote the letters, saying only that evidence links him to them.



Two of Touma's friends, who are also female soldiers and asked not to be named because they are not authorized to speak publicly about the case, said Touma and Patino had been stationed together in Germany and had dated. They said Patino had proposed to Touma in Germany, but when the two returned to North Carolina, she discovered that he was married.



Police said Wednesday that Patino was a person of interest from the early days of their investigation. Corcione said his initial interview with authorities could be described as "deceptive," and officials had little other contact with him until his arrest. Police have found no criminal record for him.



"We felt like from the beginning, there was no major concerns of a serial killer being out there," Bergamine said.



Patino was being held without bail at the Cumberland County Detention Center, Bergamine said.



Asked what police believe the motive to be, Fayetteville police Detective Joshua Carter said, "Right now, the motive is going to be held close. There's still several months of investigation left to be conducted."



"I think one of the things that folks need to understand is that scientific evidence, things that have to go to the lab, they're going to take time," Bergamine said. "This is not the world of television and 'CSI.' Things don't get settled within a hour."



Touma, a five-year Army veteran, had served with the U.S. Army Dental Activity Clinic

***

NAIROBI, Kenya (CNN) -- Somalis are so desperate to survive that attacks on merchant shipping in the Gulf of Aden and the Indian Ocean will not stop, a pirate leader promises.

A French warship keeps guard over commerical vessels in the Gulf of Aden last week.

"The pirates are living between life and death," said the pirate leader, identified by only one name, Boyah. "Who can stop them? Americans and British all put together cannot do anything."

The interview with the pirate was conducted in late August by journalists employed by the Somali news organization Garowe Online. The complete interview was provided to CNN last week and provides a glimpse of why piracy has been so hard to control in the region.

Recorded on grainy video, the interview took place in the Somali port city of Eyl, now a center of pirate operations. Eyl is on the east coast of Somalia in the autonomous territory of Puntland. It is a largely lawless zone, considered extremely dangerous for Westerners to enter.

The Puntland government said two unidentified Western journalists were taken hostage Wednesday as they attempted to report on pirate activity.

Boyah said that the piracy began because traditional coastal fishing became difficult after foreign fishing trawlers depleted local fish stocks. Traditional fishermen started attacking the trawlers until the trawler crews fought back with heavy weapons. The fishermen then turned to softer targets.  Watch why fishermen turned to piracy Â»

"We went into the deep ocean and hijacked the unarmed cargo ships," Boyah said.

"For the past three years, we have not operated near the Somali coast. We have operated at least 80 miles [out], in international waters."

When merchant shipping started avoiding the Somali coast, Boyah said, "we went to ships traveling other routes."

Over the past year, the number of pirate attacks has increased dramatically. The International Maritime Bureau cites more than 90 pirate attacks off East Africa so far in 2008. When attacks are successful, the hijacked ships are taken to Somali waters, where the ships and crew are held until a ransom is paid.  See how pirate attacks have increased Â»

Ships recently captured include a massive Saudi supertanker laden with crude oil valued at more than $100 million and a freighter carrying Russian-built tanks.

The hijackings have been profitable. Kenya's foreign minister, Moses Wetangula, estimates the pirates have been paid more than $150 million during the past year. One pirate gang wants $2 million dollars to release a Yemeni freighter and crew seized last week.

Facing increasing disruptions through one of the busiest sea lanes in the world, several countries have sent warships to patrol the area. There have been reports of skirmishes between pirates and naval forces, but the military presence does not concern pirate leader Boyah. He boasts the pirates literally sail in a vast ocean beneath the radar of the warships.  Watch how piracy thrives off Somalia Â»

"No ship has the capability to see everything," he said. "A ship can see 80 miles or so [on radar]. It cannot see us at all. No one can do anything about it."

Boyah said it is unlikely the Puntland regional government would ever crack down on piracy because government officials are involved in financing the piracy and collect a cut of the ransoms.

"They motivate us. It's their money and their weapons," Boyah said. "Thirty percent belongs to them."

The Puntland foreign minister, Ali Abdi Aware, denied government involvement with the pirates, including taking bribes. The minister cited the arrest of six pirates earlier this year as evidence it is acting to stop piracy.

Pirate Boyah said he is unimpressed with the arrests by Puntland authorities.

"The pirates are at sea and Puntland does not approach them. The pirates are on land and Puntland does not approach them," Boyah said. "They arrest some small people and tell the world that they captured pirates, but they are liars."

While Boyah may have been outspoken about the government's ineffectiveness, he did not allow interviewers

***

HARARE, Zimbabwe (CNN) -- A European Union delegation met Saturday with Zimbabwe President Robert Mugabe, who said the parties had established a "good rapport."



President Mugabe and his wife, Grace, arrive for a ZANU PF party youth conference on Friday.



"There was no animosity, it was quite friendly," Mugabe said.



Gunilla Carlsson, the Swedish minister for International Development Cooperation, said the parties "definitely made some progress."



"Of course we didn't agree with everything Mr. Mugabe said, but it was a correct meeting and we exchanged views," Carlsson, who is heading the mission, told CNN's Rosemary Church.



The delegation met with Prime Minister Morgan Tsvangirai later on Saturday.



Carlsson spokesman Peter Larsson had said earlier that "there was no sense of any hostility from Mugabe." Larsson was referring to remarks the Zimbabwean president made Friday, when he condemned "bloody whites" for meddling in his country's affairs. Carlsson is heading the mission to Zimbabwe.



"Sanctions or no sanctions, Zimbabwe remains ours," .Mugabe told his ZANU-PF party's youth conference in Harare on Friday.



"Who said the British and the Americans should rule over others? That's why we say, down with you. We have not invited these bloody whites. They want to poke their nose into our own affairs. Refuse that," he said.



The European Union imposed travel bans on Mugabe and his representatives in 2002. The bans were imposed after accusations of human rights violations and election fraud.



In addition to travel restrictions, the European Union has frozen the assets of more than 200 Zimbabweans for allegedly violating human rights, according to Sweden, which holds the rotating presidency of the EU this year.



On Saturday, Mugabe again addressed "sanctions," saying he was dismayed that they were not lifted after meeting with the EU delegation.



"I have always been disappointed with sanctions on Zimbabwe," he said, adding that the EU delegation "thought things were not working, yet we did all the things we were asked to do" under a power-sharing agreement signed in September last year.



Larsson said there was no discussion about the restrictions at the meeting.



Under the agreement, which was to end months of turmoil and violence that followed the country's March 2008 presidential elections, Mugabe retained his office, and opposition leader Tsvangirai became prime minister.



The agreement -- the Global Political Agreement-- spelled out a number of fundamental democratic reforms, but so far there has been no progress toward them, Carlsson said in a statement ahead of the meetings with Mugabe and Tsvangirai.



"There have not yet been clear positive developments in all areas. I am still concerned at the lack of democratic development," she said then.



After meeting with Tsvangirai, Carlsson told CNN that "Tsvangirai's government is working hard towards the implementation of the political agreement."



She added, "After such a long time of oppression, it is of course hard to move forward and change will take some time. But the EU is committed to follow up on this progress and encourage change."



CNN's Per Nyberg in London, England, contributed to this report

***

Beijing, China (CNN) -- China has threatened to slap sanctions on American companies that sell arms to its rival Taiwan as part of a range of punitive actions Beijing is taking to protest the deal.



China also summoned U.S. ambassador Jon Huntsman to express its anger over Washington's announcement, the official Chinese news agency Xinhua said, citing the Foreign Ministry.



Beijing also suspended plans for visits between the Chinese and U.S. militaries and postponed a high-level arms control meeting, it announced Saturday, following Washington's $6.4-billion arms deal with Taiwan.



China's Defense Ministry said the decision was made "in consideration of the serious harm and impacts on Sino-U.S. military relations" brought about by the arms deal, according to Xinhua.



"China will make further judgments as appropriate," Xinhua reported.



China had already complained to the United States about the deal, announced Friday by the Obama administration.



Chinese Vice Foreign Minister He Yafei called it a "rude interference in China's internal affairs, severely endangering China's national security" and said China expressed its "strong indignation."



The arms sale includes 60 Black Hawk helicopters, totaling $3.1 billion; 114 advanced Patriot air defense missiles; a pair of Osprey mine-hunting ships; and dozens of advanced communications systems.



The deal with Taiwan -- which neither China nor the United States recognizes as an independent country -- does not include F-16 fighter jets, which China has vehemently opposed.



The State Department described the latest round of arms sales to Taiwan as a way to guarantee security and stability, despite China's objections.



"This is a clear demonstration of the commitment this administration has to provide Taiwan with defensive weapons it needs and as provided for in the Taiwan Relations Act," State Department spokesman P.J. Crowley said Friday.



He said the action is consistent with Washington's "one-China" policy and will help maintain security and stability across the Taiwan Strait.



The arms sales come as the United States is hoping to persuade China to sign on to harsher sanctions against Iran and just after Secretary of State Hillary Clinton criticized China for its policies relating to the Internet.



Crowley would not speak directly about the timing of the announcement of the sales, and about the fact that the arms package does not include F-16s.



A senior U.S. official said later that the United States expected Chinese criticism of the arms deal, but does not expect permanent damage.



The official said he believed Clinton had discussed the sale in London with her Chinese counterpart on the sidelines of Thursday's international conference on Afghanistan.



"This relationship between the United States and China is broad, it's deep. There are a large number of issues. We don't see eye to eye with them and we have to have and do have the ability to speak honestly," the official said.



The arms deal is the latest chapter in a decades-long uneasy standoff. China claims Taiwan is its own territory and has threatened to invade if Taiwan ever declares independence. The United States has said it will defend Taiwan if China ever attacks.



The government in Taiwan began as the remnant of the government that ruled over mainland China until a Communist insurrection proved victorious in 1949. With the Communist takeover of mainland China, the losing faction fled to the island of Taiwan. Taiwan is formally known as the Republic of China, while Communist China's official name is People's Republic of China.



Many Western nations and the United Nations recognized Taiwan as the legitimate Chinese government until the 1970s.



CNN's Eve Bower and Charley Keyes contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Sen. Barack Obama won Guam's Democratic presidential caucuses Saturday by just seven votes, according to a Guam election official.



Voters line up Saturday in Dededo, Guam's largest village.



With all 21 precincts reporting, Obama finished with 2,264 votes, or 50.1 percent. Sen. Hillary Clinton got 2,257 votes, or 49.9 percent.



Each candidate picked up two delegates.



The presidential candidates were battling for Guam's four pledged delegate votes. Eight delegates will be elected, each with half a vote at the Democratic National Convention in Denver, Colorado, this summer.



According to CNN's latest estimate, Obama now has a total of 1,736 delegates (1,493 pledged delegates, 243 superdelegates). Clinton has a total of 1,599 delegates (1,334 pledged delegates, 265 superdelegates).



The Democratic contest moves to North Carolina and Indiana, which hold their primaries Tuesday.



Also on the ballot Saturday was the race for chairman and vice chairman of the U.S. territory's Democratic Party. The winners of that race will serve as superdelegates.



According to the election official, the slate of Pilar Lujan and Jaime Paulino leads the slate of Joseph Artero Cameron and Arlen Bordallo. Lujan remains uncommitted in the race for president, but running mate Paulino has endorsed Obama.



Both Cameron and Bordallo have endorsed Clinton. Incumbent Chairman Tony Charfauros and running mate Mary Ann Cabrera are in third place. Neither has endorsed a presidential candidate.



Although called "caucuses," Saturday's event in Guam functions more like a party-run primary.



Voters cast secret ballots in polling places as opposed to publicly aligning themselves in presidential candidate preference groups, as in more traditional caucuses, such as in Iowa and Nevada.



Polls closed in Guam at 6 a.m. ET. Guam is 14 hours ahead of Eastern time.



Cathleen Moore-Linn stood in line for more than an hour outside the old police precinct in Dededo, Guam's most populated village. Despite the 90-degree tropical heat and a lack of air conditioning at the polling site, she said, "Nobody left. A lot of manamko' [elderly people] came out to vote. And people were filling out the forms to join the Democrat Party."



At villages in the southern end of the island, which is far less populated, election committee member Nancy Weare says the voting is running smoothly. "There's a constant flow of traffic and good voter turnout."



Vying for Guam's delegate and superdelegate votes in their tight race for the nomination, the two remaining Democratic presidential hopefuls have inundated the island with radio and TV advertisements, each promising long-awaited political gains: the ability for Guamanians to be able to vote for president, lifting the territory's cap on Medicaid and, perhaps the most coveted prize of all, war reparations in the form of more than $120 million.



A war reparations bill, sponsored by Bordallo, would issue payments to the survivors of Japan's control of the island during World War II and would create educational and research programs about the occupation. The legislation is stalled in the U.S. Senate.



CNN Research Director Robert Yoon, CNN Political Producer Ed Hornick and special contributor Jayne Flores contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Major conflict could return to southern parts of Sudan unless international action bolsters a faltering peace accord, ten aid agencies said in a report released Thursday.



A resumption of conflict between north and south in Sudan, meanwhile, would make a sustainable peace impossible in Darfur, a region of western Sudan that has been the scene of what the U.S. calls genocide, the aid groups said.



"It is not yet too late to avert disaster, but the next 12 months are a crossroads for Africa's largest country, " said Maya Mailer, policy advisor for Oxfam International and the report's co-author.



The warnings were underscored by news Thursday of a clash that killed scores in Southern Sudan, the latest instance of tribal violence among southerners that has alarmed the United Nations.



Locals said fierce fighting in Warap State, one of the most remote regions of the south, killed 140 people, wounded 90, and led to the theft of tens of thousands of cattle early this month or in late December, the United Nations said.



"The human toll is massive -- hundreds if not thousands displaced. The death toll is massive," said Lisa Grande, a top U.N. humanitarian official in Southern Sudan. "These attacks are a matter of great concern."



Resurgent tribal violence in the south also concerned the 10 aid groups. They released their report, "Rescuing the Peace in Southern Sudan," two days before the fifth anniversary of a 2005 peace deal that ended a grinding war between the Sudanese government and southern rebels in the Sudan People's Liberation Movement.



They said that peace deal is "on the brink of collapse."



That war pitted a northern government of Arab Muslims against southern blacks who follow Christianity and traditional African religions. It killed 2 million people and forced several million others from their homes.



The peace deal conferred limited autonomy on southern Sudan and ended one of Africa's longest and deadliest wars even as a separate conflict that erupted in 2003 raged in Darfur, killing roughly 200,000, the United Nations says.



Despite the peace deal, violence in the south increased last year, Mailer said, and it could escalate further to become one of the biggest emergencies in Africa this year.



About 2,500 people were killed and 350,000 fled their homes in southern Sudan last year, the aid agencies said. Many died in tribal violence between southerners. Outside countries have ignored the problem and have not provided sufficient help, the agencies said.



The United Nations says more people have been killed in southern Sudan in 2009 than in Darfur, where a separate conflict drew international attention, prompted charges of genocide and led the International Criminal Court to indict the Sudanese president, Omar Hassan al-Bashir, for war crimes.



Some southerners blame their former enemies in the north for instigating violence in the south. As the south plans to participate in national elections in April, many southerners say the north has hindered access to registration materials, logistical support and voter education, the United Nations said.



The north denies those charges, but they're among the reasons that analysts worry about an outbreak of north-south violence in a region already buckling under the weight of corruption, cattle rustling and revenge attacks.



Sudan needs diplomatic involvement from neighboring countries and the international community to help secure the 2005 peace agreement, said Paul Valentin, international director of Christian Aid, one of the agencies that produced the report.



"A return to war is by no means inevitable, but it depends whether the world heeds the warning signs of the past year and has the political will to save the peace," Valentin added.



Other agencies that produced the report include the International Rescue Committee, Save the Children and World Vision.



The report urges the U.N. Security Council to ensure that protecting civilians becomes a core priority for a peacekeeping force in Sudan.



The agencies also called on the international community to mediate between the northern and southern parties before the national elections -- the country's first multi-party elections in 24 years -- and before a referendum on independence, which is scheduled for early next year.

***

(CNN) -- Danish authorities said Tuesday they have arrested three people who allegedly were plotting a "terror-related assassination" of a cartoonist whose drawing of the Prophet Mohammed sparked rage in the Muslim world two years ago.



The cartoons of the Prophet Mohammed provoked widespread outrage in the Muslim world two years ago.



The Danish Security and Intelligence Service said police arrested a 40-year-old Dane of Moroccan origin and two Tunisians. The Danish citizen is charged with a terrorism offense, the intelligence service said, and the Tunisians will be deported. Police have not yet released the names of the three.



The operation took place in the Aarhus area of western Denmark at 4:30 a.m. local time following lengthy surveillance, the intelligence service said.



The target of the plot, the intelligence service said, was the cartoonist for the Danish newspaper Morgenavisen Jullands-Posten, which first published the controversial drawings in September 2005. The paper identified the cartoonist as Kurt Westergaard.  Watch how threats have targeted cartoonists »



"Not wanting to take any undue risks [the intelligence service] has decided to intervene at a very early stage in order to interrupt the planning and the actual assassination," the statement by Jakob Scharf, the agency's director general, said. "Thus, this morning's operation must first and foremost be seen as a preventive measure where the aim has been to stop a crime from being committed."



The uproar over the cartoons ignited after the Danish newspaper published caricatures of Islam's Prophet Mohammed. Some Muslims believe it is forbidden by the Quran to show an image of the prophet.



Demonstrations erupted across the world in early 2006 after other newspapers reprinted the images months later as a matter of free speech. Some turned deadly.



Many protesters directed their ire at Denmark, prompting the closure of several Danish embassies in predominantly Muslim countries, including Indonesia and Pakistan.



Westergaard's cartoon depicted the prophet wearing a bomb as a turban with a lit fuse.



Westergaard said he wanted his cartoon to say that some people exploited the prophet to legitimize terror. However, many in the Muslim world interpreted the drawing as depicting their prophet as a terrorist.



"Of course I fear for my life after the Danish Security and Intelligence Service informed me of the concrete plans of certain people to kill me," Westergaard said in a statement posted on the newspaper's Web site. "However, I have turned fear into anger and indignation. It has made me angry that a perfectly normal everyday activity which I used to do by the thousand was abused to set off such madness."



CNN's Paula Newton said the arrests reinforced growing fears in Europe that radical Islam was trying to suppress free speech.



"More and more Europeans feel that Islam is a threat to their way of life," Newton said. A recent Gallup poll for the World Economic Forum showed a majority of Europeans believed relations between the West and the Muslim world were worsening. According to the poll this sentiment was strongest held among Danish.



Westergaard remains under police protection and does not know whether it will continue.



"I could not possibly know for how long I have to live under police protection; I think, however, that the impact of the insane response to my cartoon will last for the rest of my life," he said. "It is sad indeed, but it has become a fact of my life."



Carsten Juste, the paper's editor-in-chief, said staffers have been "deeply worried" for several months.



"The arrests have hopefully thwarted the murder plans," he said on the newspaper's Web site. E-mail to a friend



CNN's Saeed Ahmed contributed to this report

***

ATLANTA, Georgia (CNN)  -- Seydi Burciaga just finished her overnight shift at Sam's Club, where she worked for the past 10 years. She made her way through the pouring rain in her minivan and turned onto her cul-de-sac in suburban Atlanta.



Seydi and Pedro Burciaga were married for 14 years with two children. "She was a very loving mother," he said.



She was three-tenths of a mile from home. The mother of two young children never made it.



Floodwaters from a swollen creek swept her Nissan Quest from Desiree Drive around 5 a.m. Monday. On a normal day, the creek is only a few feet wide.



But days of nonstop rain turned the seemingly harmless waterway into a raging river. It sits at the bottom of a steep hill on a street with no lights. It would've been nearly impossible to see the swift-moving water or how deep it was in the pre-dawn darkness.



Her car was picked up and carried behind an elementary school and lodged in trees. Water was coming in fast, she told a 911 dispatcher.  Listen to the frantic 911 call »



"Please, come help me," she says, her voice cracking. "Please."



The 911 dispatcher draws silent for a moment. "Alright, ma'am. Just stay as calm as possible."



During the next 12 minutes, the dispatcher would try to reassure Burciaga as she elicited clues as to the caller's exact whereabouts.



It was a neighborhood Burciaga knew well. She'd lived there for the past decade. She was known as the neighborhood mom who would take anyone who needed help to the dentist or the doctor. Fluent in Spanish, she would often act as translator.



"She was a very loving mother, a good wife, a strong woman," said Pedro Burciaga, her husband of 14 years. "She liked helping everyone, and overall she worked very hard. ... She always had a smile for everyone."



As her life teetered in the balance, she described being near a yellow house and tried to give other details of where her vehicle was. The 911 call was one of more than 400 before daybreak Monday that sent rescue crews through the floodwaters of Gwinnett County, a large suburban county northeast of Atlanta.



"My car is turning. Now the wheels is getting up, and I'm going to drown," Burciaga says.



A fire rescue team was at the scene by 5:09 a.m. Police arrived at 5:13 a.m. She was still on the phone with dispatch. The entire roadway was submerged by 5 or 6 feet of water. Nearby parked vehicles were nearly covered by the rushing water. An outbuilding had been carried from its foundation.  Watch how to escape from a sinking car »



"Listen to me. You're not going to drown. Roll down your windows, if you're able to, and get out of your vehicle," the 911 dispatcher says.



"I'm in the back of my car. I don't know if I can break it," Burciaga says.



"Ma'am, if you can break it, break it. Do whatever you can to get out of your vehicle."



"Yes, please, but my car is --"



"It doesn't matter about your car," the dispatcher says. "What matters is your life. We're going to save your life."



A few moments later, the waters intensify. "It's taking me down now," Burciaga says, crying.



"It's taking you down," the dispatcher repeats. "Just stay on the phone with me. I'm right here. I'm gonna stay with you."



"Please! It's going to drown --"



"OK, listen, you're not going to drown. We're going to be there for you. Just stay with me, OK?"



"OK, OK," Burciaga says. Moments later, she shrieks, "Oh my

***

(CNN) -- Voldemort did not die in vain.





Ralph Fiennes may have dedicated a good part of the last decade to torturing Harry Potter, but he's also found the time, the energy and the clout to pull off his first film as director.





By any standards, "Coriolanus" is an ambitious undertaking, a modern-day interpretation of one of Shakespeare's meatiest but less frequently performed plays. Although not everything comes off, Fiennes' bold, dynamic movie will make you glad he took up the challenge.





Set in "Some place calling itself Rome," but filmed, very tellingly, in battle-scarred Serbia and Montenegro, "Coriolanus" imagines a modern state rocked by food shortages and border disputes. Gen. Caius Martius (Fiennes) returns triumphant from vanquishing archenemy Tullus Aufidius (Gerard Butler) and the Volsces from their stronghold, Corioles, and takes on the name of this, his most famous victory. But an attempt to make him consul, or head of state, alarms some senators who know his contempt for ordinary civilians.





While he easily carries the Senate, tradition demands that Caius, now known as "Coriolanus," must also seek the assent of the citizenry in the public market. Too proud to court public opinion, he goes through the motions, but when his enemies turn the crowd against him, his fury only makes matters worse and the general is banished from Rome. Alone and angry, he swears vengeance and offers his services to Aufidius.





As in other modern-dress Shakespearean adaptations, there are anomalies and eccentricities in this production, which brandishes guns and tanks but talks of swords and ultimately falls back on knife fights. The notion of the warrior-hero who can carry battles single-handedly doesn't really jibe with modern warfare, and it's been a while since we had a military man as president. Shakespeare's play leaves no doubt that however we value heroism on the battlefield, it's no qualification for success in politics.





Coriolanus is undone by his own peculiar integrity, a refusal to exploit his war record for votes; but only because he finds the democratic process demeaning -- he's a pure elitist, the kind of person who believes that birthright is destiny. In power, he'd be a disaster.





Not that the scheming, cynical professional politicians come out much better in this telling, or the fickle and easily manipulated populace for that matter. Politics is a dirty business, but Coriolanus betrays everyone he's ever known to uphold his own warped sense of honor.





Head shaved, scarred, and often caked in blood, Fiennes is utterly compelling, a kind of Roman Rambo. We know he can play villains, but even if he's essentially a fascist, there is something noble about Coriolanus, and tragic, too, in his inability to bend or compromise. He is his own man, though we see very well that he's entirely the creation of his ferocious mother, Volumnia (a magnificent Vanessa Redgrave), and ultimately powerless before her.





Substantially streamlined by screenwriter and playwright John Logan (whose scripts for "Rango" and "Hugo" also made it to the screen last year), Shakespeare's verse sounds a bit strange in the voice of cable TV newscasters, but the device works very well to convey background information and keep the action flowing. Logan has cut the play in half, but what it loses in detail the movie more than picks up in clarity and punch.





Budget constraints probably account for Rome's surprisingly meager population and a Volsci army that seems to number about two dozen, but you can't argue with the talent in the foreground: Brian Cox, Jessica Chastain and Gerard Butler don't misplace a single syllable between them. This is Shakespearean acting of the highest caliber, and a powerful, bloody vision of "honor" gone mad.

***

(CNN) -- Denver District Attorney Mitch Morrissey said Thursday that three Occupy Denver activists have been charged with felonies -- including inciting a riot and second-degree assault on an officer.





While Occupy Wall Street protests began in New York two months ago, the movement has spread to several other cities -- as have reports of activists clashing with police. Some of the most high-profile incidents have taken place in Denver, including two tied to the filing of felony charges.





A pair of men who were arrested on Sunday were charged with felonies.





The previous night, police in riot gear arrested 17 people as they cleared furniture and tents from an Occupy encampment near the city's civic center, police spokesman Sonny Jackson told CNN. The main issue, he said, was that the items were blocking a right of way.





On Sunday afternoon, two police officers were injured when protesters became upset when police began removing a food table from a park. Some of the protesters surrounded a police car.





One woman then pushed a Denver police officer, according to an earlier Denver police statement. She and a male who came to her aid were arrested.





The district attorney's office announced Thursday that a 28-year-old man has been charged with two felony counts of inciting a riot and one misdemeanor count of obstruction for allegedly blocking a police car and and telling others to riot. He has two other cases pending from two different dates in October -- unlawful conduct on public property and unlawful sexual contact -- according to the press release.





Another 30-year-old man was charged with a felony count of second-degree assault on a police officer -- as well as misdemeanor charges of obstruction, resisting arrest and engaging in a riot -- from the same day. The district attorney claimed this man grabbed a law enforcement officer from behind and tried to hit him and wrestle him to the ground.





A third man, who is 26 years old, also was charged with second-degree assault of a police officer. That charge stems from an October 29 incident in which the man allegedly tried to use a stick to hit an officer who was trying to arrest him.





That day, demonstrators tried to occupy the Colorado Capitol -- which is not allowed -- and officers pushed them back, police spokesman Matt Murray said at the time. Pepper spray and pepper-ball guns were used against demonstrators.





The man charged, Sean Drigger, told CNN affiliate KUSA soon after the incident, "All we're trying to do is have a peaceful protest and (the police) are attacking us."





CNN's Marlena Baldacci contributed to this report.

***

SEATTLE, Washington (CNN) -- Who is stealing -- and crashing -- airplanes in Washington state?



Police say they found this self-portrait of Colton Harris-Moore in the deleted file of a stolen digital camera.



The 18-year-old man police call the prime suspect does not have a pilot's license. But he does have a nickname -- "The Barefoot Burglar" -- and a Facebook fan club, which compares him to Jesse James "without the murders" and exhorts: "Fly, Colt, Fly."



Police say Colton "Colt" Harris-Moore has been linked to crimes in five counties involving planes, luxury cars and boats. He's known to alternate between squatting in vacant vacation homes, which he allegedly burglarizes, and roughing it in the woods.



Since November, police say, at least three small, private planes have been stolen and flown away. The latest to go missing crash-landed last week in a clearing in Granite Falls, Washington, after running out of fuel, police said.



The rough landing damaged the Cessna 182, which along with its instruments is worth more than $500,000. But authorities said the plane's pilot appears to have walked away unhurt.



Harris-Moore has not been charged in any of the plane thefts. But authorities are testing vomit found in the cockpit of one plane to see whether they can place the teen inside.



Harris-Moore has been on authorities' radar for years. "Colt," as he is called, was first arrested for burglary at age 12, said Detective Ed Wallace, a spokesman for the Island County Sheriff's Office. The break-in at a local school earned Colton a few weeks in a juvenile facility, Wallace said.



Local media reports tally nine arrests for Harris-Moore before the age of 15. Now police in five counties in Washington state are looking for him.



Harris-Moore dropped out of high school and, according to Wallace, police believe he spent his teens burglarizing unoccupied homes on Camano Island, a vacation community of about 15,000 people off the Washington state coast. He became known as "the Barefoot Burglar," because, investigators say, he preferred to prowl shoeless.



Gradually, Wallace alleges, Harris-Moore moved onto more sophisticated crimes.



"He will typically break into a home or vehicle and copy down the credit card numbers," Wallace said. "He then leaves the credit cards behind so people don't realize they have been stolen."



Wallace said Harris-Moore has charged thousands of dollars worth of video games, GPS devices and police scanners online, using stolen credit cards.



When Harris-Moore wasn't squatting in homes, he took to the woods with survival gear to elude police. He's been known to hide in the trees. "He's almost like a feral child," Wallace said.



Harris-Moore's days of running from authorities on the 40-square-mile island appeared to end in 2007 when he was arrested and pleaded guilty to three counts of burglary. Wallace said some of the charges were dismissed as part of the guilty plea.



Less than a year later, Wallace said,  Harris-Moore allegedly walked away from a juvenile halfway house.



Police on Camano Island again began receiving reports of thefts that fit Harris-Moore's profile, Wallace said. In 2008, a deputy said he spotted Harris-Moore in a stolen Mercedes-Benz, but he lost the suspect when he allegedly dove from the moving vehicle.



After the chase, police recovered a stolen digital camera from the car. Wallace said he found a deleted self-portrait of Harris-Moore, who posed in a shirt with a telltale Mercedes-Benz insignia. The shirt also belonged to the vehicle's owner.



Harris-Moore faces 10 counts in that case, as well as other thefts, Internet crimes and burglaries, Wallace said. Charges are expected soon in a dozen more cases.



Harris-Moore dropped from sight for a while when wanted posters of him went up around Camano Island. Soon,