(CNN) -- Battling blustery weather, a Lufthansa Airlines flight scraped its wing on the ground during a landing attempt in Hamburg, Germany, over the weekend.



Internet footage of the Lufthansa A320 as it attempts a landing Saturday at Hamburg, Germany.



The plane recovered and landed safely the second time around, the spokesman said.



Dramatic amateur video of the incident that appeared on the Internet showed the Airbus A320 teetering as it tried to land during the brutal winter storm on Saturday.



As it nears the tarmac, one wing visible scrapes the ground.  Watch the plane try to land as a passenger describes experience »



"As we were about to touch down, a gust of wind pressed the left wing towards the ground," a Lufthansa pilot identified only as Oliver A. said in a statement.



"We pulled up immediately. A maneuver we practice in training very often."



The airline said the pilot has been flying for Lufthansa for 17 years.  Watch as plane avoids crash »  Airline spokesman Wolfgang Weber said the left winglet, a fin at the end of the wing scraped the ground after a gust of wind tipped the plane. Damage to the plane was minimal and not structural. He said the plane is already back in service.



• Were you on board? Send us an iReport E-mail to a friend

***

HAVANA, Cuba (CNN)  -- Former Cuban President Fidel Castro says he is open to the idea of meeting with U.S. President-elect Barack Obama.

Former Cuban President Fidel Castro has largely been out of the political scene since falling ill in 2006.

"With Obama, one can talk whenever he wants, because we're not preachers of violence or war," the communist leader wrote in an essay published Thursday on a state-run Web site. "He must be reminded that the carrot-and-stick theory cannot be applied in our country."

Friday's missive marked the second time in recent weeks that a Cuban leader has said he is open to meeting with Obama.

In the latest issue of The Nation, actor Sean Penn writes of his recent conversation in Havana with RaÃºl Castro, who took over as president this year from his ailing brother.

According to Penn, RaÃºl Castro told him, "Perhaps we could meet at Guantanamo. We must meet and begin to solve our problems, and at the end of the meeting, we could give the president a gift. ... We could send him home with the American flag that waves over Guantanamo Bay."

Obama has called for the U.S. detention facility at the Guantanamo Bay naval base on the island of Cuba to be closed.

Despite the indications that the Cuban leadership is open to warmer relations with its neighbor to the north after 47 years of a U.S.-imposed trade embargo, some in Havana expressed skepticism that the impending change in leadership in the United States will translate in to a changed Cuban policy.

"Obama is a product of the American empire," Carlos Pose said.

But Elisany, a high school student, said she's hopeful. "We've got to wait and see. I hope things change."

***

(CNN)      -- China has killed 13,000 birds in the country's far northwest to control what it called an epidemic of bird flu, state media reported Tuesday.



Since the end of 2003, the H5N1 virus has infected birds in over 60 countries in Africa, Asia and Europe.



Five hundred fowl that had died in the Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region tested positive for the H5N1 virus, according to China's Ministry of Agriculture.



In late January, China confirmed its sixth case of bird flu in a human.



The ministry said at the time that, although further human bird flu cases were possible throughout China, there wouldn't be a large-scale outbreak, state run news agency Xinhua and CCTV reported. The country also announced it was setting up a nationwide network to test for the H5N1 virus.



Following a bird flu outbreak in late January, India culled more than 4,000 birds in the remote northeastern state of Sikkim.



Health officials also detected dozens of cases of upper respiratory infection among humans, but none of the patients had any history of handling sick poultry, a government spokesperson said. Sikkim borders Nepal and China.



Since the end of 2003, the H5N1 virus has infected many species of birds in more than 60 countries in Africa, Asia and Europe.



It has not been found in birds in North or South America or the Caribbean, according to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.



Human-to-human transmission of avian flu is rare, but the virus has passed from poultry to humans in some cases. It has killed more than 200 people since 2003. China reported its first human-to-human infection case in 2005.



Of the 34 cases confirmed to date in the country, 23 had been fatal, the World Health Organization said in late January.

***

(CNN) -- Two tractor-trailer trucks crashed and burst into flames Thursday on a bridge between the United States and Mexico, shutting a key border crossing and killing four people, police said.



Police look at the aftermath of a fiery crash on a bridge linking Reynosa, Mexico, and Pharr, Texas.



The collision on the Pharr-Reynosa International Bridge in Texas triggered a chain-reaction accident with three other vehicles, said Lt. Lupe Salinas with the Pharr Police Department.



A pickup flipped off the bridge, killing three people. Another person died in a vehicle that struck one of the tractor-trailers. Six others were injured.



Pharr Emergency Management Coordinator Elsa Sanchez told The Associated Press the pickup truck had Texas license plates, and the two 18-wheelers and a minivan involved in the wreck appeared to have Mexican plates.  Watch aftermath of fiery crash »



The accident happened around 7:30 p.m. (8:30 p.m. ET). The bridge was closed for the rest of the evening.



The bridge reopened on Friday morning after Texas Department of Trnasportation engineers inspected it, according to CNN affiliate KRGV.



The bridge is normally open from 6 a.m. until midnight and is closed overnight.



The 3.2-mile-long bridge connects U.S. 281 in Pharr, Texas, to the city of Reynosa in the Mexican state of Tamaulipas, according to the city of Pharr's Web site. On an average day, the site says, 5,800 vehicles cross it. E-mail to a friend



CNN's Ed Payne and Jessica Jordan contributed to this story.

***

(CNN)  -- The man arrested for the videotaped rape of a toddler in Las Vegas, Nevada, will make his initial appearance in court Friday, a Clark County, Nevada, court official told CNN Tuesday.

Authorities have not yet decided if Chester Arthur Stiles will appear in person or via video link. The judge will set a date for the arraignment at that hearing.

Stiles, 37, was taken into custody Monday night after a Henderson, Nevada, police officer pulled over the white Buick Century he was driving.

A former girlfriend of Stiles' said that, before the arrest, she lived in fear after going to police to identify the suspect after seeing enhanced photos from the videotape on the local news.

"I've had my share of nightmares," Elaine Thomas told CNN's Nancy Grace.

Thomas said she screamed when she recognized the photos on television and had no choice but to contact police about the man she had thought was a "weapons enthusiast" with only a minor criminal record.  Watch Thomas say how she felt when she saw the photos »

"How could I not tell them who that man was? That little girl suffered unimaginable things, and I knew for a fact it was him," Thomas said.

The judge in the case will hold an administrative hearing Wednesday, but Stiles will not be present, Clark County court spokesman Michael Sommermeyer said.

Stiles was already being sought on an unrelated 2004 charge of felony lewdness with a child under 14, Sommermeyer said, adding that authorities amended that earlier filing on October 4 to include 20 counts related to the videotaped rape, including sexual assault and attempted sexual assault.

Jerry T. Donohue, the attorney for the girl's mother, told CNN that the child on the videotape was younger than 3 when the abuse occurred.

Henderson Police Officer Mike Dye said he pulled over Stiles' car Monday night because it did not have a license plate and became suspicious when the driver gave him an expired California driver's license with a photo that did not look like him.

Dye said he and another officer, Mike Gower, questioned Stiles until he admitted his identity.

"He finally told us, 'Hey, I'm Chester Stiles. I'm the guy you're looking for,'" Dye said. "At that time, he said, 'I'm sick of running.'"

Dye said Stiles was calm and cooperative.

Stiles, a resident of Pahrump, Nevada, was turned over to Las Vegas Metropolitan Police and booked into the jail in Clark County, where he had been sought in connection with the videotape, which shows a girl being sexually assaulted.

The girl, who is now 7, was found last month after a nationwide search.

The tape was given to authorities by Darren Tuck, who told police he had found it in the desert five months before handing it over. Because of the delay, during which Tuck allegedly showed the tape to others, he faces charges of exhibiting pornography and possession of child pornography.

He turned himself in to authorities in Nye County, Nevada, earlier this month.

Professionals have evaluated the girl in the videotape since she was found, and she appears to be "healthy and fine and happy," her mother's attorney said this month.

The mother had not known her daughter had ever been victimized and was apparently oblivious to efforts to find her until late last month, Donohue said.

"A family friend called her and said, 'My God, you need to turn on the TV. I believe that is your daughter,' " Donohue said.

Donohue said the mother recognized Stiles, a former animal trainer.

The alleged abuse most likely occurred while the mother -- a single woman working six days a week -- was at work, Donohue said.

Another former girlfriend of Stiles', Tina Allen, said this month she thinks she is the reason Stiles came in contact with the girl and is "mortified" by the allegations against him.

"He said he'd been in the Navy and,

***

Muscat, Oman (CNN) -- Cyclone Phet weakened as it churned along coastal Oman Friday, dumping up to 25 centimeters (10 inches) of rain on the region.





Phet, once a powerful Category 4 storm, has been downgraded to Category 1 with winds of about 140 km/hr (86 mph), according to the Joint Typhoon Warning Center.





Yet Phet brought massive flooding to Muscat and whipped the capital with winds gusting above 200 km/hr (125 mph) at the height of the storm.





The storm is forecast to reenter the Arabian Sea late Friday or early Saturday before making a projected landfall near Karachi, Pakistan, Sunday.





In Pakistan, authorities dispatched Navy helicopters to alert fishermen near Karachi and parts of Balochistan to the expected arrival of Cyclone Phet and to urge them to return to shore, the state-run Associated Press of Pakistan reported Thursday.





Navy units were on high alert should they be needed in the aftermath of the cyclone.





Fourteen families marooned Thursday by high tides were evacuated by helicopter to higher ground, said Pakistani Chief of Naval Staff Adm. Nauman Bashir.





Civilians along Pakistan's coast will receive priority in the relief effort, dubbed "Operation Madad," should it be needed, he said.





The Pakistan navy secured its ships near the threatened areas, Deputy Chief of Naval Staff (Operations) Vice Adm. Abass Raza told reporters in Islamabad.





"All the assets of Pakistan navy are safe and necessary precautionary measures have been taken to ensure their safety in case cyclone Phet hits the coastal areas of country," he said.

***

ISTANBUL, Turkey (CNN) -- Turkish authorities have arrested 13 people in connection with blasts that killed 17 people in Istanbul last week, Interior Minister Besir Atalay said Saturday.



Video from last week's bombing in Istanbul shows bloodied people being loaded into ambulances.



Of those arrested, 10 were sent to judicial court, Atalay said in a televised news conference. He described the attack as the "work of the bloody separatist group," but did not identify a group by name.



No one has claimed responsibility for the blasts, which went off within minutes of each other in Istanbul's crowded Gungoren community.



About 154 people were wounded, state-run Anadolu news agency reported.



Istanbul Gov. Muammer Guler, who called the blasts "an act of terror," said last week that the explosive devices were placed 15 meters (49 feet) from each other. The first was a stun grenade that was detonated to draw attention before the second blast went off, he said.



The other, a bomb, had been placed in a trash can.



Turkey -- a candidate for European Union membership -- has pushed its anti-terror campaign on multiple fronts.



Tensions between  Turkey » and Kurdish rebels have risen over the Kurdistan Workers' Party's increasing attacks and Turkey's subsequent crackdown. The rebels, known as the PKK, have waged a decades-long battle for an autonomous Kurdish region in Turkey's southeast.



Last month, 86 people -- including former military officials, journalists, politicians and businessmen -- were indicted on charges of being involved with an alleged terror group called Ergenekon, which aims to topple the Turkish government.



The arrests and indictments dramatize the sharp and serious political tensions between the country's Islam-rooted ruling party -- the Justice and Development Party, or AKP -- and its outspoken critics from the nation's secularist population.

***

SAN FRANCISCO, California (CNN) -- A man police believe shot and killed two people at a California toll plaza during the height of evening rush hour Tuesday was taken into custody early Wednesday, authorities told CNN affiliate KTVU.



Police say Nathaniel Burris, 46, was arrested just after 3 a.m. on Interstate 80 near Baxter, California.



Nathaniel Burris, 46, was arrested just after 3 a.m. on Interstate 80 near Baxter, California, by the California Highway Patrol, Richmond, California, police Sgt. Bisa French told KTVU.



The shooting happened at 5:55 p.m. at the entrance to the 7.5-mile Richmond-San Rafael Bridge, which links Contra Costa and Marin counties, California Highway Patrol spokesman Sam Morgan told CNNRadio.



Deborah Ross, 51, was killed inside one of the toll booths, the California governor's office said. The other person killed was a man shot while sitting in his vehicle, which was parked in a lot at the toll plaza, Morgan said.



KTVU identified the man as Ersie "Chuck" Everett, 58. Both people were shot with a shotgun, authorities said.



The suspect drove off in a white 2005 Ford van with "Western Eagle Shuttle" printed on it in orange and blue letters, Morgan said.



Richmond police said the deaths appeared to stem from a domestic dispute, KTVU said. French told the station Burris was in a "dating relationship" and lived with Ross.



Aerial footage showed traffic backed up after the shooting, with cars being ushered through the far-right toll lane.



Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger issued a statement expressing shock and sadness over Ross' death. The statement said Capitol flags would be flown at half-staff in her memory.

***

BERLIN, Germany (CNN) -- German federal police seized two suspected terrorists from a Dutch passenger aircraft at Cologne airport Friday shortly before it was due to take off for Amsterdam, officials told CNN.



The arrests were made at Cologne's airport.



A 23-year-old Somali national and a 24-year-old German citizen who had been born in Mogadishu were arrested on a KLM plane at 6.55 am local time (0455 GMT), a police spokesman said.



Police said "farewell" letters had been found from the men that led them to suspect they were intending to carry out terror attacks. It was not revealed where the letters were found or how long the men had been under observation.



Walter Roemer, press spokesman at Cologne-Bonn airport, said that the arrests had been "very unspectacular". He said federal police boarded the plane and arrested the two suspects, "without them showing any resistance."



The two had been among 40 passengers en route to Amsterdam. All those on board were asked to disembark while the suspects' luggage was identified. The plane took off for Amsterdam after a delay of one hour and 20 minutes.



She said everyone was then forced to leave the plane, and there was a "baggage parade" to see whose bags belonged to whom.  Watch more details on the incident. »



Amsterdam's Schipol airport Web site listed flight KL 1804, the scheduled morning flight from Cologne to Amsterdam, as having arrived at 9.17 am local time, one hour and two minutes after it was due to arrive.



In September 2007, German authorities arrested three suspected militants planning what were described as "massive" attacks on American targets in Germany.



German media said at the time that potential targets could have included Ramstein Air Base, the U.S. military's main installation in Germany, or the major international hub of Frankfurt Airport.



Terrorism expert Sajjan Gohel told CNN the arrest showed Germany faces a major threat from extremists.  Watch Gohel explain details behind the arrests »



"This was a long term operation, there was a couple of individuals that the German intelligence agency was monitoring," he said.



"The feeling was that they had come back specifically with the purpose of planning and plotting a terrorist attack."



CNN's Diana Magnay in Berlin contributed to this report

***

(CNN) -- A year ago Thursday, I-Report was born.



CNN.com launched its I-Report initiative August 2, 2006, in an effort to involve citizens in the newsgathering process.



Numerous milestones later, I-Report has grown and developed its ability to be an integral component of the network's coverage.



Mark Lacroix photographed the collapsed bridge from his apartment window.



On the eve of its anniversary, I-Reporters responded to yet another major news event: the deadly collapse of a bridge over the Mississippi river in Minneapolis, Minnesota.



Mark Lacroix sent photos of the scene immediately after the disaster. As the story developed, he provided information about the situation to viewers live on television.



Lacroix's photos were among the more than 450 I-Report submissions sent to CNN within the first 24 hours of the bridge's collapse -- the biggest response in one day to a single news event in I-Report history.



CNN.com readers have long been submitting photos and video, as well as speaking with CNN reporters, during major breaking news events. (Check out our timeline of I-Report milestones) »



On April 16, Jamal Albarghouti sent cell phone video of the Virginia Tech shooting in Blacksburg, Virginia, as the dramatic events were unfolding.



More recently, when fireballs began exploding from an industrial gas facility in Dallas, Texas, in July, I-Reporters wasted no time in recording video as smoke and debris rose into the air.



Justin Randall was in a convertible during the incident and tried to drive around blast debris on a highway. He sent video of the explosions, showing flames rising high into the air.



During a steam pipe explosion in New York, Jonathan Thompson sent video of a powerful surge of steam rising from the ground and rescuers scrambling to secure the area.



He followed up later that month by sending footage of repairs being made to the crater left behind. E-mail to a friend

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN) -- Another Hollywood marriage is ending -- but this one was no flash in the pan.



Robin Wright Penn and Sean Penn had been married 11 years.



Sean Penn and Robin Wright Penn are divorcing, according to their representative, Mara Buxbaum. People magazine first reported the split Thursday night.



The actors began dating after they met making the 1990 movie "State of Grace." They married in 1996, and have two children, Dylan Frances, 16, and Hopper Jack, 14.



Previously, Penn was married to Madonna for four years, while Wright was married to actor Dane Witherspoon for two years.



In addition to "State of Grace," Penn and Wright appeared together in 1997's "She's So Lovely" and 1998's "Hurlyburly," and both are set to appear in Barry Levinson's next film, "What Just Happened?," due out in 2008.



Penn, 47, won a best actor Oscar for 2003's "Mystic River," and was nominated for best actor for "Dead Man Walking," "Sweet and Lowdown," and "I Am Sam." His latest directorial effort, "Into The Wild," has received four SAG Award nominations and two Golden Globe nominations.



Wright, 41, is best known for her title role in "The Princess Bride" and for starring opposite Tom Hanks in "Forrest Gump." E-mail to a friend

***

BAGHDAD, Iraq (CNN) -- The women are too afraid and ashamed to show their faces or have their real names used. They have been driven to sell their bodies to put food on the table for their children -- for as little as $8 a day.

Suha, 37, is a mother of three. She says her husband thinks she is cleaning houses when she leaves home.

"People shouldn't criticize women, or talk badly about them," says 37-year-old Suha as she adjusts the light colored scarf she wears these days to avoid extremists who insist women cover themselves. "They all say we have lost our way, but they never ask why we had to take this path."

A mother of three, she wears light makeup, a gold pendant of Iraq around her neck, and an unexpected air of elegance about her.

"I don't have money to take my kid to the doctor. I have to do anything that I can to preserve my child, because I am a mother," she says, explaining why she prostitutes herself.

Anger and frustration rise in her voice as she speaks.

"No matter what else I may be, no matter how off the path I may be, I am a mother!"  Watch a woman describe turning to prostitution to "save my child" »

Her clasped hands clench and unclench nervously. Suha's husband thinks that she is cleaning houses when she goes away.

So does Karima's family.

"At the start I was cleaning homes, but I wasn't making much. No matter how hard I worked it just wasn't enough," she says.

Karima, clad in all black, adds, "My husband died of lung cancer nine months ago and left me with nothing."

She has five children, ages 8 to 17. Her eldest son could work, but she's too afraid for his life to let him go into the streets, preferring to sacrifice herself than risk her child.

She was solicited the first time when she was cleaning an office.

"They took advantage of me," she says softly. "At first I rejected it, but then I realized I have to do it."

Both Suha and Karima have clients that call them a couple times a week. Other women resort to trips to the market to find potential clients. Or they flag down vehicles.

Prostitution is a choice more and more Iraqi women are making just to survive.

"It's increasing," Suha says. "I found this 'thing' through my friend, and I have another friend in the same predicament as mine. Because of the circumstance, she is forced to do such things."

Violence, increased cost of living, and lack of any sort of government aid leave women like these with few other options, according to humanitarian workers.

"At this point there is a population of women who have to sell their bodies in order to keep their children alive," says Yanar Mohammed, head and founder of the Organization for Women's Freedom in Iraq. "It's a taboo that no one is speaking about."

She adds, "There is a huge population of women who were the victims of war who had to sell their bodies, their souls and they lost it all. It crushes us to see them, but we have to work on it and that's why we started our team of women activists."

Her team pounds the streets of Baghdad looking for these victims often too humiliated to come forward.

"Most of the women that we find at hospitals [who] have tried to commit suicide" have been involved in prostitution, said Basma Rahim, a member of Mohammed's team.

The team's aim is to compile information on specific cases and present it to Iraq's political parties -- to have them, as Mohammed puts it, "come tell us what [they] are ... going to do about this."

Rahim tells the heartbreaking story of one woman they

***

Seoul, South Korea (CNN) -- An explosion at close range, and not a direct hit, caused the 1,200-ton patrol ship Cheonan to sink last month, a team of South Korean military and civilian investigators has tentatively concluded.





The investigators' determination was reported Sunday by the Yonhap news agency.





"Instead of being directly hit by a torpedo or other underwater weapon, the Cheonan was affected by a strong explosion that occurred below its bottom at a close range," the news agency quoted a government official as saying.





The explanation matches one that investigators offered shortly after the ship's stern was salvaged 10 days ago.





A final result is not expected for a month, Defense Minister Kim Tae-young told reporters.





He said that the most likely cause of the sinking was a "bubble jet" created by the external explosion under the ship.





A bubble jet effect occurs when an explosion goes off under a ship. The change in pressure causes a huge column of water that strikes the ship with great impact.





On Saturday, recovery crews found the body of a missing sailor in the wreckage of the ship.





The ship sunk in the Yellow Sea near the western sea border with North Korea on March 26.





Forty of Cheonan's 104 crew members have now been confirmed dead, and six more are also believed dead, though they are still listed as missing.





Fifty eight others were rescued before the vessel sank.





South Korea has not ruled out a theory that North Korea was involved.





But Seoul has avoided directly blaming North Korea, which sloughed off allegations it is responsible.





The families of the dead sailors began a five-day mourning period on Sunday.





On Thursday, the South Korean navy will hold a funeral ceremony at a naval command in Pyeongtaek, about 70 kilometers (43 miles) south of Seoul.





The navy has also decided to posthumously promote the dead seamen by one rank and award them a military honor for their patriotism.

***

(CNN) -- Federal Emergency Management Agency officials know the agency's performance in the California wildfires will be watched closely for comparisons to its failures in Hurricane Katrina.

A volunteer distributes donated food and supplies to evacueesTuesday at San Diego's Qualcomm Stadium.

FEMA Director David Paulison promised on Tuesday "a different type of response than the federal government put together for Katrina."

Paulison said Katrina "was a wake-up call" and that "this is a new FEMA."

President Bush signed a federal disaster declaration Wednesday, freeing up federal funds for families affected by the wildfires in seven counties in Southern California.

"I will continue to make sure that our efforts are coordinated, that we are responding to the needs of people, but most importantly I want the people in Southern California to know that Americans all across this land care deeply about them," he said.

The action follows an emergency declaration by Bush on Tuesday morning for the counties of Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, San Bernardino, San Diego, Santa Barbara, and Ventura.

He said he's "looking forward" to his visit to the region on Thursday.

According to a statement from the White House, the federal disaster declaration will allow for federal aid that "can include grants for temporary housing and home repairs, low-cost loans to cover uninsured property losses, and other programs to help individuals and business owners recover from the effects of the disaster."

FEMA and other relief and rescue services face significantly different challenges in the fire zone than they did on the Gulf Coast in 2005.

For example, the fires aren't covering every square foot of the region, as Katrina did. The devastation in California is intense but not universal.

During and immediately after Katrina, the destruction was so complete that relief personnel and supplies -- even the U.S. Army -- could not get within miles of the disaster's epicenter, New Orleans' Lower Ninth Ward, for several days.

By contrast, roads in Southern California have remained open for residents to get out and help to get in without delay. Residents there are generally more affluent and are able to use their own vehicles to escape, whereas many of Katrina's victims were poor and had no means of transportation.

Victims in California are not stranded on rooftops without food or drinkable water, but are able travel the relatively short distances to safe places.

One of those safe places is San Diego's Qualcomm Stadium, which is not endangered by the fires. FEMA and other relief agencies are able to stage supplies and meet victims' needs in an organized way.

New Orleans' Superdome, on the other hand, sitting in the center of the disaster zone, was severely damaged by hurricane winds and threatened by rising water. What had been a shelter devolved into a trap.

Katrina also wiped out the Gulf Coast's communications infrastructure, crippling the coordination of relief efforts -- even for the military.

Homeland Security Secretary Michael Chertoff acknowledged Tuesday that the government's response machinery had benefited from the Katrina experience.

"I think there's no question that [there were] a couple of the lessons from Katrina which we have put into effect here," Chertoff said.

"First of all, planning and preparation in advance for these kinds of challenges, so that we have worked together and planned together with the Defense Department and with state authorities well in advance of the crisis. That's been a big help here," Chertoff said

"Second, we have really flooded the zone as quickly as possible by staging assets to deal both with the firefighting issue and with the response issue," Chertoff said.

Chertoff said federal officials began discussing over the weekend the need to have FEMA ready, "and as we saw the evacuation issue becoming more prominent, and the number of people seeking shelter becoming more prominent, we sprang into action yesterday.

"So we've been monitoring the situation continuously. The president's been on top of it. We've been on top of it. And we're going to continue to stay ahead of this as

***

(CNN) -- The Marine Corps has dropped charges against the commander of the Marine company involved in the 2005 killings of Iraqi civilians in Haditha, Iraq.





Camp Pendleton's commanding officer ordered charges dropped against Capt. Lucas McConnell.





Capt. Lucas McConnell, who had been charged with dereliction of duty, was also granted immunity to ensure he cooperates with the investigation, the service said Tuesday.





McConnell was one of four officers charged with failing to properly investigate and report the civilian deaths.





Lt. Gen. James Mattis, the Marine commander in charge of the corps' units in the Middle East, ordered the charges dismissed last week.





"Lt. Gen. Mattis determined that administrative measures are the appropriate response for any errors or omissions allegedly committed by McConnell," according to a statement from the Marine Corps base at Camp Pendleton in California.





Four Marines from McConnell's unit were charged with murder in connection with the deaths of up to two dozen civilians in Haditha in November 2005. Charges have been dropped against two of them -- one in exchange for his testimony and the other after a hearing officer decided he acted in accord with the rules of engagement.





Two other officers -- Lt. Col. Jeffrey Chessani, the battalion commander, and 1st Lt. Andrew Grayson -- also face charges related to their response to the killings.





Haditha, located along the Euphrates River northwest of Baghdad, was the target of several Marine campaigns aimed at rooting out insurgents from 2004 through 2006.





Prosecutors accused the Marines of going on a rampage after a roadside bomb killed one of their comrades, 20-year-old Lance Cpl. Miguel Terrazas, on November 19, 2005.





A statement from the Marine Corps originally blamed the deaths on the roadside bomb, triggering a parallel investigation into how commanders handled the incident. E-mail to a friend

***

KABUL, Afghanistan (CNN) -- A fighter jet crashed in southern Afghanistan on Monday, in the fourth wreck in three days, authorities said.



A French Air Force Mirage 2000 sits under a shelter on the tarmac at an airbase in Kandahar on January 1, 2009.



Authorities were looking into why the plane went down during takeoff from Kandahar airfield Monday morning, but the role of insurgents had been ruled out, said Lt. Col. Paul Kolken, the spokesman at the airfield.



The crew ejected safely, and was being treated, Kolken said. Five hours after the crash, the wreckage of the plane was still on fire.



Military officials did not identify the type of jet that crashed, nor did they release the nationality of the crew. Weather conditions were fair at the time of the incident, Kolken said.



On Saturday, a U.S. fighter jet crashed in eastern Afghanistan, killing its crew of two.



In addition, a civilian helicopter went down on takeoff from Kandahar airfield on Sunday, killing 16 people, NATO said.  Watch details of the helicopter crash »



And a military helicopter made a hard landing elsewhere on Sunday, apparently injuring at least some of those on board, NATO said.



None of the aircraft were shot down, said the International Security Assistance Force -- NATO's mission in Afghanistan. It did not announce the cause of any of the crashes.



There were at least two earlier crashes this month. Watch report on UK deaths in Afghanistan »



At least five people were killed when a helicopter went down in southern Afghanistan's Helmand province Tuesday, a local government official said.



And on July 6, two Canadian air crew members and a British soldier were killed when a helicopter crashed during takeoff in Zabul province, the Canadian and British defense ministries said.



CNN's Ivan Watson contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Guinea-Bissau will hold a runoff presidential election Sunday, five months after the leader of the West African nation was assassinated by a group of soldiers.



Supporters of former president and current candidate Malam Sanha rally in Bissau.



The race is between two former heads of state, Kumba Yala and Malam Sanha. The candidates won the most votes in the first round of balloting June 28.



Analysts hope the new president will usher in an era of stability to the nation of 1.5 million. The former Portuguese colony has had a history of military coups since its independence in 1974.



President Joao Bernardo Vieira became president in 1980 after a military coup. He was accused of purging political rivals and suppressing dissent, but several coup attempts in the 1980s and early 1990s failed to unseat him. He was finally ousted in 1999 -- and re-elected in 2005.



Vieira was killed in March to reportedly avenge the death of the country's military chief a day earlier.



Yala, who took office in 2000, was unseated in a military coup after three years. Sanha served as interim president for a few months before his opponent's term.



The conflicts have ravaged the nation's infrastructure and economy, leaving it among the poorest in the world. Guinea-Bissau has been battling a booming drug trade and is considered a major transit point for smuggling cocaine into Europe.



U.N. chief Ban Ki-moon, who urged voters to be peaceful, said he hoped the election would provide a clean start.



"The secretary-general hopes this election will mark a clear step forward for Guinea-Bissau in achieving political stability and security, and in fostering the social and economic conditions necessary to consolidate peace and fully realize human rights," Ban's representative said in a statement.



A 1998 conflict led to the closure of the U.S. Embassy, which operates from neighboring Senegal.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- The House of Representatives voted Wednesday to give the Treasury Department the power to ban future "unreasonable and excessive" compensation at companies receiving federal bailout money.



The bill would give Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner greater say on executive compensation.



The Pay for Performance Act of 2009, which passed by a vote of 247-171, would empower Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner to define what constitutes reasonable compensation, as well as to ban bonuses not based on performance standards. Geithner's guidelines would apply to companies receiving assistance from the government's Troubled Asset Relief Program, or TARP.



Democrats provided heavy support for the bill, with only eight from that party voting against the measure. Republicans, who are in the minority in the House, were mostly opposed, with only 10 crossing party lines to support it.



Two weeks ago, the House passed legislation taxing individuals on any bonuses received in 2009 from companies getting $5 billion or more in money from the TARP. Bonuses for people with incomes over $250,000 would be taxed at a 90 percent rate, but the measure has failed to clear the Senate.  Watch Rep. Barney Frank spar with CNN's Lou Dobbs over bonus bill »



Public outrage followed the recent revelation that insurer AIG paid $165 million in bonuses even as it received at least $170 billion of taxpayer money in federal bailouts, plus an $85 billion loan from the Federal Reserve.

***

BAGHDAD, Iraq (CNN) -- Nineteen U.S. troops were killed in Iraq in May, the fewest killed in any month since the war started.



Baghdad saw a lull in violence in May, as a cease fire agreement has so far been maintained.



The second-lowest month for American deaths was in February 2004, when 20 were killed.



May's toll was a significant decrease from April, when 50 were killed -- the highest monthly figure since September.



The U.S. military death toll spiked last year as the U.S. troop escalation, dubbed the "surge," was unfolding. In 2007, there were 104 deaths in April, 126 in May and 101 in June.



Numbers began dropping when the "surge" strategy took hold and Shiite cleric Muqtada al-Sadr suspended the activities of his militia, the Mehdi Army. There were 78 American deaths in July, 2007; 84 in August; 65 in September; 38 in October; 37 in November; 23 in December; 40 in January; 29 in February; and 38 in March.



May's death numbers appeared to support Senate testimony last month from Gen. David Petraeus, the top U.S. commander in Iraq. Petraeus said recent operations in three Iraqi cities have "contributed significantly to the reduction in violence."



The month of June may not bring such optimistic news.



A suicide car bomb struck an Iraqi police checkpoint outside police headquarters in Mosul on Monday, killing nine people, including four police officers, and wounding 46 people, a Mosul police official said.



Eight of the wounded were police officers, the official said.



The incident took place in southern Mosul's Dawasa commercial area at about 7 p.m. the official said.



Mosul is about 260 miles (420 km) north of Baghdad.

***

(CNN) -- Nobel laureate Norman E. Borlaug, an agricultural scientist who helped develop disease-resistant wheat used to fight famine in poor countries, died Saturday. He was 95.



Norman Borlaug received a Congressional Gold Medal from then President George W. Bush on July 17, 2007.



Borlaug died from cancer complications in Dallas, Texas, a spokeswoman for Texas A&M University said.



A 1970 recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize, Borlaug was a distinguished professor of international agriculture at the university.



Borlaug started at Texas A&M in 1984, after working as a scientist in a program that introduced scientific techniques for preventing famine in Mexico, according to the university.



Until recently, he traveled worldwide working for improvements in agricultural science and food policy, said Kathleen Phillips, a university spokeswoman.



Borlaug was known as a champion of high-yield crop varieties, and other science and agricultural innovations to help fight hunger in developing nations. iReport.com: Tour Borlaug's boyhood farm



"We all eat at least three times a day in privileged nations, and yet we take food for granted," Borlaug said recently in an interview posted on the university's Web site.



"There has been great progress, and food is more equitably distributed. But hunger is a commonplace, and famine appears all too often."



He was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 1977, and the Congressional Gold Medal in 2006, according to the university's Web site.



The agriculture institute at the university was named after him in 2006.



Borlaug also created the World Food Prize, which recognized the work of scientists and humanitarians who have helped fight world hunger through advanced agriculture, the university said.



A memorial service will be held at the university at a later date.

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN) -- Jon Hamm has a confession to make: He hates his hair.



Jon Hamm poses with his partner, Jennifer Westfeldt, at the premiere of "The Day the Earth Stood Still."



That may come as a surprise to fans of the actor, whose slick-backed hair is part of his signature look on "Mad Men" -- the show that just earned him another Golden Globe nomination for best actor in a TV drama.



In the new movie "The Day the Earth Stood Still," Hamm sports a slightly different 'do, with his bangs combed rakishly over one eye. It was in the context of promoting the sci-fi remake that Hamm revealed his tonsorial frustration.



"It's the bane of my existence. Goofy hair," he said in a self-deprecating interview with CNN. "It never looks good ... It's a pain."



Hamm says he's always worn his hair long, but had to cut it for AMC's TV series, in which he plays a 1960s Madison Avenue ad executive. He says stylists on the show, armed with hair spray and blow dryers, mold his coiffure into a hard shell. Helmet hair has come in handy at work.



"I've had a piece of the set fall on my head and my hair didn't move," he said. "I had seven stitches in my head and my hair didn't move. That's impressive."



Whether it's his hair, good looks, acting chops or a combination thereof, Hamm's star is on the rise in Hollywood. Apart from his co-starring role in "The Day the Earth Stood Still," Hamm recently completed work on the murder mystery "The Boy in the Box." He hosted "Saturday Night Live" this fall, he's due to play Tina Fey's love interest on "30 Rock" and he continues to receive accolades for his work on "Mad Men" (nominations for an Emmy and a Golden Globe so far).



How does that make Hamm feel?



"Exciting is the right way to say it. It's been a good year. It's very exciting," he said. "I get to read a lot more scripts. I get to meet interesting people. I get to work with interesting people ... It's fun to be sort of invited to the party."

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Britain's coldest winter in almost two decades bared its teeth again Friday, with more snow trapping hundreds of motorists in their cars.



Britain is suffering its coldest winter in almost two decades, with heavy snow falls causing havoc.



Police, the army and civilian rescue teams rushed to help people trapped overnight south of Exeter, Devon, where 200 cars and dozens of trucks were snow-bound, the British Press Association reported.



"Wherever they're gonna go, they're gonna get stuck," said PC Carter of Chudleigh Police, just outside Exeter. "Everything's ground to a halt."



Rescuers needed 4x4s to reach the trapped motorists.



Some drivers abandoned their cars along the road overnight, trudging to nearby hotels to wait for the snow to pass.  Watch the snow stall motorists »



"You couldn't drive because it was coming onto your windscreen so thick and fast that it was just impossible to see," one woman staying warm at a hotel told CNN affiliate ITN. "You couldn't see the car in front and your tires were starting to skid, and it was really scary."



One man was stuck in his truck.



"I think I've been fairly lucky -- I managed to do most of what I've got to do, but this has got gradually worse," he told ITN from the cab of his truck. "It's got gradually worse and worse and worse until I got here. I've been here for 2 1/2 hours."



Devon and Cornwall Police urged people to avoid the area altogether and avoid travel whenever possible.



The snow, which has continued to fall across Britain following Monday's huge dump that brought the country to a virtual standstill, forced more airport closures Friday.  Watch an iReporter talk about being snowed in »



Luton, about 50 kilometers north of London, cancelled all flights until at least midday, while Bristol said it was closing until mid-morning.



However, London's major airports -- Heathrow, Stansted, Gatwick -- were all open for business as normal.



Britain's Met Office issued another severe weather warning, saying snow would be heavy at times with up to 10 cm over high ground.



It said the snow was likely to lead to further travel delays and warned the icy conditions would continue into the weekend.

***

(CNN) -- The world has a new alliance to save vanishing frogs, toads and salamanders.





A frog swims in a pond in Munich, Germany, in June.





A coalition of organizations established the Amphibian Survival Alliance this month to conserve species threatened by deadly fungus, habitat loss, pollution, pesticides and climate change. The scientists said amphibians are the world's most threatened group of animals.





Though they thrived on Earth for more than 360 million years, one in three of the 6,000 recognized amphibian species are now at risk of extinction and as many as 122 species have gone extinct since 1980, according to the International Union for the Conservation of Nature's amphibian specialist group.





"The world's amphibians are facing an uphill battle for survival," said James Collins of Arizona State University, co-chairman of the group.





He said the new alliance, formed at the Amphibian Mini Summit at the Zoological Society of London, will focus efforts on the biggest threat to amphibians: infectious disease and habitat destruction. The group includes amphibian specialists working in the wild as well as those in zoos, aquariums and botanical gardens worldwide.





"Amphibians have so much to offer humans," said amphibian specialist Simon Stuart. "Many have an arsenal of compounds stored in their skin that have the potential to address a multitude of human diseases."





But as amphibians die out, so do opportunities to develop new medicines, he said. The southern gastric brooding frog, for instance, could have led to the development of a treatment for human peptic ulcers had it not gone extinct, Stuart said.





"We simply cannot afford to let this current amphibian extinction crisis go unchecked," he said.





Andrew Blaustein, who began documenting amphibian declines two decades ago, said the loss of species was part of an overall biodiversity crisis.





"Amphibians seem to have been hit the hardest of all vertebrate species," said Blaustein, a professor of zoology at Oregon State University. "The long-term ecological repercussions of their decline could be profound, and we have to do something about it."

***

(CNN) -- The iPhone 4S -- Apple's newest creation -- quietly went on pre-sale at 12 a.m. on Friday.





The homepage of the company's website, however, remained a dedication to the company's co-founder, Steve Jobs, who died on Wednesday after a history of pancreatic cancer.





The phone, which has been panned by some critics who say it's more of a facelift to the iPhone 4 than a new product, features a faster dual-core processor and a camera with 8 megapixels of resolution.





It also has a "humble personal assistant" named Siri, which responds to voice commands and talks back to you.





Apple's new CEO, Tim Cook, unveiled the phone on Tuesday, a day before Jobs' death was announced.





The phone's price ranges from $200 to $400 with a two-year wireless contract. It's available on AT&T, Verizon and, for the first time, on Sprint's network.





The iPhone 4S goes on sale in stores on October 14 in the following countries: United States, Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Japan and the UK. The new iPhone will be available in 22 additional countries by the end of October, Apple says.





Pre-sale orders can be placed at Apple's online store, as well as on AT&T, Verizon and Sprint's websites.





All of those brick-and-mortar retail stores also will carry the phone, along with select Apple-approved retailers -- which as of Friday morning had not been listed by Apple.





BestBuy was making the phone available for pre-order Friday on its site. Walmart's site said only that the iPhone 4S was "coming soon."

***

(CNN) -- The National Transportation Safety Board on Tuesday will launch three days of hearings into the circumstances surrounding the US Airways Flight 1549 emergency landing on New York's Hudson River.



In January, passengers of US Airways Flight 1549 had to be rescued out of the Hudson River after a bird strike.



Looking into several issues from the January 15 incident -- from migratory birds to why a rear door opened after the landing -- the NTSB panel will hear testimony from key witnesses, including Capt. Chesley "Sully" Sullenberger, the pilot; and Billy Campbell, the only passenger scheduled to testify.



On Monday, the NTSB corrected remarks made by board member Robert Sumwalt, who was quoted by The Associated Press as saying Campbell was being called to contradict statements made by flight attendant Doreen Welsh, who has said a panicked passenger opened the rear door.



The NTSB said Sumwalt, who will lead the three days of hearings, was mistaken and that Campbell's written statement does not suggest Welsh opened the rear door.



NTSB spokesman Peter Knudson said the board asked Campbell to testify because he had the most detailed statement of those people in the cabin at the time of the crash.



"Safety Board investigators interviewed 145 passengers, each of whom provided their own perspective on what happened," the NTSB said Monday night. "Some of the passenger reports conflicted with the accounts of other passengers, including accounts of how the rear door was opened."



"What was consistently reported by those inside the plane was that the water entered the aft section of the cabin immediately while everyone was still seated," the statement said, adding that the NTSB will focus on how the water gushing "affected the ability of the passengers and the crew to evacuate the aircraft since two of the four slide-rafts were in the rear of the plane, on each of the rear doors, and they could not be used."



Sullenberger was the pilot in command during the flight, which lost power in both engines after hitting a flock of Canada geese. Bird detection, and standards for engines to handle bird strikes, are among subjects to be covered in the hearing.



Other topics include pilot training for ditching and forced landings on water, and cabin-safety training, emergency procedures and equipment.



CNN's Mike Ahlers contributed to this report.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Previously unseen footage of Diana, Princess of Wales, taken just hours before she was killed in a car crash, has been shown to the jury at the inquest into her death.

The footage showed Diana and Dodi step into an elevator at the Ritz Hotel.

Images taken from a security camera at the Ritz Hotel in Paris show the 36-year-old smiling as she and her lover Dodi Fayed step into an elevator and later walk out of the hotel.

Further footage shows Fayed visiting a jeweler's shop, images that could lend support to claims that he was buying an engagement ring.

Earlier, a British coroner at the inquest said tt may never be known for certain whether Princess Diana was pregnant when she died in the Paris car crash.

Lord Justice Scott Baker told the jury at the inquest into the deaths of the princess and her lover Dodi Fayed that scientific evidence might be unable to demonstrate "one way or the other" whether she was in the early stages of pregnancy.

But he said they would hear "intimate" details of her personal life.  Watch footage of Diana's last hours »

Baker told the 11 members of the jury -- six women and five men -- Diana may have been on the contraceptive pill and that evidence she was poised to get engaged to Dodi on the night she died was contradictory.

On Tuesday the judge, who is acting as coroner in the case, told the jury that a famous image taken in summer 1997 showing Diana wearing a swimsuit could not be proof she was pregnant with Dodi's child as she had not started a relationship with him at that stage.

The jury is set to hear "scene setting" evidence, including CCTV and a tourist video.

The inquest to establish cause of death is expected to be a six-month process.

Fayed's father, Mohammed Al Fayed, has contended from the start that Diana and his son were murdered because the royal family "could not accept that an Egyptian Muslim could eventually be step-father to the future king of England," referring to Diana's son Prince William.

"I'm hoping for justice," Al Fayed said outside court. "At last, we're going to have a jury from ordinary people and I hope to reach the decision which I believe that my son and Princess Diana have been murdered by the royal family."

Baker told the jury of Al Fayed's allegations, but again reminded them that they were responsible for deciding the facts of the case, but not to assign blame or guilt.

"You have to decide four important, but limited factual questions: who the deceased were, when they came by their deaths, where they came by their deaths and how they came by their deaths," Baker said, according to inquest transcripts.

"The first three questions are unlikely to give rise to any difficulty. The fourth is a rather wider question and is directed towards the means by which they died."

Diana, 36, and 42-year-old Dodi Fayed were killed on August 31, 1997 when the Mercedes-Benz they were traveling in hit a pillar in the Pont de l'Alma tunnel in Paris.

They were being pursued at the time by the paparazzi after leaving the Ritz Hotel. Driver Henri Paul, who was also killed, was drunk and driving at high speed. Bodyguard Trevor Rees-Jones was the sole survivor.

Next week, the jury is scheduled to travel to Paris to see the crash site, along the River Seine. They are also expected to hear testimony from the paparazzi who were present after the accident.

In its evidence section, the Web site for the inquest has posted previously unpublished pictures taken by paparazzi of the limo before and immediately after the accident.

One is a closeup -- looking into the front of the vehicle -- that shows Diana, Fayed, Paul and Rees-Jones minutes before the crash. E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- Jaycee Dugard, who police say was kidnapped at 11 and held captive for 18 years, said she is "doing well" as she speaks out in a new home video.





"Hi, I'm Jaycee. I want to thank you for your support, and I'm doing well," Dugard says in the video released exclusively to ABC News, which posted excerpts of the video on its Web site Friday.





"It's been a long haul," said Dugard, "but I'm getting there."





The full statement and video, which show Dugard baking cookies with her mother and playing with her dogs, were scheduled to air on ABC News' "20/20" at 9 p.m. Friday.





It's the first public statement from Dugard since the arrests of her suspected captors -- Phillip Garrido, 58, and his wife, Nancy, 54.





The Garridos are charged with 29 felony counts in the kidnapping of Dugard, who was 11 when she was snatched from the street in front of her house in South Lake Tahoe, California.





She was 29 when found in August at the Garridos' home in Antioch, California, about 120 miles from her home. Garrido, a registered sex offender on parole at the time of his arrest, is accused of fathering two daughters with Dugard during her captivity.





Authorities say he and his wife held Dugard in a hidden compound behind their home for 18 years. The Garridos have pleaded not guilty.





Dugard now lives in seclusion with her mother, Terry Probyn, and Dugard's two daughters.





"We released this video so that you can see that we are happy and well -- when we have more to share, we will," Probyn says in the home video. "As a mother I am pleading for our privacy in this very public story."





Authorities maintain Dugard does not want to speak to Garrido or his attorneys and have tried to keep her location a secret.

***

Washington (CNN) -- The insistence that former Sen. John Edwards serve some jail time over allegations he broke campaign finance laws caused a collapse in plea negotiations between lawyers for the former presidential candidate and the Justice Department last week.





Edwards wanted to have as "minimal" impact on his two younger kids as possible, a source with knowledge of the talks confirmed to CNN Sunday. Edwards has a 10-year-old son and a 12-year-old daughter.





The Raleigh News and Observer, which first reported the story, said the Justice Department was insisting that Edwards serve six months in jail if he pleaded guilty.





After initially saying Edwards had to agree to plead guilty to a felony in earlier discussions, CNN is told prosecutors last week offered for him instead to plead guilty to some misdemeanors.





But the jail time was the breaking point.





"He did not want to have an extended period of time away from his kids," said the source, who would not speak on the record because the details of the plea discussions have not been made public.





After the breakdown in negotiations, a grand jury indicted Edwards, a former Democratic vice presidential nominee, on six felony counts.





In court on Friday, Edwards pleaded not guilty.





"I will regret for the rest of my life the pain and the harm that I've caused to others. But I did not break the law. And I never, ever thought I was breaking the law," he told reporters outside the federal courthouse in Winston-Salem, North Carolina.





The News and Observer also reported that Edwards' lawyers were not confident they would be allowed to urge a judge to consider alternatives for incarceration such as a halfway house, weekend passes or home arrest in order to give him more time with his children. After the death of his wife, Elizabeth, Edwards is the primary caregiver for the two younger children.

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- The crown of the Statue of Liberty will reopen to tourists on July 4.



The Statue of Liberty welcomes visitors, immigrants, and returning Americans.



The crown was closed after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, for safety and security reasons.



The National Park Service closed the attraction amid worries that it would be difficult for visitors to evacuate quickly in the event of an emergency.



Visitors must climb a narrow 168-step double-helix spiral staircase to get to the crown.



Since the closing, tourists have been able to visit other parts of the statue. iReport.com: Show us your best Statue of Liberty shots



The federal government planned to give "America a special gift" by re-opening the crown, Interior Secretary Ken Salazar said in May.



"We are once again inviting the public to celebrate our great nation and the hope and opportunity it symbolizes by climbing to Lady Liberty's crown for a unique view of New York Harbor, where the forebears of millions of American families first saw the world," he said in a statement.



Access to the crown will be limited to 10 people at a time, guided by a National Park Service ranger.



"We cannot eliminate all the risk of climbing to the crown, but we are taking steps to make it safer," Salazar said.



The measures include raising the handrails on the spiral staircase and stationing rangers throughout the Statue to help visitors.



The Statue of Liberty will be open for the next two years, then closed again for "work on a long-term solution that will improve safety and security permanently," according to the U.S. Department of the Interior.



A gift from France to the United States, the Statue of Liberty was dedicated in 1886, designated as a National Monument in 1924 and restored for its centennial on July 4, 1986.



It stands just across New York Harbor from where the Twin Towers stood.

***

(CNN) -- Three-time defending champion Rafael Nadal made light work of his heavy schedule and a recurring foot problem to reach the last 16 of the French Open on Friday.



Rafael Nadal inspects his blistered foot during his third-round victory against Jarko Nieminen.



The world No. 2 crushed Finnish 26th seed Jarkko Nieminen 6-1 6-3 6-1 in his fourth successive day of action on the Paris clay, following frustration this week with bad weather.



He will play fellow Spaniard Fernando Verdasco after his 7-6 5-7 7-6 6-1 win over 15th seed Mikhail Youzhny of Russia.



Third seed Novak Djokovic was also untroubled in a later third round match to see off Wayne Odesnik of the United States 7-5 6-4 6-2.



Nadal will be hoping for some time to let his blistered foot recover, needing treatment during the match against Nieminen for a problem that saw him beaten in the second round of the Rome Masters earlier in the claycourt season.



He is bidding to become the second man after the legendary Bjorn Borg to win four successive titles at Roland Garros, but has already vented his anger at the ATP Tour for scheduling four top-level clay events in as many weeks.  Watch Nadal talk about his tournament hopes »



Nadal showed little signs of tiredness as he cruised past Nieminen in less than two hours to extend his winning record at the tournament to 24 matches.



His opening victory against Brazil's Thomaz Bellucci took two days due to torrential rain, then on Thursday he saw off another qualifier in straight sets when he beat Frenchman Nicolas Devilder.



In other third round action on Friday, Spain's Nicolas Almagro again showed his clay court pedigree with a 6-3 6-7 6-3 7-5 win over Britain's 10th seed Andy Murray.



Almagro, who has won two titles on clay this season, was made to work hard by Murray, but recovered from a 3-1 deficit in the third set to win seven games in row and take command.



He will now play 145th-ranked Frenchman Jeremy Chardy who ended the run of 30th seed Dmitry Tursunov of Russia in straight sets.



Latvia's Ernests Gulbis continued his fine run as he defeated Nicolas Lapentti of Ecuador 6-3 7-5 6-2 to set up a clash with home hope Michael Llodra who beat Italy's Simone Bolelli in straight sets.



In second-round action, France's Florent Serra completed a hard-fought 6-4 6-3 6-7 7-6 win over Victor Hanescu of Romania and will next face American Bobby Ginepri.

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- Hundreds of people converged on New York's Union Square Friday for the May Day Immigration Rally, calling for workers' rights and a path to citizenship for the country's nearly 12 million undocumented immigrants.



New Yorker's support the rights of undocumented workers on Friday at a May Day rally.



The annual event, which began in 2006, was organized by the May 1st Coalition for Workers and Immigrants Rights. Similar rallies were scheduled across the nation in Boston, Massachusetts; Detroit, Michigan; Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; San Diego, Los Angeles and San Francisco in California, and San Antonio, Texas, according to the group's Web site.



Following rally cries from speakers in both English and Spanish, demonstrators braved a rainstorm and marched approximately two miles to New York's Federal Plaza.



Among the participants was Saul Linares, who emigrated from El Salvador six years ago and works at a Long Island factory making equipment for the U.S. Army. Linares is particularly concerned about children who are American citizens, yet whose illegal immigrant parents have been deported. "The children are living alone, sometimes with relatives, at churches or with neighbors," he said.



Teresa Gutierrez, a co-coordinator of the event, blames current government policy for the United States' immigration woes. She said she believes the Clinton administration's landmark 1994 North American Free Trade Agreement, or NAFTA -- which was meant to promote cross-border growth between the United States and Mexico -- actually had exploitive effects on the Mexican population.



"Immigrants came because of NAFTA. They don't risk their lives crossing the border because they want to, but because they have to," she said.



A smaller anti-illegal immigration rally assembled across the street, organized by the New Yorkers for Immigration Control and Enforcement. Charles Maron, a New York firefighter and husband of a first generation Pakistani, believes illegal immigrants who commit crimes should be deported. "Someone who comes, teaches their kids the American way, I support that."



Participants in the May Day rally included people from Latin America, Africa and the Middle East. According to Gregory Jesus Luc, who is producing a documentary about the plight of Haitian immigrants, "It's about awareness, letting media and America know that we are immigrants and we are the backbone of this country."

***

NEW YORK (CNN)  -- An employee of a luxurious New York hotel has been arrested in connection with the slaying of a woman in one of the hotel's residential condominiums, police say.



The Jumeirah Essex House is a landmark on Central Park South in New York.



Derrick Praileau, 29, faces second-degree murder charges in connection with the death of Andree Bejjani, 44.



Police said Bejjani, who was originally from Lebanon, had moved to New York from Dubai, United Arab Emirates, and had been staying in a residential condominium at the Jumeirah Essex House since August.



Bejjani's nude body was found Saturday afternoon on the 10th floor of the hotel on Central Park South. Her throat was slashed, authorities said. Police have not revealed a suspected motive for the slaying.



"This incident occurred in one of the private condominiums at The Essex House complex," the hotel said in a statement provided to CNN. "Our sincere condolences go out to the victim's family and we have offered our full support during this difficult time."



The statement continued: "We understand that a hotel employee has been arrested pending charges in conjunction with this incident. We continue to fully cooperate with the police throughout their investigation."



A message left with Praileau's defense attorney was not returned.



The hotel referred to Praileau only as an employee, but the New York Daily News said he was its housekeeping manager, citing Police Commissioner Raymond Kelly.



The 44-story Essex House opened in 1931, a landmark Art Deco building. It recently underwent a $90 million renovation.



The hotel has more than 500 luxury rooms and suites, along with several privately-owned residences. One six-room unit is currently on the market for $8.25 million.

***

(CNN)  -- Elvis Presley may have left the building three decades ago, but he raked in more money last year than many living titans of the music industry



Singer Elvis Presley tops the Forbes list for the second year in a row, raking in $52 million last year.



For the second year in a row, Presley topped the Forbes magazine's list of Top-Earning Dead Celebrities, hauling in $52 million last year.



In comparison, the very-much-alive Justin Timberlake earned $44 million while another superstar, Madonna, made $40 million, the magazine reported Tuesday.



The 30th anniversary of Presley's death boosted attendance and merchandise sales last year at his Memphis, Tennessee, home, Graceland.



A long list of licensing deals, such as a Presley show on satellite radio, added to the earnings.



The business magazine has been compiling its annual list of departed celebrities' earnings since 2001. Since 2003, the feature has coincided with Halloween.



This year, the top 13 celebrities earned a combined $194 million in the last 12 months.



The magazine says it talked to people inside the celebrities' estates and calculated their gross earnings from October 2007 to October 2008.



Some celebrities are staples on the list, which is in its eighth year.



Cartoonist Charles Schulz, who created Snoopy, Charlie Brown and the assorted cast of "Peanuts" characters, is second on the list.



Schulz, who died in 2000, had posthumous earnings last year of $33 million, the magazine reported.



He owes his constant presence to a steady revenue stream from the ongoing licensing of his characters, the magazine said.



Schulz and Presley join Theodor "Dr. Seuss" Geisel (this year's No. 6), Beatles legend John Lennon (No. 7) and actress Marilyn Monroe (No. 9) as the only entertainers to make the list every year since its inception.



Physicist Albert Einstein, best known for his theory of relativity, is fourth on the list. It is his third consecutive year making the Forbes rankings.



Though he died in 1955, a franchise bearing his name -- Baby Einstein -- made big bucks last year selling educational books, DVDs, CDs, toys and other products. It plans to expand into the young-adult market this year.



Australian actor Heath Ledger, who died of an overdose in January, made his debut on the list in third place.



The magazine estimated his earnings at $20 million, thanks to the success of the movie, "The Dark Knight," in which Ledger played the Joker. The movie grossed $991 million worldwide.



Paul Newman, who died of lung cancer last month, also made his first appearance on the list, raking in $5 million.



"His income still largely stems from residuals from his classic pictures, as well as more recent productions," the magazine said.



The legendary actor's line of natural and organic food products, Newman's Own, earned revenues of $120 million last year, but the earnings were not considered in the tally because Newman donated all profits to charity while he was living, the magazine said.



Several entertainers from last year's list failed to make this year's cut, including composer, producer and Beatles guitarist George Harrison, rapper/actor Tupac Shakur, "Godfather of Soul" James Brown, and reggae legend Bob Marley.

***

(CNN) -- A national poll of people who watched the vice presidential debate Thursday night suggests that Democratic Sen. Joe Biden won, but also says Republican Gov. Sarah Palin exceeded expectations.



Poll respondents give Sen. Joe Biden the edge over Gov. Sarah Palin in ability to express views.



The CNN/Opinion Research Corp. said 51 percent of those polled thought Biden did the best job, while 36 percent thought Palin did the best job.



But respondents said the folksy Palin was more likable, scoring 54 percent to Biden's 36 percent. Seventy percent said Biden was more of a typical politician.



Both candidates exceeded expectations -- 84 percent of the people polled said Palin did a better job than they expected, while 64 percent said Biden also exceeded expectations.



How Palin would perform had been a major issue for the Alaska governor, who had some well-publicized fumbles during interviews with CBS' Katie Couric leading up to the debate.



Respondents thought Biden was better at expressing his views, giving him 52 percent to Palin's 36 percent.iReport.com: Tell us who you think did best



On the question of the candidates' qualifications to assume the presidency, 87 percent of those polled said Biden is qualified and 42 percent said Palin is qualified.



The candidates sparred over which team would be the better agent of change, and Biden came out on top of that debate, with 53 percent of those polled giving the nod to the Delaware senator while 42 percent said Palin was more likely to bring change.



Respondents overwhelmingly said moderator Gwen Ifill was fair during the vice presidential debate, repudiating critics who said that Ifill, of PBS, would be biased because she is writing a book that includes Biden's running mate, Sen. Barack Obama.



Ninety-five percent of those polled said Ifill was fair.



The poll had a margin of error of plus or minus 4 percentage points.



Obama was selected as a winner over Republican Sen. John McCain in a CNN/Opinion Research Corp. poll on the September 26 presidential debate.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Carrie Prejean, the Miss USA contestant from California who declared her opposition to same-sex marriage on the pageant stage, will star in a new $1.5 million ad campaign funded by the National Organization for Marriage.





Miss California USA Carrie Prejean has gotten support from many same-sex marriage opponents.





Prejean appeared Thursday at a news conference in Washington to unveil the ad, called "No Offense."





Prejean was roasted by same-sex marriage advocates after she stood up for what she called "opposite marriage" (marriage between a man and a woman) when responding to a question from celebrity blogger Perez Hilton during the pageant. But she's also become a fresh-faced standard-bearer for same-sex marriage opponents, who have rallied to her defense.





"Marriage is good," Prejean said at the news conference. "There is something special about unions of husband and wife. Unless we bring men and women together, children will not have mothers and fathers."





"She is attacked viciously for having the courage to speak up for her truth and her values," the National Organization for Marriage said in a press release. "But Carrie's courage inspired a whole nation and a whole generation of young people because she chose to risk the Miss USA crown rather than be silent about her deepest moral values."





"This vision of marriage is not hateful," Prejean said. "It's not discriminatory. It's good."





Although she claimed that her view represents that of the majority of Americans, Prejean said she has no plan "on getting into politics anytime soon, that's for sure."





According to the group, the ad will call "gay marriage advocates to account for their unwillingness to debate the real issue: gay marriage has consequences."





The Miss California USA TV ad is the group's second. Its first, called "A Gathering Storm," ran in several states and featured actors issuing ominous warnings about the threats posed by same-sex marriage.





Executive directors and producers of the Miss California USA pageant released a statement Wednesday lamenting that Prejean had taken on such a "polarizing" issue.





"We are deeply saddened Carrie Prejean has forgotten her platform of the Special Olympics, her commitment to all Californians and solidified her legacy as one that goes beyond the rights to voice her beliefs and instead reveals her opportunistic agenda," the group said.





CNN's Peter Hamby and Alan Duke contributed to this report.

***

DULUTH, Georgia (CNN) -- Neither the on-the-field fame nor the off-the-field notoriety of former Atlanta Falcons quarterback Michael Vick was enough to spark a bidding war for his suburban Atlanta mansion Tuesday.



No one submitted the minimum $3.2 million bid for former Falcon Michael Vick's Atlanta-area mansion.



The multimillion-dollar home in Duluth was on the auction block Tuesday, but just three real estate agents showed up -- and one of them, Lance Hempen of Funari Realty, was a listing agent who had no clients interested in the property.



No one offered a bid, so the auction ended before it began.



The auction required a minimum bid of $3.2 million, with a deposit of $160,000.



Vick, 28, is serving a 23-month sentence after pleading guilty in August 2007 to a federal conspiracy charge of bankrolling a dogfighting operation at a home he owned in Virginia. He is expected to be released early, possibly in May, and to serve the final two months or so of his sentence under home confinement, most likely in Virginia.



No dogfights occurred in Duluth, 40 miles northeast of Atlanta.



The home, in the upscale Sugarloaf Country Club community, has been on the market for more than a year. It has eight bedrooms, 11 bathrooms, a four-car garage and a movie theater, among other deluxe features.



Narender Reddy of Metro Brokers/GMAC Real Estate said his client offered $3.2 million for the home two months ago, but the auction organizers said they wanted to see whether someone would offer more. Reddy said his client withdrew the bid but remains interested.



"Why would I let them use my offer as a benchmark?" Reddy asked. "I wanted to see who was going to bid and what were they going to offer."



He will advise his client to offer less money now, Reddy said.



Seema Jain of Virtual Properties Realty also was on hand. She said that she has interested buyers but that they didn't want to bid if there was no competition.



The next step is to be determined by the bankruptcy judge in Virginia who ordered the sale.



Reddy said the price is too high for today's economy.



"It is the economy that is dictating the price of the houses, and I'm sure most of the people still think $3.2 million ... is higher than what the market can fetch," he said.



Jain said no one seems turned off by Vick's reputation.



"Nobody cares about who owns it. It's just the product and the location," she said.



Reddy said the home is "well-built, has a lake view and an excellent floor plan."



CNN's Amanda Moyer and Deb Krajnak contributed to this report.

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- A former New York City bouncer was sentenced to life without parole Wednesday for the brutal slaying of a graduate student from Boston, the Brooklyn district attorney's office said.



Darryl Littlejohn, 44, is already serving prison time for the attempted kidnapping of another student in 2005.



Darryl Littlejohn, 44, was convicted of first-degree murder last month in the 2006 death of Imette St. Guillen, 24, who had been studying criminology at John Jay College of Criminal Justice.



Littlejohn, who is already serving 25 years to life for the October 2005 attempted kidnapping of a 19-year-old Queens college student, will serve out the sentences consecutively, said Sarah McNaughton of the Brooklyn district attorney's office.



During the trial, witnesses said they saw Littlejohn and St. Guillen leaving The Falls bar in lower Manhattan together early February 25, 2006.



Littlejohn was working as a bouncer at the bar.



Hours later, St. Guillen's nude body was found in an isolated lot in Brooklyn. Her face was covered with strips of packing tape, and a sock was stuffed into her throat.



She died of asphyxiation, and investigators determined she had been raped.



Littlejohn was charged with murder after investigators linked his DNA to blood found on plastic ties used to bind St. Guillen's hands behind her back.



Littlejohn's attorney, Joyce David, has filed an appeal on behalf of her client and maintains his innocence. She said that although Littlejohn has a long criminal record, he has no history of violence against women.



The horrific incident spread shockwaves through New York City nightlife, which relies heavily on unlicensed bouncers to keep order in the city's bars and nightclubs.



Littlejohn is being held at New York's Rikers Island maximum security facility.



CNN's Chris Kokenes and Kristen Hamill contributed to this report

***

JOHANNESBURG, South Africa (CNN)  -- South Africa has refused the Dalai Lama a visa to attend an international peace conference in Johannesburg this week, a presidential spokesman said.

The Dalai Lama fled China in 1959 after a failed uprising against Chinese rule.

The Tibetan spiritual leader and Nobel Laureate did not receive a visa because it was not in South Africa's interest for him to attend, said Thabo Masebe.

South Africa thinks that, if the Dalai Lama attended the conference, the focus would shift away from the 2010 World Cup -- the global soccer championship it will host next year.

"We cannot allow focus to shift to China and Tibet," Masebe said, adding that South Africa has gained much from its trading relationship with China.

The Dalai Lama's fellow laureate, Archbishop Desmond Tutu, said he would boycott the event.  Watch the controversy surrounding South Africa's decision »

Former president F.W. De Klerk, another laureate, backed Tutu, saying in a statement that he would also not participate in the conference if the Dalai Lama remained excluded.

De Klerk said that the decision to refuse the visa made a "mockery" of the peace conference.

"The decision to exclude the Dalai Lama is irreconcilable with key principles on which our society is based including the principles of accountability, openness and responsiveness and the rights to freedom of expression and free political activity," he said.

"South Africa is a sovereign constitutional democracy and should not allow other countries to dictate to it regarding who it should, and should not admit to its territory - regardless of the power and influence of the country."

A representative of the Dalai Lama said he was not surprised by the decision. The Tibetan government in exile thinks that China has pressured many countries to refuse a visit by the Dalai Lama, according to Chhime Chhoekyapa, an aide in Dharamsala, India.

The Dalai Lama fled China in 1959 after a failed uprising against Chinese rule.

The peace conference was billed as an opportunity to showcase South Africa's role as a human-rights champion ahead of its hosting of soccer's World Cup next year.

It was to bring together Noble Laureates and top soccer officials. In addition to Tutu and De Klerk, laureates Nelson Mandela and Martti Ahtisaari, Sepp Blatter, president of soccer's international governing body, and actress Charlize Theron were invited to attend. The event had the blessing of the Nobel Committee.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- A series of photographic exhibitions have been organized in Europe and North America this autumn to highlight a campaign by Britain's Prince Charles to combat tropical deforestation.





An aerial of Jambi Province, Indonesia showing the destruction of the tropical rainforest.





The photographs were taken by world-renowned environment photographer Daniel Beltra who was this year's winner of the Prince's Rainforest Project Award at the Sony World Photography Awards earlier this year.





The images graphically depict the effects of climate change on the rainforests in the South America, Africa and Indonesia.





Beltra compiled a library of around 40,000 images during month long trips to the Amazon Basin, the Congolese Forest and Borneo and Sumatra in Southeast Asia.





When he returned home Beltra produced a shortlist of around 1000 images from which the final exhibition photos were selected.





"I shoot a lot when I'm in the air," Beltra told CNN. "Trying to concentrate on a small detail on the ground when your flying at a speed of 150 knots is difficult."





And that's not the only problem Beltra encountered. The very acts of destruction he was documenting often got in the way of his work.  Click here to see a selection of images from the exhibition »





"When you are photographing deforestation, you are taking a lot of pictures of logging and fires and the smoke can make it very difficult to shoot."





Beltra was born in Spain but is now based in the United States. His work, which includes freelancing for the international environmental group Greenpeace, has taken him to over 50 countries and he is a fellow of the International League of Conservation Photographers.





HRH Prince Charles has long been a passionate defender of the environment and he founded the Prince's Rainforest Project (PRP) in 2007.





The PRP works alongside governments, international businesses, non-profit organizations and rainforest nations to find a solution to the deforestation and degradation of the rainforests.





Speaking at the Sony Awards in Cannes, France earlier this year the Prince said: "Photographic images can tell a compelling story about the truth of the situation, and the truth is that if we lose the fight against tropical deforestation, then we lose the fight against climate change."





Beltra hopes that his pictures will raise further awareness of the perils that humans face in the wake of continued rainforest destruction.





"I think we are all getting more aware but we really need to get our act together because at the moment we are destroying more than we are protecting," he said.





The multimedia exhibitions organized by Sony are taking place at the Royal Botanical Gardens at Kew in London, the Hotel de Ville, Paris, the Alexa Center, Berlin and the Mercy Corps Action Center, New York.

***

(CNN) -- Financial crisis-stricken Iceland formally applied for European Union membership on Friday, a day after lawmakers narrowly backed a government plan to take the island nation into the economic and political bloc.



Icelandic PM Johanna Sigurdardottir pledged to take Iceland into the EU during April's election campaign.



A copy of the application was submitted to the Swedish government, which currently holds the EU's rotating presidency, Iceland's Ministry for Foreign Affairs confirmed in a statement.



Iceland's economy was devastated by the collapse of the island's banking system last year, leading to the resignation of the country's government.



In elections in April, center left leader Johanna Sigurdardottir was elected prime minister after pledging to take Iceland into the EU.



On Thursday, Iceland's parliament, the Althing, voted in favor of the government plan by 33 votes to 28 with two abstentions.



"This is a historic day for Iceland," Foreign Minister Ossur Skarphedinsson said in a statement.



"As a European nation already deeply integrated into European structures... we now look forward to taking the next logical step, in close cooperation with our European partners."



Welcoming Iceland's application, European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso said: "The decision of the Icelandic Parliament is a sign of the vitality of the European project and indicative of the hope that the European Union represents. Iceland is a European country with long and deep democratic roots."



Iceland already benefits from a free trade arrangement with European Union member states, latterly as a participating member of the European Economic Area, which was established in 1994, and formerly through a bilateral free trade agreement with the EEC, the EU's predecessor.



But Icelanders have traditionally been skeptical of the benefits of full EU membership, fearing that they would lose some of their independence as a small state within a larger political entity.



At present three other states in southeastern Europe -- Croatia, FYR Macedonia and Turkey -- are candidate countries for EU membership.



"I am pleased that the EU's enlargement agenda may soon extend to Europe's north-western corner as well, with Iceland, a country with deep democratic traditions, in addition to our continued commitment to South East Europe," said Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn.

***

(CNN)  -- The sagging economy is taking a bite out of federal school-meal subsidies as more students take advantage of free or low-price breakfasts and lunches, nutritionists say in a report released Thursday.



About 425,000 more students are participating in the National School Lunch Program, a group reports.



The School Nutrition Association surveyed more than 130 school nutrition directors from 38 states to produce its report, "Saved by the Lunch Bell: As Economy Sinks, School Nutrition Program Participation Rises."



The nonprofit organization said that about 425,000 more students are participating in the National School Lunch Program and the School Breakfast Program in 2008-09 than in the previous school year.



That represents an average increase of 2.5 percent from 2007-08, the report says.



These numbers hold true despite a slight decline in the number of students enrolled in public schools this school year, according to the study.



More than three-quarters of the districts surveyed reported a rise in the number of students eating free meals under the U.S. Department of Agriculture program, the report says.



Many of the school district employees who monitor the food programs complain that the federal subsidies fall far short of the rising costs.



According to the association, the estimated average cost to prepare a school meal is $2.90, but the federal reimbursement is $2.57.



School lunch programs are experiencing a potential loss of at least $4.5 million per school day, based on 30 million school lunches provided, the group says.



The good news, according to association President Katie Wilson, is that "this year, when hunger is more common, more students are able to eat a balanced, nutritious meal at school."



Meals served under the USDA programs must meet nutrition guidelines based on the Dietary Guidelines for Americans. For lunches, that means no more than 30 percent of calories can come from fat and fewer than 10 percent from saturated fat.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- The global economy is in the doldrums but the market for merchandise featuring the world's new mega-star shows no sign of tailing off.

Obama T-shirts and merchandise are flying off the shelves at the moment.

At the inauguration ceremony for U.S. President Barack Obama in Washington on Tuesday, thousands wore T-shirts, caps and watches featuring his image and even popping bottles of Barack bubbly.

Pens, pin badges and $5 cookies emblazoned with Obama's image are hugely popular in the U.S. while the Internet is helping to satisfy demand for other items around the world. Here are some pieces of merchandise available online:

Barack Obama action figure: 15-centimeter (6-inch) tall, electroplated statue in a gold suit could be yours for $39. However, the seller says that due to high demand the action figure is sold out.

Barack Obama thimble: If you're curious, then these are made out of porcelain so would be unsuitable for conventional sewing.

Obama face masks: These flew off the shelves when they first hit the markets in Japan in December and could be a hit at a fancy dress party.

Barack Obama earrings: To symbolize Barack Obama's African heritage, these earrings have a photograph of the president on a tiny map of the continent made from wood.

Replica inauguration tickets: The government printed 250,000 tickets for the inauguration in Washington, but some were reportedly sold online for $40,000. Pick up a framed replica then for just a few dollars. Have you purchased any Obama merchandise? Share your stories with us

Obama campaign poster: A set of six Obama campaign posters are on sale for $3,000.

New York Times inauguration newspaper could be yours for $10.50, plus $12.80 to post it from the U.S. of course.

"RUN DC" T-shirt: Was Obama in the 1980s hip-hop band? He certainly looks like it when dressed in geeky glasses, trilby hat and chain.

***

BERLIN, Germany (CNN) -- German Chancellor Angela Merkel defeated her foreign minister Sunday to win another four-year term, according to exit polls reported by German television network NTV.



German Chancellor Angela Merkel and her husband, Joachim Sauer, vote Sunday in Berlin.



NTV reported Merkel's center-right Christian Democratic Union (CDU) party received 33.7 percent of the vote, based on exit poll projections.



The polls show Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier's center-left Social Democrats received 23.4 percent, the network reported.



"Not only are you happy, I am very happy as well," Merkel told cheering supporters at her headquarters. "We've accomplished something great. We've done it. We've reached our election goal, to retain a stable majority in Germany and a new government with a new coalition."



The crowd chanted, "Angie, Angie, Angie."



Steinmeier, meanwhile, conceded what he called "a bitter defeat" for the Social Democrats.



"The voters have decided, and the result is a bad day," Steinmeier said in a speech to supporters.



He thanked those who helped lead his campaign and those who supported him.



The two parties currently are in a coalition, with Steinmeier as foreign minister.



Few doubted that Merkel's party would receive the most votes. The question was what kind of coalition will be formed -- another broad centrist one, across the political divide, or a more right-leaning one.



Merkel favors cutting taxes to spur growth, while Steinmeier opposes tax breaks. The country is deep in debt.  What's at stake in the German election »



Voters chose members of the lower house of parliament, or Bundestag, who will pick the head of government.



Each German had two votes -- one for a member of parliament representing a district and another for a political party.



The election Sunday followed release of a threatening videos from al Qaeda and the Taliban warning Germans not to vote for leaders who want to keep the country's troops in Afghanistan.



Security was tightened at airports and train stations, and authorities on Saturday banned all flights over the Oktoberfest beer festival until it ends on October 4. The annual event attracts about 6 million people.



About 62 million people were eligible to vote, out of Germany's population of 82 million.



CNN's Fred Pleitgen contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- A second runner missing since Monday was found alive near a ravine on a rugged mountain trail in Southern California hours after her running partner was found, an Orange County Sheriff's spokesman told CNN.



Runner Maria "Gina" Natera-Armenta, 34, is severely dehydrated and in serious condition, officials said.



Authorities and fellow runners had been looking for Maria "Gina" Natera-Armenta, 34, and her brother-in-law, Fidel Diaz, 50, since Monday.



Diaz was found about 1 p.m. ET Wednesday, but the search for Natera-Armenta continued as police questioned him.



Orange County Sheriff's officials, searching the area by helicopter, eventually spotted Natera-Armenta waving from the ravine, which was about five miles from the sheriff's command post, Orange County Sheriff spokesman Lt. Jim Amormino.



"She was lying in the shady area," Amormino said. "She did see the helicopter before, but didn't have enough energy to get up."



Natera-Armenta is in serious condition, and was severely dehydrated when she was found, Amormino said. She is currently in the intensive care unit at Mission Hospital in Mission Viejo, California.



The pair had set out at 5:30 a.m. Sunday. According to their spouses, they planned to do an eight- to 10-hour run on a remote mountain trail in the Cleveland National Forest near San Diego.



But it wasn't until Monday night that their spouses individually reported to police that the two were missing.



Natera-Armenta and Diaz are ultrarunners, devotees of an endurance sport in which it's common to trek and run for many hours over rugged terrain.  Natera-Armenta is an experienced ultrarunner and was a top finisher at a 100-mile race in San Diego.

***

MIAMI, Florida (CNN) -- Described as "an extremely dangerous Category 4 hurricane," Hurricane Bill was churning closer to the Atlantic island of Bermuda on Wednesday, forecasters said.



Most forecast maps show Hurricane Bill passing to the west of Bermuda.



Although Bill is not expected to make a direct hit on the island, forecasters cautioned that the storm is large and will generate large swells on Bermuda as well as the islands of the northeast Caribbean Sea over the next day or two.



Swells may also affect the eastern United States on Friday and Saturday, the National Hurricane Center said. CNN meteorologists said Bill could cause cause dangerous rip tides and some coastal flooding in the northeast United States and could move very close to or make landfall in Newfoundland, Canada, early next week.



In addition, Bill may strengthen further over the next couple of days, forecasters said.



As of 5 p.m. ET, Bill's center was about 335 miles northeast of the Leeward Islands and about 970 miles south-southeast of Bermuda, the hurricane center said.



"It's a little too early to evaluate what kind of direct impact Bill may have," said Jack Bevin, a senior hurricane specialist. "Most of the computer guidance has the storm passing between Bermuda and the U.S. coastline, then turning northeastward."



Other models show Bill turning more sharply out to sea and not affecting any areas, he said.



Bill's maximum sustained winds were at 135 mph Wednesday afternoon. It was moving northwest at near 20 mph and was expected to continue that motion over the next day or so, turning north-northwest by late Friday.



Five-day forecast maps show Bill passing to the west of Bermuda before turning to the northwest.



"Bill is a large tropical cyclone," the National Hurricane Center said. Hurricane-force winds extended up to 85 miles from its center, with tropical storm-force winds extending up to 230 miles out.



CNN Radio's Andrew Spencer and Lee Garen contributed to this report.

***

COLUMBIA, South Carolina (CNN)  -- Democratic Sen. Barack Obama kicked off a series of local outreach gospel concerts Friday in Charleston, South Carolina, that unexpectedly came back to bite his campaign.

Democratic presidential hopeful Barack Obama is competing for the black vote with Hillary Clinton.

The concerts were meant to boost black voters' support for his presidential nominee bid -- the kind of events that would normally fly under the national radar.

The ensuing controversy highlighted that Obama's desire to unite disparate voting blocs -- especially religious voters -- under his umbrella of "change" is not without some serious pitfalls.

When the campaign announced the lineups for the three-city "Embrace the Change!" gospel tour last week, one name stood out to gay bloggers: Donnie McClurkin.

The Grammy-award winning singer is on record as saying homosexuality is a choice, and that he was "once involved with those desires and those thoughts" but was able to get past them through prayer.

To say the least, neither of those arguments is very popular in the gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender community.

John Aravosis, a prominent gay blogger and co-founder of the Web site AmericaBlog, led the charge against the Obama campaign, writing that the Illinois Democrat was "sucking up to anti-gay bigots" and "giving them a stage."

When the story bubbled up into the mainstream media, it took the Obama campaign by surprise.

Obama's efforts in the Palmetto State have overwhelmingly targeted African-American churchgoers in a bid to win over black voters in South Carolina from rival Sen. Hillary Clinton.

The campaign has vigorously promoted the candidate's faith, launching "40 Days of Faith and Family" in September, which used Bible study groups to tap into the black electorate.

Campaigners have run three radio ads, one of which called Obama a "Christian family man," that aired on gospel stations across the state.

Earlier this month, Obama spoke at an evangelical church in the traditionally conservative city of Greenville, where he demonstrated a casual familiarity with Christian vocabulary, telling the crowd, to much applause, that "I am confident that we can create a kingdom right here on Earth."

After that appearance, the Obama campaign told CNN that Republicans no longer had a choke hold on issues of faith and values.

"I think that what you're seeing is a breaking down of the sharp divisions that existed maybe during the '90s," Obama said. "At least in politics, the perception was that the Democrats were fearful of talking about faith, and on the other hand you had the Republicans who had a particular brand of faith that oftentimes seemed intolerant or pushed people away."

But on Tuesday, Obama was forced to confront the uncomfortable truth that some Christians and gays are a little more than just strange bedfellows, especially among blacks.

Obama issued a statement saying, "I strongly disagree with Reverend [Donnie] McClurkin's views and will continue to fight for these rights as president of the United States," and argued that it is important to confront homophobia among religious African Americans.

A September poll of African Americans in South Carolina by Winthrop University and ETV showed that 62 percent of those surveyed said that "sex between two adults of the same sex" is "strongly unacceptable."

Obama held a conference call Wednesday with Joe Solomonese, president of the Human Rights Campaign, and announced that the Rev. Andy Sidden, an openly gay South Carolina pastor, will appear at the same event as McClurkin on Sunday in Columbia.

Solomonese was not completely assuaged.

"I spoke with Senator Barack Obama today and expressed to him our community's disappointment for his decision to continue to remain associated with Reverend McClurkin, an anti-gay preacher who states the need to 'break the curse of homosexuality,'" he said in a statement.

"There is no gospel in Donnie McClurkin's message for gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender people and their allies. That's a message that certainly doesn't belong on any presidential candidate's stage.

***

SAN DIEGO, California (CNN) -- Conditions that created what California Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger dubbed "the perfect storm for fire" eased Wednesday, helping firefighters gain ground against devastating Southern California wildfires.

A plane drops fire retardant on the fourth day of a wildfire pushed by winds through Pauma Valley, California.

Winds that gusted as much as 101 mph on Sunday dropped to about 30 mph Wednesday evening.

Meanwhile, the dry Santa Ana winds that have fanned the flames, changed direction and began blowing inland from the Pacific Ocean, increasing the humidity and easing the burden on almost 8,900 firefighters in the area.

But the destruction was taking its toll on the men and women on the front lines of the fires.

"It hurts us to have those homes lost. It hurts us to have those injuries. And it is frustrating for us to watch our community be devastated by this," said firefighter Andy Menshek.

As conditions improved, officials allowed people to return to communities that had been off-limits because of intense flames and dense smoke.

"It was home," said Mark Davis, whose two-story Rancho Bernardo house burned to the ground.

"It was us. We had been there 28 years, and it had a lot of our flavor."

The change in the weather also meant that firefighting aircraft -- grounded for most of the week by the winds -- could finally fly.

California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection Capt. Scott McLean called the droning sound of aircraft the "sound of joy."

"Their drops are hitting their mark because the wind is not there," he said.

The rate of burning had slowed significantly by Wednesday.

Still, the fire damage increased to 434,543 acres, said Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger.  Watch Schwarzenegger give a progress report »

That amounted to 679 square miles, or about 10 times the size of Washington, D.C.

By Wednesday evening, the largest fire -- the Witch in northern San Diego County -- was 10 percent contained.

It burned about 196,000 acres before combining with the smaller Poomacha blaze.

Seven fires among the 22 counted Wednesday were contained.  See where the fires are burning »

Others, such as the Buckweed Fire in Los Angeles County, were as much as 94 percent contained.

One large fire was a suspected arson.

The FBI and the Orange County Fire Authority are investigating the Santiago fire that has burned more than 19,000 acres.

All three of its points of origin have been declared crime scenes, said Jim Amornino, a spokesman for the Orange County Sheriff's Department.

A $70,000 reward is being offered for any information leading to the arrest of those responsible for setting the fire.

The blaze was about 50 percent contained after destroying 17 structures.  Watch the raging flames of the Santiago fire »

The smaller Rosa fire in Riverside County, 70 percent contained at just over 400 acres, was also a probably arson, state officials said.

As the fire danger eased, residents were allowed to return to several neighborhoods surrounding San Diego: Del Mar Highlands, Encinitas, Solana Beach, Carmel Valley, Chula Vista and Otay Mesa.

Helicopters were back in the air over the Lake Arrowhead, California, area after all air activity had been suspended because of extremely smoky skies.

In nearby Running Springs, CNN's Ted Rowlands stood in the midst of charred, smoldering rubble strewn with potentially deadly power lines.

"It will be a while before these people will come back. When they do come back, unfortunately they'll have this pretty much to look at," he said Wednesday.  Watch Rowlands describe a major battle with the flames »

About 500 homes were lost in the mountainous region in San Bernardino County east of Los Angeles.  See photos of the fires »

"Yesterday we couldn't be here, because just this little flame and smoldering pieces of wood would be thrown by the intense winds. ... Now you can see the flames just basically burning themselves out," said Rowlands.

The fires have already destroyed 1,664 structures --

***

(CNN) -- A man was stabbed in the chest and 13 people were arrested after violence marred an English League Cup tie between Premier League side West Ham and east London neighbors Millwall.



Millwall fans taunt West Ham supporters during their English League Cup tie.



The 44-year-old man was stabbed in Priory Road, a few yards from West Ham's stadium as fans clashed with police before and after the match; police say he is now in a stable condition.



During the match, which West Ham won 3-1, fans fought with police and stewards inside the stadium and play was temporarily suspended when numerous supporters invaded the pitch.



Metropolitan Police chief superintendent Steve Wisbey, who was in charge of policing the match, confirmed his force were investigating the events and would seek to punish those responsible for the trouble.



Commenting on the tie which has a tradition for trouble among rival fans Wisbey added: "Police worked closely with West Ham Football Club, British Transport Police and the local authority to minimize disorder.



"Officers responded swiftly whilst missiles were being thrown as they tried to separate fans outside the ground after the match.



"Incidents of this nature at a match are thankfully rare, but it would appear that a small number of supporters were intent on causing a confrontation.



"A team of dedicated police officers will be reviewing all the events that took place and will be looking at CCTV both inside and outside the ground to identify evidence of offenses and offenders.



"We will proactively seek to obtain football-banning orders for those responsible so they will not be permitted in stadiums throughout the country or abroad."



The Football Association (FA), who are currently promoting England's bid to stage the 2018 or 2022 World Cup, have denounced the violence.



"We absolutely condemn all of the disorder that has occurred at Upton Park, both inside and outside of the ground," an FA spokesman said.



"We will very quickly be working with all parties, including the police and clubs to establish the facts surrounding the events. We expect all culprits to be banned from football for life - they have no place in our game."



And West Ham confirmed they are assisting with investigations and would not hesitate to issue lifetime bans to those deemed to have been intent on causing trouble.



A statement on the club's Web site said: "West Ham United will fully investigate the deplorable scenes that took place during the cup tie with Millwall on Tuesday evening.



"The club will not tolerate the unacceptable behavior witnessed inside the Boleyn Ground and will take the strongest possible action against anyone found responsible, including life bans.



"As was the case before, during and after the match, we are cooperating fully with the relevant agencies, including the police."



The incident caps an troubled period for West Ham off the pitch following the stabbing of defender Calum Davenport and the death of the father of midfielder Jack Collison in a motorbike accident in recent weeks.

***

PERUGIA, Italy (CNN) -- A judge Tuesday convicted Rudy Guede, a native of the Ivory Coast, in last year's murder of a British woman in Italy and sentenced him to 30 years in prison.



Briton Meredith Kercher was found dead in her Perugia apartment last November.



Judge Paolo Micheli also ruled that adequate evidence exists to try an American woman, Amanda Knox, and her former Italian boyfriend, Raffaele Sollecito, in the killing of Meredith Kercher, said defense attorneys and Francisco Maresca, the lawyer for the victim's family.



Their trial will begin December 4. Guede, Knox and Sollecito have all denied wrongdoing. Guede's attorney said he will appeal the conviction and sentence.



Kercher, a 21-year-old exchange student at the University of Perugia, was found nearly a year ago, dead in her bed, with a knife wound to her neck. Official reports said Kercher may have been sexually assaulted before she died and that she bled to death.



Members of Kercher's family spoke to reporters following the court proceeding. John Kercher Jr., one of the woman's brothers, said it was "overwhelming" to be in the same room as Guede when the judge convicted and sentenced him.



But Lyle Kercher, a second brother, said that "pleased" wasn't the right word for the family's feelings, noting that his sister was murdered. "Satisfied" was more appropriate given the circumstances, he said.



At his lawyers' request, Guede, hoping for a lesser sentence, received a separate fast-track trial from Knox and Sollecito.



Lawyers for Sollecito, 24, and Knox, 21, asked that their clients -- who have been in jail since shortly after the murder -- be allowed to stay under house arrest if indicted.



However, Sollecito's attorney, Luca Maori, and Knox's attorney, Carlo Dalla Vedova, said the judge had not ruled on their request. They expect an answer in coming days, they said.



Prosecutors allege Guede committed sexual violence against Kercher with the help of Knox and Sollecito. They have said the three then strangled and stabbed the British student and took money, credit cards and cell phones in an attempt to make it look like the crime occurred during a robbery.



Guede has admitted being in the villa when Kercher was killed, but has said an unknown assailant killed her while he was out of the room.



Police say a bloody footprint from a shoe next to Kercher's body came from Sollecito. They also say investigators found traces of blood belonging to both Knox and Kercher mixed together in a bathroom adjacent to the room where Kercher died.



Both Knox and Sollecito have given what prosecutors have said are confusing and contradictory accounts of what happened the night Kercher was killed.



CNN's Hada Messia contributed to this report.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN)  -- Violent crime in the United States declined in 2008, due in part to a significant drop in the number of murders, according to the first available FBI figures covering the entire year.





The decline would be the third straight year-to-year drop in violent crime in the United States.





The preliminary figures for 2008, released Monday, show that overall reported crime dropped 2.5 percent nationally from the previous year, including a 4.4 percent decline in murders.





Although crime statistics varied sharply from city to city, the overall number of reported murders declined 9.1 percent in cities with populations of 100,000 to 250,000. However, murders increased 5.5 percent in towns of fewer than 10,000 residents.





Overall, the number of aggravated assaults declined 3.2 percent, forcible rape decreased 2.2 percent, and robbery decreased 1.1 percent.





The Preliminary Annual Uniform Crime Report historically provides a strong indication of the final figures that will be compiled and released later in the year. The statistics are based on a compilation of crime reports provided to the FBI by the more than 12,000 law enforcement agencies in the nation.





The report shows a small increase in violent crime in the second half of the year. Figures for the first half of 2008, which were released in early January, showed that overall violent crime through the end of June had declined 3.5 percent, compared with the 2.5 percent decline for the entire year.





Other results in the year-end figures were a 1.6 percent drop in reported property crimes from 2007, including a 13.1 percent decline in motor vehicle thefts.





Violent crime in the United States has largely been on the decline over the past two decades. In 2005, however, a surprising increase prompted headlines of an end to the drop in violence.





Monday's figures show that the downward trend has resumed. After the 2005 violent crime increase of 2.3 percent, the figures increased only 1.9 percent in 2006 and then dropped 0.7 percent in 2007 before the decline of 2.5 percent in the preliminary 2008 figures.

***

(CNN) -- The first bodies to be recovered from the crash of Air France 447 arrived at a Brazilian Air Force base in Recife, Brazil, Wednesday, the air force announced.



Brazilian pilots and a medical team bring one of the first bodies ashore at Fernando de Noronha island.



The 16 bodies were taken to the Legal Medical Institute in Recife for identification, the statement said. Police will perform DNA tests at their lab in the capital, Brasilia, if necessary, they said.



Another 25 bodies have been found and will go through the same procedure starting Thursday, the air force said. Official identification of the bodies will be made only by the Legal Medicine Institute, even if any of the bodies could have been identified while on Fernando de Noronha, the islands where they were first brought after being recovered.



A French nuclear submarine joined the hunt Wednesday for the flight data recorders and other wreckage from Air France Flight 447 as Brazilian air force and navy crews continued to pull bodies from the Atlantic. Bad weather and poor visibility are expected in the search area, Brazilian Air Force spokesmen said.



France is leading the investigation into what caused last week's accident when the Paris-bound flight from Rio de Janeiro plunged into the sea off the Brazilian coast with 228 passengers and crew on board.



The French nuclear submarine Emeraude began patrolling the area Wednesday morning, the French defense ministry said.



Around 400 French military personnel are involved in the salvage effort. France has also sent two tugs towing 40 tons of recovery equipment, a surveillance ship and a ship equipped for amphibious operations.



Fourteen aircraft -- 12 Brazilian and two French -- are participating, along with five Brazilian ships. The U.S. Navy will contribute two high-tech acoustic devices to listen underwater for the emergency beacons that are attached to the voice and data recorders.



The "towed pinger locators," which help search for emergency beacons on downed aircraft to a maximum depth of 6,000 meters (20,000 feet) -- will be placed aboard the French tugs. Watch challenges faced by search crews »



Brazilian officials emphasized earlier this week that finding bodies was their main priority. The French are in charge of finding the voice and data recorders.



The 16 bodies retrieved Tuesday from the Atlantic were taken to the island of Fernando de Noronha for transport by helicopter to Recife. The 25 bodies previously found were put aboard a Brazilian frigate. Watch bodies being returned to land »



The first bodies were recovered about 320 kilometers (200 miles) northwest of the Brazilian archipelago of Saint Peter and Saint Paul; Tuesday's recoveries were 80 kilometers (50 miles) away.  See photos of bodies arriving at Fernando de Noronha »



It was not clear whether the bodies had drifted in the 1-2 knot currents or whether their separation suggested that the jet may have broken apart in the air.



The location of the crash has not been determined, because ocean currents have moved the bodies and debris. The search area covers 200,000 square km (77,220 square miles), Brazilian officials said.  Map of Flight 447's flight path »



The ocean depth where the debris and bodies have been found varies, but averages about 3,000 meters (nearly 9,900 feet) deep, according to the University of New Hampshire/National Oceanic and Atmospheric Association Joint Hydrographic Center.



Brazilian officials said the plane debris will be taken to France for investigation but the bodies would undergo forensic tests in Recife.



The cause of the crash is still not known, but investigators are looking at the possible role of airspeed sensors known as Pitot tubes, among other factors.  Did plane's tail fin snap off? »



Air France has agreed to replace the sensors on its Airbus A330 and A340 jets, a pilots' union said Tuesday.



The airline said Saturday that it began replacing its fleet's sensors last month.



Another Air France pilots' union, ALTER, has advised its pilots not to fly planes until their Pitot tubes are replaced. ALTER, the smallest of three Air France pilots' unions, would not say what percentage of the carrier's pilots it represents.

***

(CNN) -- Authorities in South Dakota and Nebraska on Friday suspended a search for a missing Nebraska family after a relative told authorities he spoke to his kin and said they are doing well.

The Schade family of Creighton, Nebraska, is not missing, a relative says.

Law officers still don't exactly know the location of Matthew Schade of Creighton, Nebraska; his wife Rowena, and their two children -- a daughter, 11, and a son, 8.

But authorities think they might be in Nebraska because officials received a tip that a brush truck they suspect the couple stole from a volunteer fire department in South Dakota has been found abandoned in Antelope County, Nebraska. A brush truck is a type of small fire truck.

The family was last seen on March 20 in Knox County, where Creighton is located. Knox Sheriff James Janecek said the family had gone missing after an officer went to their house on a domestic abuse complaint.

Matthew Schade had been on probation for burglary and is wanted for violation of probation and failure to report a change of address, Antelope County Attorney Michael Long told CNN.

Schade's father, Chet Schade, contacted the Knox sheriff's office on Thursday afternoon. He confirmed he had spoken with all four family members and said they were alive and well.

The Knox County sheriff's office is urging the couple "to contact authorities immediately to resolve the situation."

"They could only help themselves by giving us a call," Janecek said.

Searchers had been searching for the family in South Dakota's Black Hills until it was determined the couple possibly made their way back to Nebraska.

"The investigation clearly shows the Schade family is no longer in the Black Hills area," said the sheriff's office in Pennington County, South Dakota.

Investigators think the Schades might have gone camping on U.S. Forest Service property in the Black Hills. Schade had visited the area in the past, and law officers found the family's Ford Taurus on Tuesday in Silver City, South Dakota.

CNN's Kara Devlin and Joe Sterling contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Prominent Chicago defense lawyer Ed Genson said Friday he intends to resign as attorney for embattled Illinois Gov. Rod Blagojevich in the criminal case against the governor.



Illinois Gov. Rod Blagojevich's impeachment trial is scheduled to start on Monday.



"I never require a client to do what I say but I do require them to at least listen to what I say. ... I wish the governor good luck and godspeed," Genson said in brief remarks to reporters.



Genson would not elaborate on his reasons for withdrawing from the case or any conversations he had with Blagojevich about his leaving the case.



Genson had headed Blagojevich's defense team since soon after the governor was arrested on December 9 on federal corruption charges. Among other allegations, federal prosecutors said the governor tried to sell the U.S. Senate seat vacated by President Obama.



Genson represented Blagojevich during proceedings in the Illinois state House in which legislators voted to impeach the governor. But on January 16, the U.S. attorney's office in the Northern District of Illinois said Genson would not represent Blagojevich in his state Senate impeachment trial. No explanation was given.



Blagojevich has denied any wrongdoing and said the House impeachment vote was politically motivated.  Watch Blagojevich ask for fair trial »



On Thursday, the outspoken Blagojevich called the Senate trial "a sham" and said the Senate is not allowing him to call witnesses in the trial, which is scheduled to begin Monday.



The Chicago Tribune reported that Genson said his inability to call witnesses or to know the identities of some parties in alleged schemes made it impossible to defend Blagojevich in the impeachment trial.



After Genson announced Friday he would leave Blagojevich's criminal defense effort, another of Blagojevich's attorneys, Sheldon Sorosky, said he was continuing to work on the case.



"I'm on the case, absolutely," Sorosky, whose law firm is separate from Genson's firm, said at an impromptu sidewalk news conference as he was leaving an office building.



"I was aware of Mr. Genson's position, and he's a good friend," said Sorosky. "The governor's a friend, and I understand his position and that's that." iReport.com: Do you trust your political leaders?



Sorosky, who has worked on Blagojevich's defense since the arrest, would not elaborate.



Asked by a reporter if he would recommend to Blagojevich that the talkative governor curtail his public comments, Sorosky said, "You can't tell the governor what to do or not to do."

***

BAGHDAD, Iraq (CNN) -- Voting in Iraqi provincial elections ended peacefully Saturday evening, and the mood was festive in some places, unlike the violence, intimidation and apathy that marked the balloting in 2005.



An Iraqi casts his vote Saturday in Ramadi. Preliminary results are expected in a week.



"There is a new norm of politics. ... It is truly a proud moment," Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister Barham Saleh told CNN. "The distance that we have come is truly inspiring."



Faraj al-Haidari, who chairs the Independent High Electoral Commission of Iraq, and Staffan de Mistura, special U.N. representative for Iraq, issued statements saying the election went smoothly.



"Hundreds of thousands of IHEC staff worked dutifully according to procedures," said Mistura, who also said he was pleased at the number of women who turned out to vote.



Preliminary results from the electoral commission are expected within five days, de Mistura said. Final numbers are due at the end of February.



"Some security incidents were reported during the day, but we didn't have any confirmation on serious security incidents that might effect the total electoral process," al-Haidari said.



President Obama congratulated the Iraqis on the elections.



"Millions of Iraqi citizens from every ethnic and religious group went peacefully to the polls across the country to choose new provincial councils," Obama said in a statement released by the White House. "It is important that the councils get seated, select new governors and begin work on behalf of the Iraqi people who elected them."



He said the United States "is proud to have provided technical assistance, along with the United Nations and other international organizations, to Iraq's Independent High Electoral Commission, which performed professionally under difficult circumstances."



CNN's Arwa Damon, who toured polling stations with UN observers, said she noticed an increased sense of awareness and optimism among voters, who felt that their participation would have an impact on their lives and country.  Watch Iraqis head to polls »



Political analysts said this election could correct some of the political imbalances that resulted from the 2005 election. Saturday's voting also was seen as a referendum on Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki.



"We are trying to build a new system of government in the heart of the Islamic Middle East," Saleh said.



The last provincial elections were in January 2005, after the ousting of Saddam Hussein, and most Sunnis did not vote.



"This time, happening four years after the first elections, means that this process is on track to building a functioning democracy," Saleh said. "I think the election results will point to the real political map of Iraq.



"The overwhelming majority of the people of Iraq are having a stake in this process, are buying into this democratic process."



He added that politics "is no longer defined by violence" and is now transcending "sectarian and ethnic dimensions."



Voting was extended by one hour, partly because a curfew had been lifted, allowing more Iraqis to go to the polls, said Judge Qassim al-Aboudi, a member of the Electoral Commission. He described turnout as "good."



Those elected will have regional power over the essentials Iraqis have been desperate for: basic services and jobs, Damon reported.



She said there was a sense of jubilation in Anbar province, the Sunni heartland west of Baghdad. The sprawling desert area was dominated largely by al Qaeda in January 2005, when the first provincial elections after the fall of Hussein were held.



In 2005, fearing retribution from the terrorist group, only about 2 percent of eligible voters cast ballots.



In Najaf, the Shiite center south of Baghdad, voters also were eager to let their voices be heard, Damon said.  Watch Arwa Damon on the importance of these elections »



At a polling station in Baghdad, 80-year-old Ibrahim Saleh, a retired lawyer, said this election "is completely different from previous elections." When asked how, he replied, "because it is open for all the society components

***

(CNN) -- A jury in Canton, Ohio, found former police officer Bobby Cutts Jr. guilty of murdering his pregnant girlfriend, Jessie Marie Davis, and their unborn child.

Grasping tissues and moaning, Bobby Cutts Jr. testitfied he never meant to hurt girlfriend Jessie Davis.

The jury of six men and six women reached the verdict after more than 21 hours of deliberations.

Jurors found Cutts guilty of aggravated murder for the unlawful termination of Davis' pregnancy and the aggravated murder of a child under the age of 13.

But the jury found him guilty of a lesser murder count in the death of Davis.

Davis was nine months pregnant when she disappeared.  She had chosen the name Chloe for her daughter.

Jurors found that baby Chloe was killed during the commission of another crime, making Cutts eligible for the death penalty.

The penalty phase of the trial is set to begin February 25. Cutts will face a sentence of either 25 years to life with the possibility of parole, 30 years to life with the possibility of parole, life without parole or death.

As the verdicts were read, Cutts remained stoic, a stark contrast to his tearful testimony on Monday.  Watch the verdicts Â»

His and Davis' families left  the courthouse without comment.

Jurors began deliberations late Tuesday afternoon. They had been sequestered, spending nights at a nearby hotel, cut off from exposure to the media and other potential influences.

According to testimony, Cutts, 30, rolled Davis' body in a comforter and dumped it in a park, leaving their 2Â½-year-old son, Blake, alone.

Cutts also was found guilty of aggravated burglary, two counts of gross abuse of a corpse and endangering a child, Blake.

Cutts sobbed on the witness stand as he admitted killing Davis and their unborn child. But Cutts insisted that their deaths were an accident.

"I didn't mean to hurt her," Cutts testified, clasping a handful of tissues. "This isn't real," he said he kept telling himself.

Prosecutors discounted Cutts' story, claiming he buckled under the financial pressure of child support, killed the mother of his child and then created a cover story to try to get away with it.

On the stand, Cutts said he went to pick up his son Blake and became agitated when Davis, 26, wasn't moving fast enough to get the boy ready. He said he tried to leave her house but she grabbed him to keep him from leaving, and he accidentally elbowed her in the throat.

Cutts told the jury he performed CPR on Davis and then tried to revive her with bleach. When he realized Davis was dead, Cutts said he panicked and put her in the back of his truck, so Blake wouldn't have to see his mother.

Myisha Ferrell, Cutts' longtime friend, testified for the prosecution that Cutts appeared at her home at 6 a.m. after Davis died.

She said she could tell he was distraught. When they left her home in his truck, she found out why.

"We drove off and he said something was wrong," she said. "He said, 'Something bad.' "

"He said something was wrong with his baby's mother."

Ferrell told the jury Cutts started speaking erratically as they drove, then blurted out, "She's in the back."

Ferrell admitted she helped dump Davis' body in a field and said Cutts later coached her on what to say to police.

Ferrell was sentenced to two years in prison after pleading guilty to lying to authorities and complicity to gross abuse of a corpse.

During closing arguments, prosecutor Dennis Barr said Cutts strangled and killed Davis and her unborn child because of his mounting debt and child support for what would have been his fourth child.

Cutts' own actions following Davis' disappearance were a clear indications of his guilt, he said.

"His reaction is the reaction of person who committed a crime and is trying to cover it up," Barr said.

Davis disappeared

***

(CNN)  -- Cristiano Ronaldo scored a late headed winner as Real Madrid stayed a point behind leaders Barcelona in the Spanish title race after a dramatic 3-2 win over Osasuna on Sunday night.





Real had to come from behind twice in the Bernabeu with former World Player of the Year Ronaldo grabbing a double.





Trailing by four points after Barcelona's 4-1 win over Villarreal on Saturday, Real made a disastrous start as a poor back pass by Raul Albiol allowed in Carlos Aranda to give Osasuna an early lead.





Ronaldo then came to the rescue for the first time as he equalized with a fine strike from just outside the penalty area, but Real were soon behind again as   Krisztian Vadocz struck home Osasuna's second.





But with time running out in the first half, Marcelo headed Real level again.





Osasuna refused to lie down and substitute Masoud Soleimani missed the easiest of several chances for the visitors as Real pushed forward for a winner.





The game appeared to be headed for a draw, which would have severely dented Real's title hopes with games running out, until Ronaldo popped up to score an 89th minute goal from a cross by Gonzalo Higuain.





A double from Lionel Messi had helped Barca to rebound from their Champions League exit at the hands of Inter Milan to leave them on course to defend their La Liga crown with a fine win over Villarreal.





In other action on Sunday, Alvaro Negredo scored two penalties to give Sevilla a 3-1 win over Atletico Madrid to lift them into the fourth and the final Champions League place.





The match was a forerunner to the Copa del Rey final later this month.





Atletico, who are also in the Europa League final, fell behind to a Luis Fabiano strike after five minutes.





Tiago Cardoso equalized for Atletico who were then undone by Negredo's two spot kicks.





A double from substitute Nicola Zigic saw Valencia beat Espanyol 2-0 to keep a tight hold on third place.





Getafe were held goalless by Valladolid and Tenerife beat Racing Santander 2-1 but remain in the drop zone as Malaga drew 1-1 with Sporting Gijon.

***

MANCHESTER, England -- Owen Hargreaves curled in a superb free-kick, 18 minutes from time, to give Manchester United a 2-1 Premier League victory over Arsenal at Old Trafford.

Hargreaves curls his match-winning free-kick over the Arsenal wall and past Lehmann.

The win lifted United six points clear of Chelsea, who meet Wigan on Monday, and effectively ended Arsenal's fading title bid.

The Gunners trail United by nine points with four matches left to play.

Emmanuel Adebayor gave Arsenal a 48th minute lead but Cristiano Ronaldo  equalized from the penalty spot minutes later with his 38th goal of the season.

The loss dooms Arsene Wenger's side to their third season without a trophy and ends a black week which also included a Champions League quarterfinal defeat to English rivals Liverpool.

England midfielder Hargreaves, best known for his determined defending, Scored United's 100th goal in 50 games this campaign when his curled free-kick from the edge of the box over the wall left goalkeeper Jens Lehmann standing.

Adebayor headed Arsenal in front three minutes into the second period when he met Robin van Persie's cross and profited from confusion between United keeper Edwin van der Sar and center-back Rio Ferdinand.

There were no complaints from United about the goal but tv replays suggested Adebayor may have handled the ball rather than knocked it in with his head, even though he was just a few yards away from goal.

Six minutes later Arsenal defender William Gallas clearly handled inside his own area and referee Howard Webb pointed to the spot.

Ronaldo netted but Webb ordered the penalty to be re-taken because of encroachment by other players.

Lehmann, only playing because of a wrist injury to first-choice keeper Manuel Almunia, was then booked for delaying the second kick.

Ronaldo, making light of the pressure of the situation, stuck with his stuttering run-up and struck the ball low and hard past the German international's right-hand.

Liverpool captain Steven Gerrard scored and created a goal for Fernando Torres in a 3-1 win over Blackburn Rovers at Anfield.

Spain striker Torres now has 30 goals this season and midfielder Gerrard 21 .Substitute Andriy Voronin added a third in the 90th minute.

This win left Liverpool five points clear of city rivals Everton in the race for the final Champions League qualifying spot.

Sunday's match, played out against a backdrop of ongoing boardroom rows at Anfield, was all square for an hour until England midfielder Gerrard beat several Rovers players on the edge of the box before sliding the ball past goalkeeper Brad Friedel.

Torres then became the first Liverpool player to score in seven consecutive top-flight games at Anfield when he headed in Gerrard's cross eight minutes from time.

Voronin then got on the end of a John Arne Riise cross to make it 3-0 before Roque Santa Cruz pulled a goal back for Rovers in stoppage time. E-mail to a friend

***

Port-au-Prince, Haiti (CNN) -- Slashing red tape or ignoring ordinarily required paperwork, officials in the United States and the Netherlands have cleared the way for scores of Haitian orphans to leave their earthquake-ravaged homeland, according to officials from the two countries.





All of the children had adoptions pending with prospective parents in the two countries before Tuesday's 7.0-magnitude quake, and government officials said paperwork was expedited or put on hold to make transfers happen on an emergency basis.





300 children have pending adoption cases with American families. Six children arrived in Florida Sunday night, met by their adoptive parents with hugs and tears of happiness.





The Dutch Ministry of Foreign Affairs has chartered a plane to pick up about 100 children Monday, spokesman Aad Meijer told CNN.





Dutch Justice Minister Ernst Hirsch Ballin over the weekend granted the children entry into the country, although their paperwork, including travel and adoption documents, was incomplete, Justice Ministry spokesman Patrick Mikkelsen told CNN.





About 44 of the orphans' adoptions had yet to be approved by a Haitian judge, even though they were matched to Dutch parents, Mikkelsen said. Dutch officials may seek the remaining approvals from Haiti once the children have already settled in the Netherlands, he added.





Haiti is home to about 380,000 orphans, according to the United Nations Children's Fund, and that number is expected to grow in the wake of Tuesday's earthquake. And those who lived in orphanages before Tuesday may be homeless now, as reports of destroyed orphanages have come throughout the quake zone.





Full coverage of the earthquake in Haiti





Some children who lost parents in the quake or were separated from parents are being relocated to the Dominican Republic, a child advocacy group said.





About 50 orphaned and abandoned children will arrive in the border town of Jimani on Wednesday, Kids Alive International said. The efforts, coordinated with the governments of both countries, will eventually take the children back to Haiti. Some will be reunited with parents who lost communication with their children in the quake's aftermath, the group said.





View or add to CNN's database of missing persons in Haiti





CNN's Melissa Gray and Richard Greene in London contributed to this report.

***

BEIJING, China (CNN) -- At the Aimin Fat Reduction Hospital in the Chinese city of Tianjin, they have never seen anyone so big.



Bland said he misses his family and friends, but his goal is to lose the weight and be "healthier and happier."



"Yes this is our record," Dr. Su Zhixin proudly boasted.



He's talking about 33-year-old Alonzo Bland of Green Bay, Wisconsin. When Bland stepped off the plane at Beijing Airport in May of this year, he weighed 640 pounds. In fact, he struggled to take more than a few steps, and as he lay flat on his back, exhausted, airport staff called an ambulance.



After repeated warnings from his doctor, Bland decided to come to China as a last-ditch effort to shed the pounds.



"I needed to take it serious because we were talking about my life."



Bland's weight yo-yoed for years, ballooning after he lost his job 12 years ago.



"Nobody wanted to hire a guy who couldn't move, you know and so, [I] spent the next ...12 years on the couch and watched my weight constantly going up."  Watch more on Alonzo Bland's transformative journey »



At one point he needed an emergency tracheotomy because fat around his neck was crushing his windpipe.



Earlier this year, while watching TV on the couch, he did an Internet search for weight-loss competitions. He entered one offering a first prize of an all-expense-paid trip to one of China's most famous boot camps for the obese.



The weight-loss clinic is housed in a drab building, far from the city center.



"It's a beautiful place. It really is," Bland said. "It is difficult though: I am away from home -- all my family and friends. But my goal here -- my goal is to lose the weight, so I think in the end I will be healthier and happier."



Being this far from home, Bland said, has been a clean break from his bad habits. He simply doesn't know where the restaurants are, or how to order takeout.



"It is away from everything I know, all those things -- even the excuses you make up: 'Oh I have to do this today, I can't work out, I have this do.' So coming here eliminated all the excuses."



So far he has lost nearly 240 pounds -- a result of diet, exercise and traditional Chinese medicine such as acupuncture, which doctors say reduces appetite and increases metabolism. He works out at a gym three times a week, he walks every day and plays badminton as well.



Bland's doctors are impressed with his determination to shed the weight.



When he was in America, he had a different lifestyle, said Su. If he wanted to eat he would just order on the phone and "every day stay on sofa, playing games, watching TV," Su said.



Bland has only been home once in the past seven months, for two weeks. His family was amazed at his weight loss, and more importantly, despite the fears of his doctor, Bland did not put on any weight while he was away.



In fact, he woke at 4 a.m. most days, he said, to work out at the gym -- an indication, said his doctors, that he has broken the bad eating and living patterns that caused his weight gain.



The ultimate goal for Bland is a weight of 220 pounds. To reach that goal, he must lose another 180 pounds. His doctors hope he can do that in the next five months -- a year after he arrived at the hospital.



"I know I will get there. Will it happen in the next five months? I don't know, but I will get there."

***

(CNN)  -- Mano Menezes has been entrusted to lead Brazil into the next World Cup on home soil in 2014 after being named as the replacement for sacked coach Dunga.





The 48-year-old has no experience outside of his native Brazil where he has enjoyed success with Gremo and his current club Corinthians.





"I have the honor to inform you that I was approached by the Brazilian Football Confederation to take over the post of national team coach," AFP reported Menezes at a media conference in Sao Paulo.





"I have come here to officially confirm that I have accepted the offer."





The Brazilian Football Confederation (CBF) said Menezes had been on a three-man shortlist to succeed Dunga and his chances greatly improved after Fluminense refused to release Muricy Ramalho from his contract.





The new man in charge was then contacted by Ricardo Teixeira, the head of the CBF.





"Menezes was already on a three-man shortlist, drawn up during the World Cup in South Africa," said a statement on the official CBF website.





"And his name was confirmed following talks with Texeira during which he approved the renewal project decided by the CBF pertaining to the 2014 World Cup that Brazil will host," it added.





Reports in Brazil said the third name on the CBF shortlist was former coach Luiz Felipe Scolari, who led Brazil to their 2002 World Cup triumph.





Former Portugal and Chelsea coach Scolari will remain at Brazilian club side Palmeiras.





Menezes will be officially unveiled on Monday before naming his squad for a friendly against the United States on August 10.





Dunga was sacked after Brazil were sent crashing out of the quarterfinals of the World Cup by the Netherlands.





They had gone into the finals as South American champions and the world's top-ranked team, but after taking the lead against the Dutch slipped to a disappointing 2-1 defeat.

***

(CNN) -- Paul Harvey, the legendary radio host whose career sharing "the rest of the story" with listeners spanned more than 70 years, has died, according to ABC Radio Networks.





Paul Harvey received the Medal of Freedom from President Bush in 2005.





He was 90.





Harvey died at a hospital in Phoenix, Arizona, where he kept a winter home, said Louis Adams, a spokesman for the networks. He was surrounded by family members when he died, Adams said.  Known for his deliberate delivery and pregnant pauses, Harvey's broadcasts were heard on more than 1,200 radio stations and 400 Armed Forces networks and his commentaries appeared in 300 newspapers, according to his Web site. iReport.com: Share your memories of Paul Harvey





He had been hosting his radio shows part-time for much of the past year, after recovering from physical ailments including pneumonia and the death of his wife, Lynne "Angel" Harvey, in May 2008.





"My father and mother created from thin air what one day became radio and television news," said Harvey's son, Paul Harvey Jr., in a written statement. "So, in the past year, an industry has lost its godparents and today millions have lost a friend."





Born in Tulsa, Oklahoma, Harvey began his radio career in 1933 at KVOO-AM there while he was still in high school, his Web site says. He helped clean the station and was eventually was allowed to fill in on air, reading news and commercials.  Watch how Paul Harvey Aurandt got into broadcasting »





"Paul Harvey was one of the most gifted and beloved broadcasters in our nation's history," ABC Radio Networks President Jim Robinson said in a written statement. "As he delivered the news each day with his own unique style and commentary, his voice became a trusted friend in American households."





Some critics faulted Harvey for the way he seamlessly intertwined news stories with advertisements, which he often read in his own voice in the middle of a story.





But his accolades were plentiful -- from his 1990 induction into the National Radio Hall of Fame to receiving the Presidential Medal of Freedom from then-President George W. Bush in 2005.





"Paul was a friendly and familiar voice in the lives of millions of Americans," Bush said Saturday in a written statement. "His commentary entertained, enlightened, and informed. Laura and I are pleased to have known this fine man, and our thoughts and prayers are with his family."





The cause of Harvey's death was not immediately known. He was forced off the air temporarily in 2001 because of a virus that weakened a vocal cord.





CNN's Doug Gross contributed to this report.

***

(WIRED) -- The iPhone 4S is available on three major carriers, leaving potential buyers to wonder whether AT&T, Verizon or Sprint is the better network choice.





Pricing plans aside, carrier quality is a significant factor in anyone's purchasing decision, and now consumers have hard data to help them choose: A just-released study reports AT&T is tops for fast data speeds, while Verizon is the most reliable when it comes to making phone calls.





Sprint's main draw is that it offers unlimited, albeit slow, data.





The study was performed by Metrico Wireless, a mobile device performance analytics firm. To test network performance, Metrico made 6,000 voice calls, conducted 8,000 data download/upload tests (both moving and stationary), and downloaded more than 21,000 web pages.





The tests found that Verizon dropped calls 2.1 percent of the time, while AT&T dropped 2.8 percent of calls and Sprint lost 3.7 percent of calls. The average dropped-call rate for the entire mobile industry is 1.4 percent. Although Sprint dropped the most calls, it had the highest call quality on the uplink (outbound calls), while AT&T had the best downlink call quality (inbound calls).





With regard to maximum data speeds, AT&T led the pack at 6,047Kbps, with Verizon a distant second at 2,371Kbps, and Sprint crawling in last with only 1,767Kbps. It's unclear, however, exactly where Metrico tested data bandwidth, and as any iPhone-toting San Francisco resident will tell you, data quality can be terrible in areas with high concentrations of tech geeks.





The original iPhone launched exclusively with AT&T, which was the sole carrier of the iPhone until Apple announced that Verizon would also begin carrying the iPhone 4 in January 2011. Prior to the launch of the iPhone 4S, rumors swirled that the phone would land on Sprint, and ultimately proved true. Of the three carriers, Sprint is the only one that provides a true unlimited data plan.





Metrico's results are consistent with what we found back when Verizon began offering the iPhone 4: AT&T offered better download speeds, while Verizon had better coverage.





Another important stat Metrico found was that the iPhone 4S performed perfectly across all three networks when it came to data task reliability. In short, 100 percent of the time, the phone was able to complete web-page loads, stationary downloads, and stationary uploads. This contrasts with an earlier Metrico study from March 2011 that found Verizon had a higher download success rate when the phone was stationary, and AT&T had a higher rate while the phone was moving.





So what's the bottom line? It looks like you're going to get a relatively positive data-downloading experience no matter which carrier you choose, if only because you will be able to download data. But if you value downloading material quickly, you should go with AT&T. If call reliability is paramount, stick with Verizon, and if you want to use a lot of data but don't care about speed, go with Sprint.





Subscribe to WIRED magazine for less than $1 an issue and get a FREE GIFT! Click here!

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- It only takes one injury to end an athlete's career. Anything that impairs an athlete's performance could mean they're no longer good enough for the top flight -- that's why the best athletes need the best treatment if they're to recover from injury.

Owen Hargreaves (L) in action before his career was cut short by tendonitis.

Manchester United star and England international footballer Owen Hargreaves is known for his versatility and exceptional work rate, but in 2008 his season was cut short by tendonitis.

Hargreaves, 27, was told he would need surgery on both knees to save his career.

That's when he decided to travel to the small mountain ski village of Vail, Colorado, to meet the "knee whisperer" -- Dr Richard Steadman.

Steadman became fascinated with the way the knee functions and how it can be injured during his university days playing American football.

Now known as "Doctor Steady," Steadman is knee specialist to the stars, counting Real Madrid ace Ruud van Nistelrooy, American football sensation Bruce Smith, and even the King of Spain among his clients.

"I just think he understands the athletes, the significance of the injuries and he's able to deal with the personalities that go along with these injuries," Hargreaves told CNN.   Watch Owen Hargreaves talking about his recovery Â»

Steadman works with a team of 75 doctors who have together repaired some 16,000 knees.

He has developed pioneering knee treatments, including "micro-fracturing," which involves making a small hole in a patient's bone to draw out marrow blood, allowing the patient's own stem cells and growth factors to make new cartilage.

Dr. Steadman says the secret to healing athletes is letting them do what they do best. "I became convinced early in my career that mobility was important and immobility was a bad thing.

"I was one of the first ones to say, 'I don't think we'll use casts, we'll work on braces, we'll try to get motion back'," he told CNN.

Owen Hargreaves has about a month left of rehab in Vail. His days follow a strict routine: Wake up, rehab, eat lunch, rehab, eat dinner and rest.

"It's been frustrating at times," says Hargreaves.

"I don't really watch our games because as an athlete, and being so competitive, it's hard to watch when you normally would be out there."

Steadman says Hargreaves will return to football next season better than ever, adding that athletes often build inner strength from overcoming what could be a career-ending injuries.

Hargreaves shares that view. "I'm going to come back stronger and hopefully add a couple of years onto my career," he said.

For others the road to recovery can be slower. British middleweight boxer Michael Watson almost died after collapsing at the end of his 1991 title fight with Chris Eubank.

"I took a punch, everything went blank and I woke up in a bed. I thought I was dreaming," Watson told CNN.

Watson spent the next 40 days in a coma and had to undergo six brain operations. Neurosurgeon Peter Hamlyn, who operated on Watson, told CNN, "He was as close to death as I think it's possible to go, and survive. And he stayed there for longer than anyone I've ever known."

It was thought that Watson would never walk again, but after years of slow recovery, he was able to enter the 2003 London Marathon, completing it over six days. "His [recovery] is by far the most remarkable I've ever seen," said Hamlyn.

There's now a close bond between Hamlyn and Watson, and Steadman's patients are similarly grateful for their recoveries.

The hallway of Steadman's clinic is lined with the signed shirts of his former patients; the number 10 Manchester United shirt signed by Ruud van Nistelrooy reads simply "Thank you for giving back my dream."

***

(CNN) -- Republican vice presidential nominee Gov. Sarah Palin vowed on Tuesday to use her executive experience to tackle government reform and energy independence if she and Sen. John McCain win this year's presidential election.



Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin speaks with CNN's Drew Griffin Tuesday.



"It's going to be government reform because that, that is what I've been able to do as a mayor and as a governor, you, you take on the special interests and the self-dealings. Yep, you ruffle feathers and you have the scars to prove it," Palin said Tuesday in an interview with CNN's Drew Griffin.



"You have to take that on to give the American people that faith back in their own government. This is their government and we've got to put it back on their side," she said.



Palin said she and McCain, the Republican presidential nominee, discussed the possibility of her working on the issue of energy independence if she becomes vice president.  Watch Palin talk about potential plans for the vice-presidency »



"That's been my forte as the governor of an energy producing state and as a former chair of the, of the energy regulator -- entity up there in Alaska," she said.



"[I] look forward to that and that's a matter of national security and, and our economic prosperity opportunities."



Palin also said helping families with special needs children and cleaning up Wall Street were among the other "missions" she and McCain had discussed.



Palin emphasized her executive credentials as mayor of Wasilla, Alaska, and governor of Alaska, contrasting them with what she said was Sen. Barack Obama's lack of leadership experience.



"We don't like to toot our own horn so we don't," Palin said. "But, I have, I do have more experience than Barack Obama does. You know, he had served for his 300 days before he became a presidential candidate and that wasn't in, in executive office."  Watch Palin say she has more experience than Obama »



Palin also apologized Tuesday for any misunderstanding caused when she referred last week to the patriotic values of "the real America" and "pro-America areas of this great nation."



Democrats and others criticized Palin for seeming to imply that some parts of the country are more patriotic than others.



Palin denied that was her intention in an interview with CNN on Tuesday.



"I don't want that misunderstood," Palin said. "If that's the way it came across, I apologize."



The Alaska governor made the remarks at a fundraising event in North Carolina last week.



"We believe that the best of America is in these small towns that we get to visit, and in these wonderful little pockets of what I call the real America, being here with all of you hard-working, very patriotic, very pro-America areas of this great nation," she told the crowd.



On Tuesday, Palin also addressed Democratic vice presidential nominee Sen. Joe Biden's comment that Sen. Barack Obama would be tested from the very beginning of his time in office.



At a fundraiser Sunday night, Biden said that after taking office, "it will not be six months before the world tests Barack Obama like they did John Kennedy. ... We're going to have an international crisis, a generated crisis, to test the mettle of this guy."



Palin told Griffin that the comment points to the dangers of electing a relatively inexperienced person



"We need to thank Joe [Biden] for the warning," Palin said.  Watch Palin say the media gave Biden a pass »



Biden's point, according to a statement issued later, was that "we need steady leadership in tumultuous times, not ... the stubborn ideology of John McCain."



Palin stopped short of labeling Obama a socialist Tuesday, although she and others have previously called his tax policies socialist.



"I'm not going to call him a socialist, but as 'Joe the Plumber' has said, it

***

Bali, Indonesia (CNN) -- Defense Secretary Leon Panetta praised China on more than one occasion Sunday during a series of meetings with fellow defense ministers from southeast Asia, but hinted if relations between the United States and China worsen, it could be a threat to "the security of the world."





He said he appreciates China's muted response to the United States announcing a deal last month to sell more arms to Taiwan, and he lauded China for working with its neighbors with regards to the contentious issues involving the South China Sea.





"I would commend them for the way that they've handled the news of that sale to Taiwan, compared to the past," Panetta told reporters after a meeting with Indonesia's defense minister Sunday in Bali.





China regards Taiwan as a renegade province. Taiwan began as the remnant of the government that ruled over mainland China, until a Communist uprising proved victorious in 1949.





The $5.3 billion arms package, announced last month, includes upgrades to Taiwan's F-16 fighter fleet.





Last year, a similar deal prompted China to temporarily cut off military to military relations with Americans. This time, aside from some strong objections voiced by Beijing, Panetta said there has been no tangible action taken in response by China. "I've heard nothing that indicates that they're taking any steps in reaction to that," Panetta said.





Part of the reason might be the way the United States government handled the sales. "It was something that the United States had announced but we had given the Chinese a heads up as to what was going to take place," Panetta said. "I think in the end ... they handled it in a professional and diplomatic way and we appreciate that. "





The South China Sea, a body of water east of Vietnam, north of Malaysia and west of the Philippines, has been a source of regional tensions for decades. But because of recent discoveries of massive oil reserves as well as its importance to regional maritime and aviation navigation, tensions have increased recently. Many countries lay claims to the same parts of the sea.





After his meeting with the Indonesian defense minister, Panetta met with defense ministers from all eight member nations of ASEAN, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, which includes all the nations that border the South China Sea, except China.





In remarks prepared for the start of the meeting, Panetta said, "I applaud the July accord between ASEAN and China on implementing guidelines to the 2002 declaration on the conduct of parties in the South China Sea. I would encourage you to maintain this momentum, and continue working towards a binding code of conduct."





But Panetta said there are still some concerns regarding China's military that bear watching.





"Obviously there are some concerns about some of the things they are doing on modernization, there are concerns about some of the things they are doing with some of the more sophisticated weapons that have been developed."





He said China being open and letting the world know what its military is doing is key. "As long as they are transparent, as long as we can discuss these issues on a frank and direct basis then I think we can develop a strong working relationship."





He ended his discussion of China with the reporters on an ominous note about positive relations. "I think it would be in the interest, not only in the interest of both nations, but also in the interest of the security of the world."

***

Editor's note: CNN has asked its journalists across the country to offer their thoughts on how the economic crisis is affecting their cities. In this installment, Bob Crowley reports from Boston, Massachusetts.

Hardware store owner Brendan Kenney says "people who have money should go out and spend it."

BOSTON, Massachusetts (CNN) -- Brendan Kenney has seen enough bad news about the economy.

"I'm also getting tired of being worried," he says.

His family has been running a small hardware store in Brookline, Massachusetts, just outside Boston, for about 56 years. He says business has slowed down a little, but mostly because winter is normally the slow time of year for them.

Though he hopes the stimulus plan will help his and other small businesses, he believes people shouldn't be afraid.

"I think the American consumer holds a lot of power," he continues. "I think people who have money should go out and spend it."

Like many in the Boston area, Kenney doesn't want to hear more discouraging stories and sees that as part of the problem.

"It's just negative story after negative story, kind of creating a crisis of confidence."  Watch Boston-area reaction to the economic slump Â»

South of Boston, Jose Nieto, from Plainville, has his own reasons to be discouraged. Between September and October of last year, he was laid off twice.

Nieto, a civil engineer who works on road construction projects, had felt fortunate. After losing his job of 14 years, he was able to find employment after only being out of work for two weeks.

After being on the new job for three weeks, however, he got called into the boss's office.

"I said, 'Oh, no. My God, not again.'" He was faced with looking for work in an industry that traditionally slows down in the winter months.

"It's more than losing your job. It gives you a feeling of rejection," he says. Yet, Nieto feels this is a time to learn valuable lessons, especially for those who need to dip into their savings when unemployment checks don't cover all of the bills.

"I think a lot of people will learn from this situation, and, going forward, they'll try to save more money."

He has been trying to stay healthy, busy and positive. Passing the time working on projects in his basement workshop and taking yoga classes has helped him get through the rough spots, and his luck is turning. He was offered a job that starts in March.

"It is a relief, because I'm employed," he says, "however, I'm taking a job for much less money."

Nieto believes that most employers cannot afford to hire at the salaries they could offer in the past.

Like Kenney's hardware store, Sue Stein's American craft gallery, also in Brookline, is not seeing any major shifts in her business, yet.

"Our business has been certainly down, but not devastating," she says.

Fire Opal, her gallery, sells everything from earrings to pottery to scarves, all made by artists from around the country.

To keep her business healthy, she says, she is trying to make adjustments like buying less merchandise. But she is changing her approach to her customers as well.

She says she tries to keep "understanding that people are having a hard time and trying to find things that are more in their price range."

Like Kenney and Nieto, Stein is also trying to stay optimistic.

"I think if we all are very careful," she says, "we'll sort of ride it out and then things will adjust."

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Accidents happen, said the Supreme Court, but the criminal penalties can still be tough, at least for one "bungling bank robber."



The case involved Christopher Michael Dean, arrested after he and a partner robbed a bank five years ago.



By a 7-2 vote, the justices ruled Wednesday that the sentencing for a felon who accidentally fired a gun during a crime should be the same as if he had fired intentionally.



The case involved Christopher Michael Dean, arrested after he and a partner robbed a Rome, Georgia, bank five years ago.



The masked Dean had waved a gun and ordered patrons and staff to get down. While grabbing bills in one hand, the gun he was carrying in his other hand went off. The bullet hit a partition, and no one was injured.



After the shot, Dean cursed and immediately ran out of the bank. Witnesses later testified he seemed surprised the weapon had gone off.



Dean was charged in federal court and admitted committing the robbery. His sentence included a mandatory 10-year prison term for "discharging" a weapon during a crime. He appealed, saying the sentencing enhancement required proof that he intended to discharge the firearm, and his actions were accidental.



But in his majority opinion, Chief Justice John Roberts said federal law "does not require that the discharge be done knowingly or intentionally."



In what has become a regular feature of his writing, the 54-year-old chief justice displayed a sense of creativity and sly humor in his conclusions. He openly called Dean the "bungling bank robber" and quoted one patron's reaction to the bank gunshot: "Melissa in the lobby popped up and said, 'Oh, my God, has he shot Nora?' " Nora turned out to be all right.



Justice John Paul Stevens dissented in the case, noting, "Accidents happen, but they seldom give rise to criminal liability. Indeed, if they cause no harm they seldom give rise to any liability. The court nevertheless holds that petitioner is subject to a mandatory additional sentence -- a species of criminal liability -- for an accident that caused no harm."



He was supported by Justice Stephen Breyer.



Roberts, however, saved the best for last in his bench remarks, when summarizing the ruling. "An individual who brings a loaded weapon to commit a crime runs the risk that the gun will discharge accidentally," he said.



"Those criminals wishing to avoid the penalty for an inadvertent discharge can lock or unload the firearm, handle it with care during the underlying violent or drug trafficking crime, leave the gun at home, or -- best yet -- avoid committing the felony in the first place," Roberts wrote



That brought barely contained laughter in the audience of several hundred gathered in the courtroom.

***

JERUSALEM (CNN) -- Palestinian militant groups including the armed wing of Hamas are committing war crimes when they fire rockets into Israel, according to a report by campaign group Human Rights Watch.



Palestinian militants from the al-Ahrar Brigades march during a rally in Gaza City in July.



Three Israelis have been killed and dozens more seriously injured in Palestinian attacks since November 2008 with rockets striking populated areas up to 40 kilometers (25 miles) inside Israeli territory and putting 800,000 Israelis in danger, the report said.



Two Palestinian girls died in Gaza when a rocket fell short of its intended target while the attacks have also put Palestinian citizens at risk from Israeli counterstrikes, it added.



Human Rights Watch urged Hamas, which controls Gaza, to hold those responsible for the attacks accountable. Hamas is designated a terrorist organization by the U.S. and the European Union.



Hamas militants have cut down on rocket strikes in the past few months, but the group has not denounced those targeting Israeli civilians, nor has it tried those behind the attacks, the New York-based watchdog said.



"Hamas rocket attacks targeting Israeli civilians are unlawful and unjustifiable, and amount to war crimes," said Iain Levine, program director at Human Rights Watch.



"As the governing authority in Gaza, Hamas should publicly renounce rocket attacks on Israeli civilian centers and punish those responsible, including members of its own armed wing."



A spokesman for Hamas, Sami Abu Zuhri, criticized the report, claiming Palestinians had the right to defend themselves against Israeli military operations.



"The report is not fair," he said. "It should condemn the (Israeli military) crimes instead of condemning people who defend themselves.



"The international law gives them the right to defend themselves because they are occupied. We have the right to defend our land."



During Israel's offensive into Gaza during December and January, Hamas and Islamic Jihad militants claimed to have fired 820 rockets at Israel, the report said.



Human Rights Watch said the use of homemade Qassam and Soviet-designed Grad rockets to strike at densely populated areas amounted to indiscriminate attacks on civilians because the weapons cannot be aimed with any reliability.



The watchdog found no evidence that Palestinian armed groups had deliberately used civilians as shields in rocket attacks. But it said militants took insufficient precautions to avoid putting civilian lives in danger.



"Hamas forces violated the laws of war both by firing rockets deliberately or indiscriminately at Israeli cities and by launching them from populated areas and endangering Gazan civilians," Levine said.



Human Rights Watch has also documented war violations by Israeli forces during its three-week offensive into Gaza.



While Israeli military operations had been more harmful, killing hundreds of civilians with airstrikes, tank shelling and other assaults, "violations by one party to a conflict never justify violations by the other," it said.



"Attacks targeting civilians are never permitted under the laws of war, which require armed forces to target only military objectives, and to take all feasible precautions to spare civilians from harm, regardless of the reasons for resorting to armed conflict."



The United Nations is investigating violations by both sides and is due to report to the U.N. Human Rights Council in September.

***

PANAMA CITY, Panama (CNN)  -- The sole survivor of a plane crash that killed two Americans and a Panamanian pilot was awake and talking Wednesday, a doctor said.



Francesca Lewis, 13, apparently fell out of the plane or was ejected on impact, her mother, Valerie Lewis, told CNN on Wednesday.



The girl endured two days in the rugged mountains of Panama, in frigid temperatures and heavy rain, before rescuers stumbled upon her in the wreckage on Christmas Day.



"She's doing all right," Valerie Lewis said. "She is having tests done at the hospital right now, and so far things seem good -- kind of miraculous.



"The fact that she so far doesn't seem to have any major damage seems incredible."



Dr. Alexander Quidano at the Mae Lewis Medical Center in Boquete, Panama, said Francesca was in stable condition, awake and speaking.



She was being treated for a fractured arm and several cuts, but tests, including a CAT scan, were under way to make sure nothing else was wrong, Quidano said.



Francesca apparently was disoriented when her rescuers saw her under a wing of the wrecked plane, her mother said. She thought she was at home and wondered why an airplane wing was in her house, her mother said.



Rescuers carried the girl on a stretcher for three and a half hours in torrential rain over rugged terrain to a helicopter.



"We're so relieved to have her with us," her mother said.



The small plane disappeared Sunday in a mountainous area of Panama.



Authorities found the bodies of pilot Edwin Lasso, American businessman Michael Klein and Klein's 13-year-old daughter, Talia, about 4:30 p.m. Tuesday, according to a statement posted on the Web site of Panama's civil protection agency.



Francesca and Talia were friends.  Watch latest from school the girls attended »



Rescuers planned to retrieve the three bodies Wednesday, said Thomas Mesa, a spokesman for the U.S. Embassy in Panama City.



Klein, a 37-year-old hedge fund manager, was vacationing with the two girls when they took the flight Sunday to photograph a volcano in Chiriqui province, about 285 miles west of Panama City.



Authorities think the small single-engine Cessna ran into bad weather. Radio contact with the flight was lost about noon Sunday.



Authorities and hundreds of volunteers spent the last two days searching the dense jungles and mountainous terrain, but heavy rain in the area had hampered recovery efforts.



"I just want to thank all of the people that cared so much about trying to help us," Valerie Lewis said. "So many people tried to help, and at great effort and sacrifice, and through the Christmas holiday.



"I mean, the most important family holiday, people were giving up that to go and trudge through the mud. It was like looking for a needle in a haystack. We really appreciate everything that was done."



Klein was president and CEO of eGroups Inc. in 1999 and 2000, when Yahoo! acquired the company, merging it with its own e-mail services and changing its name to Yahoo! Groups, which now serves more than 100 million users worldwide.



"My heart goes out to everyone," Valerie Lewis said. "We all have been through a tremendous trauma together." E-mail to a friend

***

(Mashable) -- There's no denying that Facebook has had an impact on the way the younger set flirt, fall in love and break up. Now, Seventeen magazine has released a study that depicts just what kind of repercussions the social networking site has had on modern courtship.





"Teens are incredibly social, and Facebook plays a huge role in their love lives," says Ann Shoket, editor-in-chief of Seventeen magazine.





According to the study -- which polled 10,000 guys and girls ages 16 to 21 -- Facebook plays an important part in how amorous teens make a connection.





Within one week of meeting a new person, 79 percent of people click "friend," and after adding a new friend; 60 percent of people stalk their crush's profile once a day (40 percent check in on their would-be soulmate several times a day).





Moreover, contrary to beliefs that social networking is erroding interpersonal communication, 72 percent of those surveyed said that talking to someone online brings you closer to them IRL.





As we have already seen in other studies, Facebook also plays a role in how we fall out of love.





Mashable writer Samuel Axon wrote a detailed feature about how Facebook has changed dating for the worse, Facebook dating app AreYouInterested released a study in which 21 percent of respondents said they would break up with someone via changing their statuses, and, most recently, infographic wizard David McCandless came out with a chart that shows popular breakup periods by way of status updates.





Seventeen, for its part, reports that 10 percent of people have been dumped over Facebook, and the same number would just change their relationship status to "single" to cut a lover loose.





The report also depicts the anguish the site can cause after a breakup, citing that 27 percent of people change their connection to their exes after a breakup via blocking (getEx-Blocker for that extra push), hiding him or her on the News Feed or unfriending.





Surprisingly, 73 percent of people keep their exes in the friends list. I'd like to see some stats on how many of those 73 percent stalk said ex after the breakup.





A couple of other interesting tidbits from the study:





Girls are more judgmental: 43 percent of girls would decide not to date someone based on their Facebook profile, compared to 33 percent of guys.





Guys are more likely to keep relationship statuses under wraps: 17 percent of guys don't share their status, compared to 12 percent of girls.





Girls think it's exciting to change their relationship status: 50 percent of girls get a kick out of the status change -- one-third of guys agree; 24 percent of guys find it unnecessary, compared to 17 percent of girls.   What do you think? Has Facebook affected your love life?





© 2011 MASHABLE.com. All rights reserved.

***

London (CNN) -- August 13 is likely to be Heathrow Airport's busiest day in its history, so the airport is building a temporary terminal to check through more than 10,000 athletes on that one day, the day after the closing ceremonies of the London 2012 Games.





With 80% of Olympic and Paralympic athletes, coaches, media and other visitors expected to use Heathrow during the games, the world's busiest international airport unveiled the design of a temporary terminal to be used just for departures.





"The airport ... already operates close to capacity," said Nick Cole, the head of Heathrow's Olympics planning team. "Every part of the airport is working together to ensure we can give the athletes a warm welcome and ensure all passengers enjoy the atmosphere."





London has had a relatively smooth seven years of planning and building venues. The one big worry for organizers and the city is transport.





There are plans to limit car traffic while creating special Olympics-only traffic lanes. Officials have also asked companies to find ways to keep some employees out of central London and off the busy transport networks during July and August.





In recent years, Heathrow has suffered from baggage snafus, snow disruptions and strikes.





To help get people out of London after the games, Heathrow will allow athletes to check their luggage at the Olympic Village east of the city.





Heathrow expects a 35% increase in baggage on August 13.





Departure will not be the only challenge. The airport expects nearly 50% more passengers arriving on July 26, the day before the opening ceremony.





That includes 390 athletes bringing in 780 firearms, says Heathrow.

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN) -- Hal Holbrook has made his name playing famous historical figures. He won an Emmy for his portrayal of Abraham Lincoln in a 1974 TV miniseries, accolades as "Deep Throat" in 1976's "All the President's Men," and a Tony as Mark Twain -- a performance he's been giving now for a half-century -- in "Mark Twain Tonight!"





Hal Holbrook, 83, is nominated for his role as Ron Franz in "Into the Wild."





But playing Ron Franz, the thoughtful, down-to-earth 81-year-old who bonds with a youthful adventurer in "Into the Wild," was an opportunity he dared not miss, he says in a phone interview.





"This was an opportunity, and a rare one for me, to just play myself, to not do Abraham Lincoln or another character," Holbrook says in his familiar rich baritone. "I didn't want to research anything. I had a very personal reaction to the role."





Holbrook's gut feeling has led to some of the best reviews of his career and a first for the actor: a nomination for an Academy Award. At 83 -- his birthday was last Sunday -- he's the oldest man ever to be nominated for best supporting actor.





The Oscars are scheduled for Sunday night. "Into the Wild" is due out on video March 4.





Holbrook says he's familiar with the kind of adventurousness exhibited by Christopher McCandless, played by Emile Hirsch in Sean Penn's film.





Holbrook has gone into the wilderness himself. He's also sailed the open sea in a small boat, accompanied by little more than a sextant and a map. "No electronics," he says.





He's even traveled in McCandless' tracks, taking a trip to Alaska the year after the self-named "Alexander Supertramp" died.





"They were still talking about him, whether he was crazy," Holbrook recalls.





Holbrook, who'd also read Jon Krakauer's book about McCandless' journey, says he was sent the script "out of the blue" and told that Penn wanted to meet with him the next day. The director, upon discussing the part with him, offered Holbrook the role.





Holbrook has nothing but praise for Penn's work on the film.





"To work with Sean Penn might be the best experience I've ever had with a director," he says. "He's so trusting. There was none of this 'Let's discuss the back story' -- he trusts you. He'll take whatever you give him, and begins to open up your sense of freedom. He gives you space to explore whatever the scenes bring out of you. Sean was wonderful."





Holbrook also has high praise for Hirsch, who lost 40 pounds for the role. "[His performance] was a brilliant piece of work. ... An actor takes his performance from other actors, and in this case it was easy," he says, adding that "I'm astounded he wasn't nominated -- he deserved it more than anybody." Read Hirsch's view of "Into the Wild."





But Holbrook also paid tribute to a person seldom considered by the audience: the film editor, in this case Jay Cassidy. By changing the sequence of two scenes, Cassidy gave the film an added power -- which made all the difference to how his performance was perceived, Holbrook says.





"I have never been more aware of an editor's genius as I have in this particular film," he says. Referring to the film's back-and-forth chronology, which he calls "a very daring piece of work," he marvels at how Cassidy and Penn fit the pieces together. "It's quite an achievement," Holbrook says. "The effect it can have on a performance is profound." Cassidy's work earned "Into the Wild" its only other Oscar nomination.





Holbrook has had a busy couple months, with his performance nominated for critics' awards as well

***

Miami, Florida (CNN) -- Tropical Storm Paula pushed across western Cuba Thursday evening with wind gusts just under hurricane strength in some places, bringing heavy rain and high winds to the island nation, forecasters said.





The storm is gradually weakening and is expected to become a tropical depression Friday, the Miami, Florida-based National Hurricane Center said





As of 8 p.m. ET, the center of Paula was about 25 miles (45 kilometers) east of Havana, the center said. It was moving east at 14 mph (22 kph).





Paula passed just south of the Cuban capital around 6 p.m. Thursday -- with sustained winds of 41 mph (67 kph) and a gust of 54 mph (87 kph) recorded in Havana -- after making landfall at about noon near Puerto Esperanza.





The storm's maximum sustained winds have weakened to 55 mph (90 kph), the center said Thursday night, but wind gusts of 68 mph had been recorded earlier near Puerto Esperanza. Stronger gusts were confined to a small area near the storm's center, the center said.





Paula's tropical storm-force winds have expanded to 70 miles (110 km) outward from the center, altering the landscape of a storm that has been roughly half that size for most of its duration.





Forecasters said the storm was likely to stick to an east to east-northeast track, moving across western and central Cuba Thursday night and Friday.





The hurricane center said that tropical storm force winds should continue to spread eastward across western and central Cuba Thursday night, primarily along the north coast.





The center discontinued an earlier tropical storm watch also was for the Florida Keys and Dry Tortugas.





Emergency management officials in the Keys said Wednesday they were keeping an eye on the progress of Paula and expected some gusty winds and rain, but no protective actions had been initiated. Forecasters predict the center of Paula will remain south of the Keys.





Paula is likely to dump an additional 2 to 4 inches of rain over portions of western and central Cuba over the next two days, the National Hurricane Center said. Total maximum amounts could be 10 inches in some areas. Heavy rain could trigger flash floods and mudslides, forecasters said. The Florida Keys could see between 1 and 2 inches of rain.





In addition, a storm surge is forecast to raise water levels by 2 to 4 feet above normal tide levels along the coast of western Cuba, accompanied by "large and destructive waves," the hurricane center said.

***

LAFAYETTE, Tennessee (CNN) -- James Kruger was watching election results Tuesday night in Lafayette, Tennessee, when a warning appeared on his TV screen: A tornado was headed straight toward his town. Then the lights went out.



James Kruger survived after Tuesday night's storm blew his house away above him in Lafayette, Tennessee.



He put on sweat pants, grabbed a flashlight, drank a shot of whiskey, "and then I heard this noise," Kruger said Thursday.



He headed for a door, "and all of a sudden I heard the glass breaking and it was sucking," he said. "When I tried to shut the door, [it] seemed like the door was lifting up. So I just dove and I lay flat on the floor."



Lying there, everything in the house flew over him, scraping and banging his back, Kruger said.  Then the chaos stopped. "I was laying in the dirt. There was no floor. No nothing."  Watch Kruger tell his story »



The house was gone, but Kruger says he believes there's reason why he survived.



"I think God was holding my leg, beating my ass, teaching me that I hadn't been doing everything he wanted me to do," he said.



Pam Whitaker was volunteering at a hospital in Lafayette that night as dozens came in with injuries from the tornadoes and storms that raked across the South.



Whitaker was cleaning one man's feet to check for cuts when the patient told her the address of a house that had been destroyed.



"I just went white. I said, 'That's my house!'" Whitaker recalled Thursday. "And he said, 'Hon, you don't even have a toothpick or splinter left.' "  Watch Whitaker describe her frightening night »



Kruger, Whitaker and others across the region tried Thursday to put their lives back together in a swath of the South where tornadoes killed at least 56 people.



It was the deadliest tornado outbreak in the United States in more than 20 years.



The storms ripped apart houses and trapped residents of university dorms and a retirement home in debris.



The trail of death stretched across four states, with four fatalities in Alabama, 13 in Arkansas, seven in Kentucky and 32 in Tennessee.



Macon County, Tennessee, which includes Lafayette, was one of the worst-hit areas, with 14 deaths and overwhelming damage.



Whitaker lost her home and everything in it, including the money from cashing her disability check.  She had 15 cents left, she said Thursday, and was staying at a National Guard shelter.



"We don't have a home to go to," Whitaker said. "I don't know where we're going to end up."



In some cases, there was almost no warning before the severe weather hit.



James Baskin of Jackson, Tennessee, said he was driving when a twister "just picked us up and threw us."



Everyone in the car was injured, including his daughter's friend, who suffered a broken collarbone.



"We'll get through it. Nobody's dead. That's the biggest thing," Baskin said.  Watch tornado survivors' stories »



President Bush said Wednesday he had called the governors of the affected states to offer help and to tell them that "the American people hold those who suffered up in prayer."



The Federal Emergency Management Agency was deploying teams to the area, Homeland Security Secretary Michael Chertoff said Wednesday. "We're going to keep watching this," he said.  See a map of where the storms hit »



In Sumner County, Tennessee, two victims were found outside a house the storm had blown away, said Jay Austin, the county's primary death investigator.



Elsewhere in the area, a mother was found dead in a creek bed about 50 yards from where her house stood. Her baby was discovered alive 250 yards away. The child was taken to a local hospital, Austin said.



Tennessee

***

MADRID, Spain (CNN) -- Chess legends Garry Kasparov and Anatoli Karpov faced off again in Spain on Tuesday, 25 years after their epic first world championship battle in Moscow, in what organizers are calling a "historic revenge match."



Garry Kasparov, right, and Anatoli Karpov play chess at the Arts Palau in Valencia, on Tuesday.



Revenge or not, the past chess champs will receive undisclosed sums for playing the three-day, 12-game match in the eastern port city of Valencia.



There will be no additional cash prize for the winner of the exhibition event, which the regional Valencia government is organizing under the title "Valencia, cradle of modern chess," event spokesman Rafa Carretero told CNN.



But bragging rights, yes, and perhaps with more on the line for Kasparov, who dominated the chess world for 20 years.



Kasparov carried on that legacy on Tuesday, winning the first two games in this rematch, Spain's state new agency EFE reported.



Karpov was world champion when they began their initial five-month match in 1984 in Moscow. That match was controversially stopped by chess authorities, citing concerns about the health of the contestants after 48 grueling games.



But the next year in Moscow, Kasparov beat Karpov in a rematch and went on to hold the number-one world chess ranking almost without interruption until his retirement in 2005.



The two last met, in their fifth match, in 1990, with games played in New York and Lyon, France. Kasparov won.



In a total of five world championship matches, Kasparov has the edge with 21 wins, 19 losses and 104 ties in a total of 144 games.



Karpov, now 58, and Kasparov, 46, told Spanish newspaper El Pais they hoped the rematch in Valencia would put chess in the spotlight again.



Karpov came from Russia to Valencia more than a week ago, with a team of elite trainers, organizers said. Kasparov arrived last Sunday from his home in Croatia, where he had been training.



The match, at Valencia's Palace of Arts, has attracted interest from ticket buyers on five continents, organizers said. One of the highest-profile fans on hand is Sulaiman Al-Fahim, president of the chess federation of the United Arab Emirates and owner of England's Portsmouth football team.



Dutchman Geurt Gijssen, who was referee for the last two matches between Karpov and Kasparov, will referee this match as well, the organizers said.



Kasparov is now an opposition politician in Russia, running unsuccessfully against then-President Vladimir Putin in 2007.



During their first match, in 1984, Kasparov was just 21 and Karpov was 33.

***

Tokyo (CNN) -- Japan is prepared to gradually reduce the amount of oil it imports from Iran, Finance Minister Jun Azumi said Thursday, as the United States seeks to muster international support to put fresh pressure on Tehran over its nuclear program.





Japan imports 10% of its crude oil from Iran at the moment, Azumi said at a news briefing after meeting with U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner. The country is ready to decrease that level "in a planned manner," he said.





"What I told the secretary is that we have already reduced Iranian oil imports by 40% in the past five years," Azumi said, standing next to Geithner. "The nuclear development issue is an issue that the international community cannot overlook, so we very much understand the U.S. action."





The United States is exploring ways to cut off Iran's central bank from the global financial system and reduce the country's oil revenues, Geithner said at the briefing.





Washington is in "the initial stages of consulting with allies around the world about how best to achieve those goals," he said, adding that Japan's support was appreciated.





"We are working very closely with Europe and Japan and countries around the world to substantially increase the pressure we bring on Iran," Geithner said.





The announcement is a plus for Geithner, after his efforts on Iran were rebuffed by senior Chinese officials during his visit to Asian countries this week.





"I think 'small victory' is a fair categorization," said Michael Levi, a Council on Foreign Relations' expert on energy policy and national security.





From January to September 2011, Iran exported 13% of its crude oil to Japan, according to the International Energy Agency.





Levi said Iran is likely to absorb this and find alternatives -- unless those drop out as well.





"As long as Iran has a substantial set of potential buyers, it's going to make as much money as it made before," Levi said.





Levi said Japan wants to phase out its imports from Iran slowly so it can smoothly transition to other sources.





"That same slow speed gives Iran the opportunity to transition to other customers," he said.





Geithner had made a similar push for China to reduce its Iranian oil imports. But Beijing said that its imports have nothing to do with Tehran's nuclear program and rejected new U.S. sanctions on foreign financial institutions that conduct business with the Iranian central bank.





There was notably little mention of Iran in the comments made by Geithner and Chinese leaders Wednesday.





China relies on imports for half of the oil it consumes. Iran exported 22% of its crude oil to China from January to September last year, the IEA said.





Japan's government faces a difficult balancing act, trying to meet the needs of its closest ally and at the same time fuel its energy-strained country.





Japan has been facing an energy crisis since last March's earthquake and tsunami, which triggered a meltdown at the Fukushima Nuclear Plant.





While making the announcement of plans for a gradual decrease in Iranian oil imports, Azumi did not specify how quickly his country would carry out the action. He said that Japan also needed more time to deal with how to reduce non-crude oil imports.





Iran threatened in late December to block the Strait of Hormuz if sanctions were imposed on its oil exports. France, Britain and Germany have all proposed such sanctions to punish Iran for lack of cooperation on its nuclear program. Those countries and others believe Tehran may be trying to develop nuclear weapons, but Iran says its nuclear program is solely for civilian energy production.





The strait is a critical shipping lane, through which 17 million barrels of oil passed per day in 2011, according to the U.S. Energy Information Agency.





CNN's Jethro Mullen and Joe Sterling contributed to this report.

***

Washington (CNN) -- A House panel voted Thursday to subpoena the White House for documents related to the solar energy company Solyndra.





The House Energy and Commerce Committee's subcommittee on oversight and investigations voted along party lines, 14 to 9, in favor of issuing the subpoenas for internal documents regarding the decision to issue more than half a billion dollars in federal loan guarantees in 2010 to Solyndra, which later filed for bankruptcy.





The decision followed a contentious debate among subcommittee members, with Republicans accusing the Obama administration of stonewalling, and some Democrats calling the subpoena resolution politically motivated.





Rep. Cliff Stearns, the Republican chairman of the subcommittee, said the White House Office of Management and Budget earlier this year "repeatedly failed to cooperate with our investigation and we agreed to put off a vote on that subpoena" in hopes that engaging the White House could avoid the need for subpoenas.





"Only after repeated failed attempts to engage the White House did the committee notify the White House" that it intended to discuss possible subpoenas, Stearns said. "This finally got the attention of the White House counsel," who then met with lawmakers Wednesday, he said. "Unfortunately, the White House was unable or unwilling to answer even the most basic questions."





Democrats slammed the subcommittee's move, though some acknowledged the White House could be more forthcoming with information in the case.





Veteran Rep. John Dingell, D-Michigan, said after the vote: "I've never seen a procedure quite like this."





"We are protesting here a sweeping subpoena," he said. Since Republicans have "been able to find nothing" wrong in what they've looked at so far, they have "increased the size of the net and reduced the size of the holes in the net as they go about this fishing expedition."





The White House accused the House panel of choosing "a partisan route."





"This administration has cooperated extensively with the committee's investigation by producing over 85,000 pages of documents, including 20,000 pages produced just yesterday afternoon," White House spokesman Eric Schultz said in a statement. "Administration officials have participated in multiple briefings and hearings, and the White House has also already provided over 900 pages of documents in response to requests we have received. And all of the materials that have been disclosed affirm what we said on day one: this was a merit-based decision made by the Department of Energy."





Schultz called the subpoenas "unprecedented and unwarranted."





Federal analysts looking at the proposed Solyndra loan in 2009 warned then of possible problems, as well as pressure from the White House to speed up a decision, according to a memorandum released last month by congressional investigators.





Approved in May 2010, the Energy Department's loan allowed Solyndra to build a factory in Fremont, California, to produce state-of-the-art solar panels.





Solyndra filed for bankruptcy in late August and closed its doors, however, putting more than 1,000 people out of work after it received $535 million in loan guarantees.





The bankruptcy leaves the federal government unlikely to get the loan money back. President Barack Obama touted the company in a widely publicized visit last year.





A source familiar with the congressional investigation said the White House has provided e-mail communications with details about who at the White House was looped in on the deal while red flags were being raised about the financial soundness of the company.





White House Chief of Staff William Daley announced last week that he is ordering a 60-day independent review of the state of the Energy Department's loan portfolio. The review will include recommendations about how to improve the loan monitoring process.





The review will be headed by Herb Allison, a veteran of both the Obama and last Bush administrations who oversaw the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP), among other things.





CNN's Alan Silverleib, Tom Cohen, Josh Levs and Deirdre Walsh contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton met her match while appearing on NBC's "Saturday Night Live" to deliver the show's trademark opening line and provide an "editorial response" to a mock presidential debate.



During the opening sketch -- which featured SNL actors playing Clinton, rival candidate Barack Obama and the debate moderators -- Clinton complimented the performance of Amy Poehler, who regularly lampoons Clinton with her impersonation of the senator from New York.



"I simply adore Amy's impression of me," Clinton said, providing the cue for Poehler to enter the stage, wearing the same two-button brown jacket and sporting Clinton's medium-length, layered hairstyle.



Poehler giddily thanked Clinton for appearing.



"I love your outfit," the identically dressed Poehler told Clinton.



"Well, I love your outfit," Clinton responded, putting her hand on Poehler's shoulder, "but I do want the earrings back."



The quip sparked a hyperbolic cackle from Poehler. Clinton asked, "Do I really laugh like that?" The two jokingly agreed she did.



Clinton appeared on the show ahead of several do-or-die primaries that will determine the fate of her campaign.



During the segment, Poehler -- who also does impersonations of talk show host Kelly Ripa, "American Idol" judge Paula Abdul and pop star Michael Jackson -- asked Clinton, who trails Obama in the Democratic race, how her campaign was going.



"The campaign is going very well. Very, very well," the former first lady responded before earning some laughs with a deadpan: "Why? What have you heard?"



Clinton said she appeared on the show to "just relax, have fun" without politics, but she didn't miss her chance to address voters in delivering the opening line.



Saying she was appealing to all Americans -- whether they're from Ohio, Texas, Rhode Island, Vermont, Pennsylvania "or any of the other states" -- Clinton opened the show with "Live from New York, it is Saturday night!"  Watch Clinton open the show »



Pennsylvania's primary is slated for next month, while the other four states Clinton mentioned are holding primaries Tuesday.



Clinton's appearance was a poorly kept secret. The media were tipped off when she failed to arrive for a campaign charter flight from Dallas, Texas, to Columbus, Ohio, on Saturday.



Her campaign would not say where she was, but an entertainment industry source confirmed she was set to appear on SNL.



The late-night skit show has been a popular spot on the campaign trail. Obama appeared unannounced in October, and GOP candidate Mike Huckabee did a bit on the show's "Weekend Update" last week.



Also, former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani, who dropped out of the GOP presidential race this year, appeared later in the show that Clinton opened.



During an MSNBC debate in Ohio on Tuesday, Clinton referenced an SNL skit in which the comedy troupe satirized the media for being too friendly with Obama.



"Maybe we should ask [Obama] if he's comfortable and needs another pillow," she said during the debate.



Clinton is scheduled to appear on Jon Stewart's "Daily Show" Monday. E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- An Australian high court ruled Friday that a quadriplegic man has the right to refuse food and water and can be allowed to die, a rare legal finding that some see as a major victory for right-to-die campaigners.





An Australian high court ruled Friday that Christian Rossiter has the right to refuse food and water.





The ruling means that the nursing facility in which Christian Rossiter has lived since November 2008 cannot be held criminally liable for allowing the patient to die, the Supreme Court of Western Australia said.





"I'm happy that I won my right to die," Rossiter, 49, said afterward. But he added that he will further consult with a doctor because he may change his mind.





A leading Australian right-to-die advocate called the ruling a significant victory.





"I don't know that many people will want to die this way. But for people who do, it's a very important decision," said Dr. Philip Nitschke, founder and director of Exit International, a leading global voluntary euthanasia and end-of-life advocacy group.





Nitschke noted that Rossiter's case is significant because his mind is fully functional.





"This is the first time that it's come up with a person that's rational and lucid," Nitschke told CNN. "This is unusual. It's very rare."





Chief Justice Wayne Martin noted that distinction in his order, saying, "Mr. Rossiter is not a child, nor is he terminally ill, nor dying. He is not in a vegetative state, nor does he lack the capacity to communicate his wishes. There is therefore no question of other persons making decisions on his behalf.





"Rather, this is a case in which a person with full mental capacity and the ability to communicate his wishes has indicated that he wishes to direct those who have assumed responsibility for his care to discontinue the provision of treatment which maintains his existence."





Some family and right-to-life groups opposed Rossiter's request.





"Really, what we should be doing is looking after each other rather than facilitating an escape," John Barich of the Australian Family Association said in a TV interview.





Peter O'Meara, president of Western Australia's Right to Life Association, said, "The law which is being applied can be a dangerous precedent."





Rossiter has suffered a series of injuries since 1988 that have left him with limited foot movement and the ability to wriggle only one finger. He is fed through a stomach tube. He relies on staff at the Brightwater Care Group nursing facility in the city of Perth for such routine care as regular turning, cleaning, assistance with bowel movements, physical and occupational therapy and speech pathology.





Australian law gives patients the right to refuse life-saving treatment, but helping someone commit suicide is a crime that can carry a life prison sentence. The Brightwater nursing facility sought the ruling to make sure it would not be held liable if it complied with Rossiter's request to stop all nutrition and hydration, except to be given enough liquid to make it possible to take pain medication.





Rossiter attended the hearing in a wheelchair, breathing through a tracheotomy tube in his throat. He told the judge he wants to die.





It's a point he has been making publicly.





"I can't move," Rossiter said in a televised interview this week. "I can't even wipe the tears from my eyes. And I'd like to die. I'm imprisoned in my own body. I have no fear of death. Just pain."





Rossiter pointed out in a recent interview with the PerthNow news outlet that he once led an active life.





"This is living hell," he is quoted as saying. "I used to be a cyclist, I used to be a keen walker. I bushwalked around the world. ... I've rock climbed in Yosemite Valley in California up very steep cliffs. I've got a degree in economics and now I can't even read a newspaper, I can't turn the pages

***

(CNN)  -- A former high school cheerleader who sued over injuries caused when a teammate failed to catch her during a routine, lost her appeal before the Wisconsin Supreme Court on Tuesday.



The Wisconsin Supreme Court ruled Tuesday a cheerleader couldn't sue her teammate.



The seven state justices unanimously concluded cheerleading is a "contact" sport, and therefore neither the male student cited nor the school district was liable for damages.



The opinion also said the stunt in question did not create a "compelling danger" to students.



It is the first legal decision of its kind, according to the National Cheer Safety Foundation, a group founded by parents.



The case was closely watched by school districts and parents around the country concerned about whether they would have immunity from lawsuits involving unintentional injuries from certain extracurricular activities.



Brittany Noffke was a varsity cheerleader at Holmen High School, about 14 miles from La Crosse, in western Wisconsin. Her team was practicing a "post to hands" stunt before a basketball game in 2004, and after being lifted up to stand on the shoulders of a fellow student, Noffke fell backward, striking her head on the floor.



The 16-year-old male cheerleader who lifted her, and then was supposed to be a spotter, failed to catch her.



The girl's family sued the boy and the school district, claiming the coach was negligent by not having a second spotter and not providing safety mats.



State law does not specifically spell out which high school activities involve "contact," but they typically involve sports such as football or lacrosse in which opposing teams compete against each other.



But the Wisconsin high court concluded that "cheerleading involves a significant amount of physical contact between cheerleaders that at times results in a forceful interaction between the participants."



Justice Annette Ziegler cited the "spirit rules" of the National Federation of State High School Association's handbook, which contained pictures illustrating various cheerleading stunts. She said all but one photo showed at least two cheerleaders in contact with one another.



Because the male cheerleader just made a mistake by being out of place when Noffke fell, the court found he did not act "recklessly," the only legal standard that would have permitted a lawsuit to proceed.



Although it is not considered a sport at many high schools and colleges, cheerleading has grown increasingly popular over the years, and the stunts have become more complex and dangerous, sports injury experts say.



A University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill study found cheerleading accounted for about two-thirds of some 93 "catastrophic" sports injuries -- including head and neck damage -- among high school girls in the past 26 years. But the study noted that other sports such as football produce far more devastating injuries, though fewer in number.



Cheerleading advocates say the activity has become much safer in the past 15 years, following greater awareness of the risks and better coordination among state and national groups.



The American Association of Cheerleading Coaches and Administrators estimates about 4 million people are involved in the activity.

***

(CNN) -- The Marines have been making children's Christmas dreams come true for nearly 60 years, but the corps may be seeing fewer smiles this year.

Volunteer Betty Whelan sorts donated toys in a Toys for Tots center in Boston, Massachusetts.

With demand up due to the poor economy and toy donations down, Toys for Tots, the Marine Corps' program that distributes Christmas toys to children in need, is facing one of its toughest years, according to Bill Grein, the Toys for Tots Foundation vice president.

Grein said the program last year distributed approximately 16.6 million toys and books, but this year he doesn't think they will be able to reach that number.

"We always run out of toys before we run out of children,"  he said, but this year "it's a major problem."

Grein said that the program is getting more requests than in previous years and cities like Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Miami, Florida; Fresno, California; Atlanta, Georgia, and many others are hurting for donations.

"Every kid deserves a present," said Marine Sgt. Daniel Sampson of the Toys for Tots program in Boston, Massachusetts. "Right now, we're not sending out as much as we should be."

In the Washington area, the Marines need to find toys for 82,000 children, but "we are tens of thousands of toys behind," Master Sgt Timothy Butler said.

If they can't fill the need and get every child on the list a toy for Christmas, Butler said, "It's gonna break my heart."

Last year, the Marines were able to raise $13,000 in donations from people at Union Station, a major commuter hub in downtown Washington, but this year the Marines will be "lucky to get half that," Staff Sgt. Johnny Noble said.

In Atlanta, Toys for Tots administration chief Edward Barrett said they had received 241,814 donations, well short of their goal of 800,000.

Barrett understands that the economy has a lot to do with the lack of contributions, and he estimates that donations are down by about 30 percent this year.

In San Francisco, California, Gunnery Sgt. Timothy Anthamatten said the Toys for Tots program there was also seeing a 30 percent decrease in toy and monetary donations.

In Boston, last minute donations came to the rescue. According to volunteer Kay Carpenter, the Boston Toys for Tots program used money that came in last week to buy $15,000 worth of toys, hopefully, enough to fill all of their orders.

But, nationally, Toys for Tots bins are still empty.

"We're Marines and we set goals," Edwards said, "and when we can't achieve those goals that's frustrating."

CNN's Bethany Swain contributed to this report.

***

ISLAMABAD, Pakistan (CNN) -- Conflict raged Wednesday in volatile northwestern Pakistan, with nine militants killed in a gun battle, the Taliban's abduction and release of about 30 police officers, and strikes on stranded NATO trucks.





Pakistani policemen at a check point in Khyber Agency near the Pakistan-Afghanistan border, February 12, 2008.





It's the latest fighting between Pakistani security forces and the Taliban militants in the northwestern region near Afghanistan.





The country's central government has little control in the area, and U.S. intelligence officials say the area is a haven for militants.





Nine militants were killed when police and local residents foiled an attempted kidnapping of the mayor in a village on the outskirts of Peshawar, police told CNN. Taliban fighters attempted to abduct Fahim Ur Rehman, but police and residents resisted and a gun battle ensued.





Along with the slain militants, two police and two civilians were wounded and some of the militants fled. The village, Bazid Khel, is located between Peshawar and the Khyber Agency in the tribal areas.





In the Swat Valley, militants abducted around 30 police Tuesday night but eventually released them on Wednesday. Taliban spokesman Muslim Khan confirmed to CNN that the personnel had been released after returning to the path of Islam and promising not to return to their jobs.





Police told CNN that the security personnel had been forced to agree to the Taliban's terms and confirmed the release.





There are conflicting details about the incident, in which Taliban forces attacked the Shamozai check post in the Barikot area of Swat Valley on Tuesday night and captured the people after a nightlong firefight.





Khan said the personnel surrendered after Taliban forces mined the area, preventing access. He said their ammunition was seized when supply vehicles coming to assist government forces were stopped by Taliban mines.





Pakistan police said the security personnel didn't surrender; they were caught after they used up their ammunition. Police and military sources said the personnel were police, but Khan said paramilitary officers as well as police were among the group. Locals said government forces came under attack Tuesday evening and ran out of ammunition before surrendering.





This comes as the Pakistani military beefed up its operations this week in the Swat Valley.





In the latest in a series of recent attacks meant to choke off supplies into Afghanistan for the United States and its allies, a rocket strike destroyed at least nine vehicles near the town Landi Kotal in the Khyber Agency -- one of seven semiautonomous tribal agencies along the Afghan border, a Khyber official told CNN.





The trucks were returning from Afghanistan but were stranded in the town because, a day earlier, suspected militants had destroyed a bridge connecting Landi Kotal to Jamrod, another part of the Khyber Agency.





The bridge's destruction had forced authorities to halt traffic.





Because Afghanistan is landlocked, many of the supplies for NATO-led troops fighting Islamic militants there have to be trucked from Pakistan. In recent months, militants aligned with the Taliban and al Qaeda have carried out several attacks to disrupt supplies, Pakistani officials said.

***

(CNN) -- The pilot who made a treacherous crash-landing on New York's Hudson River look like a routine maneuver got a hero's welcome Saturday in his California hometown.



Chesley B. Sullenberger was honored Saturday with a celebration in his hometown of Danville, California.



Chesley B. "Sully" Sullenberger put his US Airways jetliner down on the Hudson minutes after both engines failed, then walked the length of the drifting Airbus A320 twice to make certain that all 155 people on board got off safely.



He was greeted by several thousand cheering people gathered around the town square in Danville, California, for a celebration in his honor.



Mayor Newell Arnerich presented Sullenberger with a ceremonial key to the city, an upscale suburb near San Francisco. Sullenberger, who has avoided public comment since the January 15 incident, made very brief remarks.



He thanked the crowd for an "incredible outpouring of support."



"Circumstance determined that it was this experienced crew that was scheduled to fly on that particular flight on that particular day," Sullenberger said. "But I know I can speak for the entire crew when I tell you we were simply doing the jobs we were trained to do. Thank you."  Watch Sullenberger address the crowd »



Sullenberger's wife, Lorrie, fought back tears as she spoke of her husband.



"I have always known him to be an exemplary pilot. I knew what the outcome would be that day, because I knew my husband," she said.



"Mostly for me, he's the man that makes my cup of tea every morning."



Investigators from the National Transportation Safety Board continue to piece together details from the double engine failure that hit the plane after it took off from New York's LaGuardia Airport for Charlotte, North Carolina.



The jet's left engine, which apparently tore away from the plane on landing impact, was raised from the bottom of the Hudson on Friday.



Sullenberger reported to air controllers that his plane had hit birds shortly before both engines shut down.



On Saturday, the NTSB said a preliminary examination of the left engine found evidence of "soft body impact damage," the same kind of damage reported on the right engine.



An NTSB spokesman said that there was no evidence of organic material such as a dead bird in the left engine but that was not surprising because the engine had been under water for a week.



Although the NTSB has not officially confirmed reports of a bird strike, the agency's findings and statements have not done anything to discount the bird-strike reports.



Both engines will be shipped to the manufacturer in Ohio, where NTSB investigators will tear them down completely for examination.

***

INDIO, California (CNN) -- Parents danced with their young children to the infectious hip-hop beat of Lupe Fiasco on the main stage.



The Yeah Yeah Yeahs' Karen O is immersed in the music at Coachella.



Twentysomethings wearing feathers in their hair jumped up and down to Somali emcee K'naan in the Gobi tent.



In the portable toilets, an impromptu discussion broke out about the "awesomeness" of Yeah Yeah Yeahs singer Karen O.



The mercury may have hovered close to 100 degrees, and somewhere outside the desert oasis of the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival there was a global recession, but you'd never know it from the carefree crowd on Day 3 at the Empire Polo Club in Indio, California.



Although exact figures have yet to be released, about 50,000 revelers turned out for the final day of the 2009 festival for an eclectic lineup that included former Jam front man Paul Weller, rap pioneers Public Enemy, a reunion of Irish indie darlings My Bloody Valentine and a nearly three-hour set from The Cure.



Promoters say the turnout exceeded expectations, and this year's attendance figure might be the third largest in the festival's 10-year history. The three-day ticket price may have been steep -- roughly $300, including service charges -- but when divided among the 131 acts on the bill, that breaks down to less than $2.50 per act.



This was also the first year concert promoter Goldenvoice offered layaway, which is how 18 percent chose to pay. The strong showing is good news for Bonnaroo, All Points West, Lollapalooza and other festivals taking place this spring and summer. Coachella was also moved up one weekend, which allowed for more kids on spring break to attend.



Although Coachella is one of several music festivals in the United States, it still carries a certain cachet that's hard to match. Perhaps it's the scenery -- listening to music on a grassy polo field surrounded by swaying palm trees and craggy desert mountains. Or maybe it's the thrill of discovering new artists and rediscovering old ones standing shoulder-to-shoulder with friends, strangers and the random Hollywood celebrity.



Or maybe it's the wacky moments that seem to happen only under the blistering desert sun.



Where else could you get Morrissey -- a well-known vegetarian -- complaining in the middle of his Friday set that the smell of burning animals was making him sick, and that he only hoped it was human? The Moz was referring to meat grilling in a food booth across the polo field.



And when troubled British neo-soul singer Amy Winehouse dropped out of her Saturday performance because she couldn't get a visa, M.I.A. stepped into her slot on the main stage -- but she apparently wasn't happy about the upgrade. Despite a massive, adoring crowd and a highly charged set, the new mom exclaimed, "This is the main stage? Next time, I'm back in a tent! I prefer the sweat!"



This was after her tongue-in-cheek nod to Winehouse, where she sang, "They tried to make me do the Oscars, I said, 'No, no, no.' "



Then, there were the memorable music moments. Friday headliner Sir Paul McCartney didn't end his playful, hit-filled set until about 54 minutes past the midnight curfew -- for a potential fine of $54,000. (According to Benjamin Guitron, media relations officer for the Indio Police Department, the promoter agrees to pay $1,000 for every minute past 12 a.m.)



On Saturday, Seattle, Washington, indie pop band Fleet Foxes drew an overflowing crowd to the Outdoor Theatre, charming the audience with its delicate, baroque harmonies. Sunday headliners The Cure played 31 songs from the group's vast catalog -- concentrating heavily on early material, and for the most part, staying away from the biggest radio hits. They, too, played well past curfew -- continuing with their third encore even after the sound from the main PA system was cut off.



My Bloody Valentine -- whose four members reunited last year after a decade apart -- was also a crowd

***

(CNN) -- U.S. Navy ships loaded with supplies for victims of Myanmar's cyclone will sail away from the country's coast on Thursday, after the ruling junta refused for three weeks to allow them to deliver aid.



U.S. ships steam in formation off the coast of Myanmar on May 23.



Adm. Timothy Keating said the USS Essex group would leave the shores of Myanmar, also known as Burma, on Thursday, but that he would leave several heavy lift aircraft in Thailand to assist international relief efforts.



"We have made at least 15 attempts to convince the Burmese government to allow our ships, helicopters and landing craft to provide additional disaster relief for the people of Burma, but they have refused us each and every time," Keating said in a statement Wednesday.



Cyclone Nargis made landfall early last month, killing more than 77,000 people in the southeastern Asian country, according to a United Nations estimate.



Some 55,000 others are missing, the United Nations said, and as many as 500,000 to 600,000 people, mainly in the Irrawaddy Delta region, have had to be relocated.



The White House issued a statement Wednesday saying more than a million victims have yet to receive assistance. Watch a discussion of Myanmar's handling of the crisis »



"I am both saddened and frustrated to know that we have been in a position to help ease the suffering of hundreds of thousands of people and help mitigate further loss of life, but have been unable to do so because of the unrelenting position of the Burma military junta," Keating said.



Myanmar leaders did grant permission for U.S. planes to deliver aid, a total of 106 plane-loads of supplies worth more than $26 million. Transportation cost about $6.8 million, it said.



But the junta never gave permission for the United States to distribute the aid directly to the storm victims, prompting questions about whether some of the assistance went astray.



Last weekend, U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon guided a conference of 52 donor nations in Myanmar, where countries pledged in excess of $100 million to help Myanmar recover -- and said they are willing to open up their wallets further once aid groups are granted access to the worst-affected areas.



The country's government had asked for $11 billion in assistance, saying that the relief phase of the disaster was already over and that it needed the money for reconstruction and rehabilitation efforts.



More than a month after the cyclone struck, more than 1 million people affected have received help, Elisabeth Byrs of the U.N. Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs said on Tuesday.  She added that aid has reached nearly half of the people in the Irrawaddy Delta.



However, she said, "There remains a serious lack of sufficient and sustained humanitarian assistance."



On Tuesday, State Department spokesman Sean McCormack said that the United States would continue to push to get emergency supplies to the country's victims.



"We are not going to abandon those ... people," McCormack said. Of the Navy ships leaving the area, he said, they "are needed elsewhere and there is no rational expectation at this point we will be effectively able to use those assets in an humanitarian relief operation."



"Our folks will do the forensics on that to see if there are any lessons learned," McCormack said. "We think that to the extent that there has been significant loss of life that we as well as others could have reduced that number had we been allowed to act more quickly with a large-scale intervention."



CNN's Charley Keyes and Barbara Starr contributed to this report.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN)  -- First lady Michelle Obama's father is not buried in the Chicago-area cemetery where investigators say hundreds of graves have been dug up in a scheme to resell the burial plots, a spokeswoman said Tuesday.



First lady Michelle Obama's father is not buried in the Chicago-area cemetery where graves were disturbed.



The announcement followed an earlier, mistaken statement by the first lady's communications director, Camille Johnston. Johnston later said that Obama's father, Fraser Robinson III, was buried in Lincoln Cemetery in suburban Alsip, Illinois, not the Burr Oak graveyard now at the center of a criminal investigation.



"There has been some confusion that has been cleared up," Johnston said.



Robinson, who worked as a pump operator for the Chicago water department, died in 1991 after a long struggle with multiple sclerosis. Lincoln Cemetery is about 2 miles from Burr Oak.



Four people face felony charges in the investigation surrounding Burr Oak Cemetery in Alsip, Illinois.



Authorities said last week that about 300 graves had been disturbed as part of the scheme, but that number is expected to rise.



Cook County Sheriff Thomas Dart said his office has received more than 55,000 requests for information from families with loved ones buried in Burr Oak. But he said many of the cemetery's records are in rusted cabinets filled with decaying file cards.



"Most of the file cards have rotted together," he said. "They're covered in mold, and they've rotted together."



In addition, some of the cemetery's books are missing pages, and others are known to have been altered, "So this has made it incredibly difficult for us to give accurate information," Dart said. His office asked a court Tuesday to appoint a receiver to manage the graveyard, which he said has been run by his office since last week.



Among others buried in the 150-acre graveyard are civil rights martyr Emmett Till, blues pioneer Willie Dixon, jazz and blues singer Dinah Washington and several Negro League baseball players. Cemetery groundskeepers told investigators that Till's grave was not among those disturbed, but the identities of other remains dug up have not been disclosed.



Carolyn Towns, an office manager for the cemetery, and gravediggers Keith Nicks, Terrance Nicks and Maurice Daley have each been charged with dismembering a human body. The felony charge carries a sentence ranging from six to 30 years, authorities said.



Authorities began investigating the cemetery about six weeks ago after receiving a call from its owners, who said they suspected "financial irregularities" regarding the business, Cook County Sheriff Thomas Dart told CNN last week. He said the owners are not believed to be involved in the alleged scam.



CNN correspondents Dan Lothian and Elaine Quijano contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- A global commodities trading company says it is considering a settlement to legal claims that it is responsible for the deaths of 15 people and thousands of illnesses after 500 tons of toxic waste were dumped in the African nation of Ivory Coast.



Signs such as this were still up in "toxic zones" around Abidjan, Ivory Coast, a year after the waste dumping.



The Dutch company Trafigura said studies by 20 experts it has hired conclude that the chemicals did not harm anyone.



"In view of that expert evidence, and the fact that claims are not being made in this litigation for deaths, miscarriages, still births, birth defects and other serious injuries, the parties are exploring the possibility of compromising the claims which have been made," Trafigura said in a release Wednesday. "A global settlement is being considered by the parties and it currently appears that this settlement is likely to be acceptable to most, if not all, of the claimants."



A United Nations report also released Wednesday said Trafigura did cause death and injury when the cargo ship Probo Koala dumped 500 tons of toxic waste belonging to the company at sites around Abidjan, the West African nation's largest city. The incident happened in August 2006.



"According to official estimates, 15 people died, 69 people were hospitalized and over 100,000 others, complaining of nausea and vomiting after inhaling fumes, sought medical treatment after the incident," said the report by Okechukwu Ibeanu, an unpaid investigator for the Geneva-based U.N. Human Rights Council.



"We still don't know -- and we may never know -- the full effect of the dumping. But there seems to be strong prima facie evidence that the reported deaths and adverse health consequences are related to the dumping of the waste."



Ibeanu, who visited Ivory Coast and the Netherlands during his investigation, urged all parties to take steps "to address possible long-term human health and environmental effects of the incident."



According to a U.N. statement, Ibeanu said last month that the areas where the toxic waste was dumped still have not been decontaminated and continue to threaten residents' health. Many people, he said, are still reporting headaches, skin lesions, digestive difficulties and nose, throat and lung problems.



Trafigura noted in its release Wednesday that it initiated a plan two years ago that would compensate, without any admission of liability, any claimants who could demonstrate any injury caused by exposure to the waste, which the company calls "slops."



"The company has always maintained that the Probo Koala's slops could not possibly have caused deaths and serious or long-term injuries," Trafigura said. "Independent expert witnesses firmly support Trafigura in this stance."



Trafigura also maintains it "sought to comply with all relevant regulations and procedures concerning the offloading of the Probo Koala's slops in Abidjan."



The company denies that the ship went to Ivory Coast solely to dump the toxic waste.



"Trafigura has consistently stated that the Probo Koala was returning from a routine commercial voyage to deliver a gasoline cargo in Lagos, Nigeria, when it stopped in Abidjan," the company statement said. "Consequently, any suggestion that the vessel was sent to West Africa solely for the purpose of offloading its slops is entirely inaccurate."



As one of the largest independent companies trading commodities, Trafigura has 1,900 employees in 42 nations, the company's Web site says.



"We handle every element involved in the sourcing and trading of crude oil, petroleum products, renewable energies, metals, metal ores and concentrates for industrial consumers." the company says.



Ivory Coast, a former French colony with a population of 20 million, is also known as Cote d'Ivoire.

***

KAMPALA, Uganda (CNN) -- A fight between Ugandan and Libyan presidential guards sparked chaos during a ceremony attended by the heads of state from 11 African nations on Wednesday.



Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi and Ugandan President Yoweri Museveni attend the opening of the mosque.



Several of the guards to the visiting heads of state from Kenya, Tanzania, Burundi, Rwanda, Mali, Somalia, Sudan and Djibouti sustained serious injuries in the fight, which included punches, kicks and the drawing of guns.



No leaders were hurt in the melee, though several were knocked over. Several journalists also were caught up in the fracas and suffered injuries or lost their grips on cameras and recorders.



The incident occurred at the opening of a massive Gadhafi National Mosque in Kampala, a structure begun by the late Ugandan dictator Idi Amin in 1972 and completed with financing from Libya, according to African media reports.



Minutes after Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi and his host, Ugandan President Yoweri Museveni, jointly unveiled a plaque to mark the event, the Libyan guards pushed away the guards of other delegations at the mosque's entrance.



The Ugandan guards -- who had traded hostilities with the predominantly-Arab Libyan guards at every joint event since Gadhafi's arrival in the country Sunday -- reacted with fury and fought back.



Museveni briefly lost his balance when a hefty Libyan guard pushed him to a wall. Another Libyan guard pushed Rwandan President Paul Kagame, who also lost his balance but was caught by his own guards.



The vice president of Tanzania was knocked over by fighting guards as he was taking his shoes off to enter the mosque.



Guards to the rest of the visiting presidents and prime ministers kept their respective leaders out of the fray, with some drawing their guns as the dignitaries looked on in disbelief. Some leaders -- notably those from Somalia, Burundi and Djibouti -- were visibly uneasy as guns were drawn on all sides.



By the time the fight was over more than six minutes later, about a dozen presidential guards were left bleeding from compound fractures and the Libyan and Ugandan protocol officials traded bitter accusations of disrespect and racism.



"What are your people up to? Do you want to kill our leader?" a Libyan protocol official said to his Ugandan counterpart.



The Ugandan official, who declined to be named, shouted back, "Why do think you're superior? What makes you think Uganda has any ill intention against Gadhafi?"



The Ugandan official said Museveni's guards were simply doing their job as security for the host country and had a right to respond when the Libyan guards pushed them back.



It has taken 36 years to complete the giant mosque on a hill in the heart of Kampala. It used to be a colonial fort named after British Capt. Frederick Lugard.



The mosque can accommodate as many as 17,000 people at one time, according to the engineers, who call it the largest mosque in sub-Saharan Africa.



Many Muslims interviewed said the mosque's opening evoked sweet memories of Amin, the deceased dictator.



"It is a great day and thanks be to Allah for the completion," said Salim Abdul Noor, 39. "This should remind us that while Amin is demonized as Africa's worst dictator, there are many things he did for this country that successive governments largely depend on, and much of the completed installations and structures like this beautiful mosque was Amin's dream, may Allah rest him in peace."



The Swedish vice president of the European Islamic Conference, Adly Abu Hajar, 57, said the mosque heals rifts in a religion introduced to Uganda in 1844 by Arab slave traders.



"I find this complex has brought unity among Muslims in Uganda. There have been so many factions, but this attraction has brought them together, identifying themselves with a common home."



The fight prompted a crisis meeting by Ugandan security authorities, after which invited diplomats from mainly the European missions in Uganda expressed dismay.



"It's disgrace. It shows there is something wrong yet unknown between the two parties," said the head of one European mission in Kampala, who

***

(CNN) -- Someone out there just leapt all comic book purchase price records in a single bound.





A near-pristine copy of Action Comics #1 -- better known as the first appearance of Superman -- sold at an online auction Wednesday night for a staggering $2.16 million.





The seller? None other than cash-strapped actor Nicolas Cage, according to The Hollywood Reporter. Cage turned a super-sized profit, the Reporter noted. He bought the 1938 Man of Steel original 14 years ago for roughly $150,000.





The buyer has remained anonymous. But "he's an extremely passionate collector, and he treasures owning the best of the best," said Vincent Zurzolo, chief operating officer of New York-based ComicConnect.com, which conducted the auction. "In particular, he loves Superman."





When the comic book first went on the auction block November 12, the top bid was around $900,000, Zurzolo noted. The price rose to more than $1.5 million Monday and smashed the $2 million mark five minutes before the close of bidding.





The previous comic book sale price record? Roughly $1.5 million for another copy of Action Comics #1 in March of 2010.





"I've been involved in the comic book business for over 25 years," Zurzolo told CNN. Superman remains an "icon that represents the best of this great country."





Cage's copy of the all-American classic comes with a colorful back story. It was reported stolen in January 2000, according to the Reporter, and remained lost for more than 11 years before showing up last April in an abandoned storage locker in California's San Fernando Valley.





Comic book collectors' holy grails





If you're hoping to get your own original 1938 copy, don't hold your breath. There are only about 100 copies still believed to be in existence, according to ComicConnect.





About 100 copies of Detective Comics #27 -- better known as the first appearance of Batman -- are also still believed to be out there. The Caped Crusader made his inaugural appearance in 1939.





An original Depression-era Batman won't come cheap, however. One copy sold last year for a little over $1 million.





The good news: if you're willing to settle for a more modern incarnation of the two crime fighters, you can probably afford it. "All New Batman: The Brave and the Bold" went on sale last month for $2.99.

***

(Sunset) -- An insider shares five top experiences in Sausalito, California, you won't read about in guidebooks.



Waldo Point Harbor is one of several scenic houseboat communities in Sausalito.



Off-the-path pier



You'll want a bike or a car to get to the Fort Baker fishing pier, which sits in the shadow of the Golden Gate Bridge and has unbeatable views across the bay to San Francisco. In summer, foghorns bellow loudly from here, but in December, fishermen and pelicans are more the order of the day.



A short walk north is eco-luxe Cavallo Point: The Lodge at the Golden Gate, which was big news in town when it debuted last summer. Even if you don't stay there, stop for a glass of wine in the clubby Farley Bar.



Locals' beach



Schoonmaker Beach is a bit farther from downtown, but still doable on foot and well worth finding. My son and I have whiled away many sunny mornings here, wading in the bay and watching sailboats.



The beach bumped up to our number one favorite in April with the addition of Le Garage, a French bistro steps from the sand and, hands down, the best new restaurant in town in ages. Grab a seat next to the roll-up glass garage door and definitely try the mussels Provençale. Sunset.com: 20 perfect summer trips



Undiscovered hike



You can't spend time in Sausalito and not make it to the Marin Headlands, just a mile outside town -- it'd be like going to Yosemite and missing Half Dome. So join the parade of cars winding up twisty Conzelman Road to Hawk Hill, but don't stop there.



Drive a bit farther to the beach parking area on your left, and you'll see signs for the trail to Black Sands Beach. The 0.75-mile hike down (slightly rickety) steps is sure to put the rosy in your cheeks, and the narrow strip of beach is windy, wild and stunning.



My secret? Instead of starting from the beach parking area, I like to drive past the Marin Headlands Visitor Center, turn right on Bunker Road, and start at the historic rifle range. It's worth the extra 1.5 miles over the ridge for the views you'll have all to yourself. Sunset.com: Our amazing national parks



Best shopping street



There's more to Sausalito shopping than the chintzy souvenir shops that line the main drag downtown. Just a 10-minute walk north of the waterfront lies leafy Caledonia Street, home to several locally owned galleries and framing shops, plus Flying Oliver Books, where we always find deals on used cookbooks.



I love to look at the black-and-white photography at Sausalito Picture Framing and pick up letterpress holiday cards and fashionable ribbons and papers for present wrapping at Pinestreet Papery.



And one block to the east on Bridgeway is McCloud Design, with streamlined modern container gardens, handcrafted fountains and outdoor furniture. Sunset.com: Outdoor dining rooms



Hidden harbor



Sausalito wouldn't be Sausalito without its houseboats. Among several houseboat communities in town, Waldo Point Harbor stands out for its hilarious, only-in-Sausalito message board at the harbor entrance.



On my all-star list: "Lost: Plywood dinghy, battered blue" (alongside a charmingly rakish drawing of the poor lost boat) and "Want to exchange your houseboat with mine in Paris for a week?" Impressive feats of container gardening -- succulents, roses, lemon trees -- line the boardwalk, and residents are often out watering plants in the early morning.



Truth be told, I did once catch a minibus of Japanese tourists being let off in this area, but that was in the height of summer, and they seemed to walk right past Issaquah Dock, our favorite spot.



Enter to win a monthly Room Makeover Giveaway from MyHomeIdeas.com

***

(Budget Travel) -- Prohibition-style bars and speakeasies have been popping up all over, but these lounges go beyond the gimmicks in their near obsessive devotion to the art of old-time cocktails and decor.



The perpetually packed Beehive in Boston is known for its Beehive julep and champagne cocktails.



The Edison, Los Angeles, California



The 1920s scene at legendary watering holes like the Cocoanut Grove and Ciro's of Hollywood inspired this cavernous lounge, where current industry players mingle in their best vintage cocktail dresses and blazers. The Edison is in the basement of a former power plant; leather furniture surrounds preserved industrial elements like furnaces and power generators. Silent movies play on brick walls, and a circus troupe performs weekly. On Soup Kitchen Fridays, drinks mixed from house-made Bath Tub Gin are 35 cents from 5 p.m. to 7 p.m. and come with free grilled cheese sandwiches and tomato soup. edisondowntown.com.



The Violet Hour, Chicago, Illinois



Luxurious floor-to-ceiling velvet curtains create intimate spaces inside the Violet Hour, discreetly hidden behind an unmarked, wood-paneled door. Circles of high-backed leather chairs and the warm glow from crystal chandeliers and working fireplaces encourage conversation. So does a strict no-cell-phones policy. Eight kinds of ice -- shards, crushed and cubes of varying shapes -- are tailored to specific drinks, which gives an idea of how seriously this bar takes its cocktails. A favorite is the Juliet and Romeo, Beefeater gin with mint, cucumber and rosewater ($12). theviolethour.com. Budget Travel gallery: See the bars



APO Bar + Lounge, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania



Look for the pharmacy cross marking the entrance to APO, short for apothecary -- a place where ingredients like gin and bitters were put to medicinal use way before the cocktail was born. Inside the sleek, green-hued lounge, barkeeps sporting '30s-style suits serve cocktails spruced up with creative, unusual ingredients. The Booty Collins, for instance, is green-tea-infused gin with brandied cherries, passion fruit and homemade seltzer, finished with agave nectar, cayenne pepper and fresh valerian root ($10). The bar recently introduced a simpler recession-proof menu of $6 drinks that lose the exotic accents and just mix fine spirits with fresh fruit juices. apothecarylounge.com.



Flatiron Lounge, New York City



In a landmark 1900 building in Manhattan's Flatiron District, this lounge evokes jazz-age glamour with velvet bar stools, red circular booths and an entire wall covered in blue vintage mirrored-glass tiles. The anchor is the 1927 mahogany bar salvaged from The Ballroom, where Frank Sinatra partied. Painstakingly crafted drinks range from fresh-fruit-infused cocktails ($13) to daily martini flights -- three mini cocktails with a common theme, such as the Flight Back in Time, featuring a Sazerac, a Sidecar and an Aviation martini ($22). flatironlounge.com.



The Beehive, Boston, Massachusetts



Named for a Paris café des artistes that once hosted artists Marc Chagall and Amadeo Modigliani, this Moulin Rouge-esque supper club presents jazz, cabaret and burlesque performances on a shimmering stage draped with theatrical red-velvet curtains. At round stage-side tables, diners feast on stick-to-your-ribs comfort food like gravy-smothered poutine. Chandeliers hang among exposed pipes over the perpetually packed bar, known for champagne cocktails and Beehive juleps ($10.50). beehiveboston.com.



Velvet Tango Room, Cleveland, Ohio



This funky 1800s brick house was a speakeasy during the '20s, and it feels like not much has changed since then, as evidenced by the well-used jazz piano and the secret room hidden behind a two-way mirror. Bartenders measure ingredients on scales to ensure exact proportions go into cocktails ($15) made with throwback mixers like frothy egg whites, fresh-brewed bitters and homemade ginger soda. velvettangoroom.com.



Illusions Magic Bar, Baltimore, Maryland



With custom-made chandeliers above the cherry wood bar and jazz and swing played on the piano, Illusions gives the impression of being like any other roaring '20s-themed jazz club

***

(InStyle.com) -- Is anyone else besides Michelle Obama leaving the house these days? Because for the last week, you would have thought that Anne Hathaway, Gwyneth Paltrow and Halle Berry had gone into the Witness Protection Program.



First lady Michelle Obama arrives with President Obama in London, England, for the G-20 Summit.



During first lady Michelle Obama's whirlwind visit to Europe this past week, her refreshing take on American style has emerged. It is elegant, smart, appropriate and shows the first lady to be comfortable in her own skin.



Coverage surrounding the first lady's wardrobe in Europe, from cardigans to kitten heels, has been relentless, riveting, fawning and, frankly, missing the objective of her strategically packed suitcase.



No doubt about it, Michelle Obama scored big, looking terrific everywhere, delighting everyone -- probably no one more so than Mickey Drexler, CEO of J. Crew. But the post-game commentary sparked by each of her appearances has been hyperbolic when it hasn't been comical.  See photos of the first lady's outfits »



You would have thought each of the first lady's "face offs," as both American and British tabloids labeled her meetings with Queen Elizabeth II, Britain's first lady Sarah Brown, and France's Carla Bruni-Sarkozy, had been deliberately set up as counter-programming to C-SPAN's coverage of the budget negotiations in Congress.  Watch Michelle Obama wow the world »



One wire service reporter asked me if Michelle, wearing a two-toned silk dress by Isabel Toledo, should have "taken a bigger fashion risk" when meeting the 83-year-old British monarch, who was all mumsy in blush pink. It was an afternoon tea, folks, not the Embassy Ball in "My Fair Lady."



Another wanted to know if I agreed that the first lady's now-sold-out J. Crew outfit, an embellished cream cardigan and mint-green jacquard skirt, was "a little too down-market" to meet the prime minister of England's wife, completely overlooking where the two women were headed after the photo op. Or would a bias-cut silk charmeuse dress have been a wiser choice for visiting a children's cancer ward?



But the main event was going head-to-head with the former supermodel, pop-star first lady of France, Carla Bruni-Sarkozy. Except both women wound up wearing similar bow-tied coats -- Mrs. Obama's floral print number by the American designer Thakoon, and her counterpart's, a dove-gray look by the French house of Dior. Nevertheless, Tina Brown's TheDailyBeast.com went so far as to immediately declare the up-until-recently overtly scrutinized Mrs. Bruni-Sarkozy "over." The citizens of France might argue the point.



More importantly, the press has been missing the over-arching point of our new first lady's wardrobe. Despite the declaration by many of the fashion community's talking heads that she is this generation's Jacqueline Kennedy, Michelle Obama's approach is quite different.



True, Michelle's reception has been equally rapturous. But, Mrs. Kennedy's transatlantic mission nearly 50 years ago was to show the world that despite America's image of a country fueled by energy and youth, it was also one of elegance, poise and culture. In addition, whether speaking in English or French, Mrs. Kennedy purposely presented herself and her husband as children of privilege, embracing the aura of Camelot, which had cast them as American royalty.



Conversely, what's most striking about each of Mrs. Obama's appearances is not the grandiose message, diverse labels or designers' origins. Rather, it is their unmistakable, uniform accessibility and appropriateness.



Michelle Obama looks exactly like what she is: a modern American, working woman. Her outfits appear comfortable instead of buttoned up, her impression is pretty rather than formal, her silhouette based on sportswear -- the form of design that is at the heart of American fashion -- not politics. Add warmth, confidence, and openness and what the world is seeing -- besides someone who knows how to pack

***

(CNN) -- The reaction to Mackenzie Phillips' detailed account of her sexual relationship with her father, John Phillips, has been explosive, and some of the strongest statements have come from her family.



Chynna Phillips said she doesn't think anyone could make up having a consensual incestuous relationship.



But as the former actress and musician talked with Oprah Winfrey for the second time this week -- this time about the firestorm that erupted from her hour-long interview Wednesday -- she said she doesn't regret writing her memoir, "High on Arrival."



"I understand this is a difficult thing for my family," Phillips told Winfrey via satellite Friday, "but nobody's talking about this, and if I've started a national dialogue, then I'm forever grateful."



Phillips said she has gotten letters and Facebook messages from incest survivors, thanking her for coming forward.



"It's been heartening and heartbreaking at the same time," she said.



John Phillips died in 2001.



Two of his former wives, however, have vehemently denied Mackenzie Phillips' accusations.



In an statement to CNN, Michelle Phillips, an original Mamas & Papas bandmate who divorced John in 1970, called the situation "very hurtful."



"Mackenzie's drug addiction for 35 years has been the result of many unpleasant experiences," Michelle Phillips said. "Whether her relationship with her father is delusional or not, it is an unfortunate circumstance and very hurtful for our entire family."



She spoke more strongly to The Hollywood Reporter's Roger Friedman, telling him, "Mackenzie has a lot of mental illness. She's had a needle stuck up her arm for 35 years. ... She did 'Celebrity Rehab,' and now she writes a book. The whole thing is timed."



Genevieve Waite, who married John Phillips in 1972, told Winfrey in a statement that "John was a good man who had a lot of problems, [but] he was incapable, no matter how drunk or drugged he was, to have sexual relations with his own child."



The fallout from Phillips' decision to reveal her family's secrets has been heartbreaking for her sister Bijou as well.



Bijou Phillips supplied a statement to Winfrey stating that Mackenzie told her about the incestuous relationship with their father when Bijou was 13 but later denied it.



"This news was confusing and also scary, because I'd lived alone with him since I was 3," she said. "[John Phillips] was Mr. Mom, loving and encouraging; the man who raised me would never be capable of such things."



She also questioned why Mackenzie would leave her alone with their father if he'd molested the elder sister.



Still, Bijou Phillips showed signs of measured support.



"I understand Mackenzie's need to come clean, but it hurts because the man in question isn't here to defend himself," she said. "I hope she can come to terms with this and find peace."



Mackenzie Phillips told Winfrey that her family's disbelief and anger saddened her, especially since she and Bijou Phillips have been very close. Phillips recalled the way Bijou immediately came to her aid when she was arrested last year for cocaine and heroin possession.



"I love my baby sister, and I miss having contact with her," Mackenzie said.



"By the time Bijou was living with my father, I felt she was safe. I did take her out of there if I felt like she wasn't being watched properly," she said in her defense.



But she added that Michelle Phillips' statements weren't as surprising.



"When Michelle found out I was writing this book, she vowed to do everything to discredit me," Mackenzie told Winfrey. "She's having a textbook reaction, trying to sweep it under the rug. It seems so unkind and ungenerous to lash out in this way; I don't have a history of mental illness. I have a history of drug addiction."



Chynna Phillips, who also sat down with Winfrey on

***

(CNN) -- A phone hacking scandal may have cost Rupert Murdoch his biggest-selling newspaper in 2011, but the billionaire media mogul managed to end the year with a modest addition to his empire -- an account on Twitter.





Within 48 hours of debuting with tweets about family, work and politics, Murdoch had pulled in more than 45,000 followers and stirred internet debate over why the 80-year-old was now embracing a technology often used to attack him.





The tweets also raised doubts that the notorious technophobe was writing the messages himself. Twitter creator Jack Dorsey -- one of only four people being followed by Murdoch -- however insisted that the media mogul was writing "with his own voice, in his own way."





Murdoch appears to have made his Twitter debut on New Year's Eve with a couple of brief comments on books including the biography of late Apple boss Steve Jobs, which he called "interesting but unfair."





These were followed by praise for cinema releases "We Bought a Zoo," and "The Descendants," both produced by Murdoch's Fox Movies. These fueled suspicions that Murdoch's Twitter account was being used as a publicity tool to help improve his image after a damaging year.





"Could be brilliant News Corp PR operation," Murdoch biographer Michael Wolff tweeted after earlier commenting: "Might be somebody who knows Murdoch, but it's not Rupert (he doesn't use a computer unassisted nor get his own email)."





Others claimed that the voice of the tweets, as well as their faltering grammar and punctuation, were unmistakably Murdoch. "You can tell by the tweets he's doing it himself," wrote CNN's Piers Morgan, a former editor of one of Murdoch's newspapers.





A spokesperson for Murdoch's News Corp. confirmed to CNN the account is genuine.





The account could offer new insight into a businessman whose life has been under intense scrutiny this year after revelations that journalists at News of the World, one of his most profitable newspapers, illegally accessed the voicemail messages of scores of celebrities and public figures.





Twitter played a prominent role at the height of the scandal when it was used to pressure advertisers into boycotting the paper. Commentators said the loss of revenue was a key factor in Murdoch's decision to shut the paper down.





Murdoch's subsequent appearance before a British parliamentary inquiry into phone hacking also caused a sensation on Twitter, particularly after his wife, Wendi Deng, pounced on a man who tried to attack him with a foam pie.





There were echoes of Murdoch's parliamentary appearance -- which he called the "most humble day day of my life" -- in New Year pledges which he tweeted in a January 1 message to Dorsey. "My resolutions, try to maintain humility and always curiosity. And of course diet!"





But there were also signs that the media mogul was still getting to grips with social media. Reports suggested he was forced to quickly delete one post -- possibly after Deng leapt to his aid once again.





The Sydney Morning Herald -- a fierce rival of his Australian publications -- was among news outlets claiming that Murdoch was guilty of "tweeting-before-thinking" for suggesting that the British have too many holidays for a "broke country."





The message was apparently removed, but not before someone tweeting as Wendi Deng implored: "RUPERT!!! delete tweet!" A further post on the unverified Deng account later added: "EVERY1 @rupertmurdoch was only having a joke pROMSIE!!!" [sic]





Murdoch also follows an account that appears on the surface to be Google CEO Larry Page but is actually run by a man in Virginia. It's not clear whether Murdoch realizes he's not following the real Larry Page.





Among other tweets by Murdoch, who also follows Zynga CEO Mark Pincus and Silcon Valley entrepreneur and British businessman Alan Sugar, were an expression of support for Republican presidential hopeful Rick Santorum.

***

Washington (CNN) -- Valerie Jarrett does not like to talk about herself.



I know this because we've sat down on numerous occasions for interviews, going back to the early days of Barack Obama's presidential campaign. But this one was perhaps the most challenging because the focus was on her.



She is fiercely loyal to Obama, as one of his closest friends. But she also advises him as president, with the title of Senior Adviser and Assistant to the President for Intergovernmental Affairs and Public Liaison.



The ultimate insider does not spill the beans. But doing a series on the power players inside the White House would not be complete without looking at Jarrett's role.



She has called her relationship with the president a "mind meld."



"We're good friends who have known each other for a long time," Jarrett says. "Eighteen years, you get a pretty good sense of him."



Her first sense of him came in 1991 when Obama was a young law professor in Chicago, Illinois.



Jarrett was interviewing his fiancée, the future first lady, Michelle Robinson, for a job in Chicago Mayor Richard Daley's office. The protective partner, Obama, was making sure Jarrett was on the up and up.



Jarrett first explained the scene when I interviewed her in May 2008.



"They sat next to each other and when she was speaking he would just look at her with this adoring look,"Jarrett said with a laugh, "but he was really tough on me in the nicest possible way."



The three became fast friends. Now Obama says he runs every important decision by Jarrett, trusts her completely and considers her family.



When I bring this to her attention she accepts her role humbly.



"Well, I hope he would trust me the way any close friend does. He knows I have his best interest at heart and that I understand, because I'm part of the administration, the myriad of challenges he faces," Jarrett says. "So I hope he views me a sounding board, someone who's going to be honest, direct and candid with him at all times."



She laughs when I suggest perhaps she is his consigliere.



"You can tell I'm uncomfortable with this," she says when I try to get her to focus more on her role.



She does not like to be singled out from the rest of the White House team.



Instead she paints a picture of what it would be like if I were in an Oval Office meeting with the president.



"When everyone's done talking, if there've been a couple of people who've been quiet, he'll say, 'Well, Suzanne, what do you think of this issue?' " Jarrett says.



She describes his style in running the meetings as "accommodating."



"He reads people very well. He's extraordinarily perceptive. He can tell from the body language if someone is uncomfortable with something," Jarrett says.



But she can also read the president's body language when he's heard enough talk.



"He's not moody, but you can tell when he's ready for a conversation to end," Jarrett says. "He enjoys making sure there is robust debate, but when he's finished with debate he's finished. He's ready to move on. So I can detect when enough is enough, let's bring in the next issue."



Jarrett says newcomers to the administration have pulled her aside to get her take on how things were going.



"Particularly early on, people who didn't know the president as well as I did would come to me after a meeting and say 'What did he really mean? I know he said this, but what is he really thinking?' and I took such delight in being able to say he meant exactly what he said. That's who he is."



It's the intangibles that Jarrett sometimes brings to the table.



"People are always looking for the hidden intent, the body language,

***

(CNN) -- Rick Warren -- the man at the center of an inaugural firestorm -- has built his career on an uncontroversial reputation.

President-elect Barack Obama has chosen Rick Warren to deliver the invocation at his inauguration.

The irony of the furor over Warren's selection to deliver the invocation at Barack Obama's inaugural ceremony is that the California minister first drew notice for his determination to expand the evangelical agenda beyond hot-button social issues like opposition to same-sex marriage.

Warren has been described as the next Billy Graham, an evangelical leader with a moderate reputation and mass-market appeal -- although instead of massive open-air rallies and an out-sized television presence, Warren focused on forging partnerships with unlikely allies working to protect the environment and fight AIDS.

As a pioneer of the mega-church movement, Warren looked to translate traditional evangelical messages for a wider audience. He penned "The Purpose-Driven Life," a spiritually based self-help guide that brought mainstream best-seller status to a muted religious message.

In his model, everyday concerns were a top priority: Attendees at his Saddleback Church -- now more than 20,000 strong -- could expect free classes on home finance, or assistance with child care needs.

Warren urged ministers to adopt a Madison Avenue approach: to super-charge the growth of congregations by fine-tuning their pitch for the "un-churched." He released bullet-point sermons with crossover potential, along with material to help churchgoers follow along. The church atmosphere he called for was a relaxed one, with dressed-down ministers leading services in nontraditional venues, featuring easy-listening music chosen with younger listeners in mind.

But even as Warren's nonpartisan appeal led to increasingly high-profile roles -- like host of this summer's presidential faith forum, featuring Sens. Obama and John McCain -- controversy grew over his conservative stands on social issues.

The headlines may be new, but Warren's positions aren't. During the last election cycle, he sent thousands of pastors an e-mail laying out what he viewed as non-negotiable issues for evangelicals deciding on their pick at the polls, from stem-cell research and abortion to same-sex marriage.

On Wednesday, after Obama announced Warren as his choice, prominent liberal groups and gay rights proponents criticized the selection. Some said the choice signaled that Obama is not interested in advancing gay rights or protecting abortion rights.  iReport.com: What do you think of the choice?

Joe Solmonese, president of the Human Rights Campaign, said Wednesday that he feels a "deep level of disrespect" because of the choice of Warren and is calling on Obama to reconsider the move. Read more about the criticism of Obama's choice

On Thursday, Obama defended his decision to tap Warren. "And I would note that a couple of years ago, I was invited to Rick Warren's church to speak, despite his awareness that I held views that were entirely contrary to his when it came to gay and lesbian rights, when it came to issues like abortion. ...

"And that dialogue, I think, is part of what my campaign's been all about: That we're not going to agree on every single issue, but what we have to do is to be able to create an atmosphere ... where we can disagree without being disagreeable and then focus on those things that we hold in common as Americans."

But progressive commentators said Warren is a symbol of division.

"When Obama advances a progressive agenda on social issues, as he's certain to do, Warren will continue to speak out on the other side," wrote the Washington Monthly's Steve Benen.

"Only now, he'll do so with the added authority that comes with being the president's hand-chosen pastor for the inauguration's invocation. Warren's status will soar, and his criticism of Obama's policies -- or Democrats' in general -- will resonate that much louder."

Warren himself is working to contain the fallout from his support for California's Proposition 8. In an interview

***

(CNN) -- Sidney Frank made millions marketing Jagermeister and other alcohol brands. Three years after his death, he's a big hit with students at the Ivy League college he briefly attended.



Sidney Frank, shown accepting an honorary degree in 2005, gave $100 million to Brown University.



He's a big hit not because of what he sold but because he's given dozens of them what he couldn't afford as a young man: an education at Rhode Island's Brown University.



On Sunday, 49 students from low-income families became the first four-year Sidney E. Frank Scholars to graduate from Brown, owing virtually nothing except gratitude to the late liquor magnate.



"The world of difference that he made for each and every one of us is unbelievable, incredible," one of the Frank Scholars, 22-year-old Shane Reil, said Sunday.



Frank -- who left Brown after one year in the late 1930s because he couldn't afford to stay -- gave the school a $100 million endowment in 2004. He stipulated that the fund's income go exclusively to covering all tuition and expenses for the neediest of Brown's admitted applicants.  Hear graduates say how their dreams came true »



For this year's graduates, tuition and expenses came to a four-year total of about $180,000 each. The median annual income of the recipients' families was $18,984.



The gift was the largest single one ever given to Brown and one of the largest ever given for undergraduate scholarships in the United States, according to the school.



Reil, a history major who is preparing to co-chair a student conference on U.S.-South Korean relations and aspires to work in politics or foreign service, says the scholarship was the stuff of dreams.



He was working up to 40 hours a week during high school so he could pay for clothes and even help with grocery bills. He and his mother were getting by, but the Massachusetts native thought community college or a big state school would be all he could afford.



When his academic achievements put Brown in his sights, he thought he'd have to go into too much debt to go there. But he applied anyway, and Brown invited him to campus to tell him about how much the school would award him.



"I sat in this guy's office ... and he said, '$37,000 for tuition,' " Reil recalled. "I said, "$37,000, that's going to be split over four years, so essentially I'm getting a $10,000 scholarship per year.'



"He said, 'No, no, that's $37,000 for this year, and it will be covered [the rest of the years] too.' "



Reil said he cried in the office and ran to his car, where his mother was waiting.



"She was crying so much, we had to sit in the car for so long because she couldn't drive. It was a great moment," Reil said.



"Having the opportunity to go to a really good school ... I think it took my world from a very small area and physical space and just expanded it in multitudes," he said.



Though other universities give full rides, Frank's gift was a coup for Brown. Like many other schools, Brown used to factor a family's ability to pay when deciding whether to accept students.



Brown no longer does that, and Frank's gift was "integral" in bringing the change, said Jim Miller, Brown's dean of admissions.



The school intends to give 30 to 35 Frank scholarships per year. Most recipients are the first in their families to go to college, Miller said.



That was the case for Eliana Reyes Castro, who was born in the Dominican Republic and came to the United States when she was 6. She said she attended a Massachusetts high school that had regained its accreditation only months before she graduated.



Like Reil, she was one of the Frank Scholars who graduated Sunday. She received a degree in education with a concentration in human development

***

(WIRED)  -- Scofflaws could hack the smart cards that access electronic parking meters in large cities around the United States, researchers are finding.



"Cities all over the nation and all over the world are deploying these smartcard meters," researcher says.



The smart cards pay for parking spots, and their programming could be easily changed to obtain unlimited free parking.



It took researcher Joe Grand only three days to design an attack on the smart cards. The researchers examined the meters used in San Francisco, California, but the same and similar electronic meters are being installed in cities around the world.



"It wasn't technically complicated and the fact that I can do it in three days means that other people are probably already doing it and probably taking advantage of it," said Joe Grand, a designer and hardware hacker and one of the hosts of the Discovery Channel's "Prototype This" show. "It seems like the system wasn't analyzed at all."



Grand and fellow researcher Jake Appelbaum presented their findings Thursday afternoon at the Black Hat security conference in Las Vegas, Nevada. The researchers did not contact the San Francisco Municipal Transportation Agency or the meter maker prior to their talk, and asked reporters not to contact those organizations ahead of their presentation, for fear of being gagged by a court order.



At last year's DefCon hacker conference, MIT students were barred from talking about similar vulnerabilities in smartcards used by the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority after the MBTA obtained a restraining order. They spoke with Threat Level about their findings prior to the presentation.



"We're not picking on San Francisco," Grand said. "We're not even claiming to get free parking. We're trying to educate people about ... how they can take our research and apply it to their own cities if they are trying to deploy their own systems or make them more secure.... Cities all over the nation and all over the world are deploying these smartcard meters [and] there's a number of previously known problems with various parking meters in other cities."



San Francisco launched a $35-million pilot project in 2003 to deploy smart meters around the city in an effort to thwart thieves, including parking control officers who were skimming money from the meters.



The city estimated it was losing more than $3 million annually to theft. In response, it installed 23,000 meters made by a Canadian firm named J.J. MacKay, which also has meters in Florida, Massachusetts, New York, Canada, Hong Kong and other locales.



The machines are hybrids that allow drivers to insert either coins, or a pre-paid GemPlus smart card, which can be purchased in values of $20 or $50. The machines also have an audit log to help catch insiders who might skim proceeds.



To record the communication between the card and the meter, Grand purchased a smartcard shim -- an electrical connector that duplicates a smartcard's contact points -- and used an oscilloscope to record the electrical signals as the card and meter communicated.



He discovered the cards aren't digitally signed, and the only authentication between the meter and card is a password sent from the former to the latter. The card doesn't have to know the password, however, it just has to respond that the password is correct.



The cards sold in San Francisco are designed to be thrown out when the customer has exhausted them. But the researchers found that the meters perform no upper-bounds check, so hackers could easily boost the transaction limit on a card beyond what could legitimately purchased. They could also program a card to simply never deduct from the transaction count.



"We're residents of San Francisco and our taxes are going towards a broken system that they could potentially be losing money on and we pay the consequences of that," Grand said.



Subscribe to WIRED magazine for less than $1 an issue and get a FREE GIFT! Click here!

***

ROME, Italy (CNN) -- An Italian woman who had been in a coma for 17 years and whose right-to-die case was being debated in the Italian Parliament has died days after doctors began removing her feeding tube.



A portrait of Eluana Englaro. She was in a vegetative state for nearly 17 years.



The speaker of the Italian Senate announced the death of Eluana Englaro, 37, Monday night, then called for a moment of silence in the chamber.



Even as the silence ended, one legislator declared, "She has not died -- she was killed," prompting other right-to-die opponents to join in with calls of "Murderers!"



Englaro had been in a vegetative state for 17 years, after suffering what doctors determined to be irreversible brain damage in a 1992 car crash, when she was 20 years old.



For years, Englaro's father, Beppino, fought to have her feeding tube removed, saying it would be a dignified end to his daughter's life. He said that before the crash his daughter visited a friend who was in a coma and told him she didn't want the same thing to happen to her if she were ever in the same state.



Confirming his daughter's death Monday, Beppino Englaro told Italian media: "Yes, she is no longer with us, but I don't want to say anything further. I need to be left alone."



But the intense debate swirling around her case will go on.  Watch as Italians protest against her death »



When Englaro's death was announced, the Senate was debating a proposed law that would require doctors to provide nourishment to all incapacitated patients, and that would have forced doctors to resume feeding Englaro through tubes.



Debate on that proposal as it would affect other patients is likely to continue in Parliament.



Last year, a court ruled that the feeding tube could be removed, and Italy's high court upheld the ruling on appeal.



Englaro was transferred last week to a private clinic, where the removal process began Friday -- even as the Senate took up a debate aimed at reversing that process.



A decree aimed at preventing doctors from completely removing the feeding tube was passed unanimously Friday by Italy's Council of Ministers, with Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi leading the effort.



"I will do everything I can to save her life," Berlusconi said. "We have to do everything possible to stop a person from dying."



But President Giorgio Napolitano refused to sign the decree. According to a statement from Napolitano's office, "An emergency decree cannot be in contrast with a court decision."



The case has been a controversial one in Italy, a heavily Catholic country where the Vatican has great influence. Earlier this month, Pope Benedict XVI told pilgrims that "euthanasia is a false solution to suffering."



Monsignor Elio Sgreccia, president emeritus of the Pontifical Academy for Life, said Friday that Englaro had the right to be kept alive.



"It is the duty of the doctors, of society, and of the political institutions to administer her essential foods to keep her alive. No one has the right to take her life away from her," he said.



Euthanasia is illegal in Italy, but patients have the right to refuse treatment. It is on that basis that Englaro argued his daughter should be allowed to die, because some time before her accident she had expressed the wish not to be kept alive while in a coma -- indirectly refusing treatment, he said.

***

Editor's note: Watch "The Situation Room" at 5 p.m. ET Tuesday for more from CNN's Brooke Baldwin about the dog rescue.



Authorities raided a residence in Laurens County, Georgia, and found dogs scarred and malnourished.



LAURENS COUNTY, Georgia (CNN) -- It was 8 a.m. October 15. Our CNN crew had been up for a while, waiting. We still didn't have an address.



My producer, Susan Brown, and I had several questions: What would the living conditions of these dogs be like? What about the man whose door the Sheriff's Office was about to knock on? He was unaware of the raid that was about to occur in his backyard. Despite all of our planning, unknown variables were at play.



First stop was the Sheriff's Office in Laurens County, which is in central Georgia. Starting with information from a tip line, authorities had uncovered clues that led them to believe they needed to intervene and investigate.



The plan was this: The sheriff would drive to the property to execute the search warrant for particular objects generally associated with dogfighting, and for the dogs themselves.  Watch the dog raid unfold »



Expressing concerns about the conditions at this private residence where dogs were suspected of being bred for dogfighting, Laurens County Sheriff Bill Harrell said, "If anything is going wrong, we want to get it stopped."



Private investigators with Norred and Associates Inc. will work alongside Harrell and his deputies, leading tactical teams. The teams were made up of veteran investigators donating their time, effort and expertise, along with volunteers of the Dublin-Laurens County Humane Society, who would collect and care for the dogs.



All of the team members had experience with animals, particularly pit bulls. Based on information from the tip line, they were starting the day prepared to find as many as 60 dogs chained up in the woods behind one man's house in East Dublin, Georgia. These men and women waited, braced for battle -- only the war they were waging was on animal cruelty.



"I want to thank everybody for coming. It's for a good thing. It's for the dogs." Chuck Simmons, a private investigator and former police chief, was mapping out the search area on a dry erase board.



He was warning his crew about snakes, water from recent rains and nonsocialized dogs.



After loading up crates on several trucks, everyone headed out. With the address of the raid location in hand, our crew joined a convoy of half a dozen cars down several rural roads to our final location. We arrived at a one-story ranch house with several acres of grounds.



The sheriff beat us there. He and his deputies were already roping off this man's front yard with yellow crime tape. Rollin Monta "Monty" Loyd, the property owner, appeared furious. As the teams moved into the woods behind his home, our crew was stuck in front and across the street.



We could not go on the property to get the shots we wanted, because that would be trespassing. We couldn't see the dogs, but we could hear them. The private investigators, who were part of the raid, videotaped the operation.



Half an hour into the raid, reports began to come in. The good news: The dogs were still there; news of the raid hadn't leaked. The bad news: There weren't 60 dogs, as anticipated; there were more. The final count was 97.



Most of the dogs were pit bull terriers; many were puppies. They were found cowering in cages or chained. Some older dogs were scarred -- possible signs of fighting, investigators said. Others were malnourished, simply skin and bone.



Their conditions were atrocious, according to Terry Wolf of the Dublin-Laurens County Humane Society.



"Their chains are too short to reach shelter, those who have shelter. The water that they have seems to be recent rainwater with algae in it, and I've seen no food bowls. Most of them are very timid," Wolf

***

(CNN) -- This week's shooting death and subsequent dragging of a black man in South Carolina are being investigated as a possible hate crime, the Newberry County Sheriff's Office said Friday.





Sheriff Lee Foster said the body of 30-year-old Anthony Hill was found early Wednesday on a road near an elementary school in the town of Pomaria, 35 miles west-northwest of Columbia.





Hill had a single gun shot wound to the head, his body was nearly nude and a rope was around his neck and upper torso, Foster said.





Foster said Hill's body -- which carried no identification -- was found around 4:30 a.m. Wednesday by a motorist, who called 911. Officers followed a trail of blood and human tissue nine miles to the trailer park where Hill's co-worker Gregory Collins lives, surrounded his trailer for nearly four hours and finally resorted to tear gas, Foster said. "He came outside and gave himself up," Foster added.





Collins, 19, who is white, is charged with murder. Both men worked in Newberry at the Louis Rich turkey processing plant, said Foster.





"They did know each other; they worked in the same industry, on the same shift but different divisions," said Foster. "Neighbors told us the two spent most of the day together Tuesday. They were seen on a porch drinking together."





Hill, an Army veteran who lived in the neighboring county of Fairfield, was estranged from his wife and had two children, Foster said.





Investigators have not concluded that the killing is a hate crime, but are looking at it as one, according to Foster. "We called the FBI out of an abundance of caution," he said. "We have no motive whatsoever as to why these two gentlemen would have been together, then one shoots the other in the head and drags him down the road. It's a horrific act of violence."





Collins, who is being held in the Newberry County Detention Center, has been assigned a public defender.





Funeral arrangements are pending.

***

(CNN) -- Injuries continue to strike down the planet's top football players ahead of this month's World Cup in South Africa, with Dutch star Arjen Robben's participation in doubt and key Nigeria midfielder Jon Obi Mikel forced to withdraw.





Robben, whose inspired form this season took German club Bayern Munich to the final of the Champions League, has not joined his teammates in flying to Africa after suffering a hamstring injury on Saturday.





He scored two goals after coming on as a second-half substitute in a 6-1 friendly romp over Hungary in Amsterdam, but needs a scan on Sunday after hurting himself trying to execute a fancy backheel pass.





"I would rather lose this match and have Arjen stay fit," Netherlands coach Bert van Marwijk said on Dutch Web site www.vi.nl. "He felt a sharp pain. That does not bode well. But I do not lose hope."





Robben had returned to action after missing Tuesday's 4-1 international friendly rout over Ghana in Rotterdam on Tuesday.





Earlier on Saturday, Nigeria officials reported that Mikel has decided he has not recovered sufficiently from knee surgery, meaning he joins teammates Michael Ballack (Germany), Michael Essien (Ghana) and Jose Bosingwa (Portugal) from his English club Chelsea in missing the tournament.





The 23-year-old Mikel missed the end of Chelsea's season, which culminated in a league and cup double.





"We have dropped Mikel from the World Cup squad after he told the team he did not want to put his career at risk as his knee injury has yet to fully heal after a recent surgery," Nigeria team official Emmanuel Attah said in quotes carried by the Chelsea Web site.





Another Chelsea player, Ivory Coast striker Didier Drogba, may also be sidelined for the month-long event after suffering an elbow injury against Japan on Friday.





He had a "successful" operation in Switzerland on Saturday, according to Ivory Coast officials, but they could not yet say if he would be fit to take part.





Mikel followed England captain Rio Ferdinand in being denied a chance to play on soccer's biggest stage, with the defender suffering a knee injury on Friday.





He has been replaced in the 23-man squad by Tottenham defender Michael Dawson, with Liverpool midfielder Steven Gerrard taking over as skipper and Chelsea's Frank Lampard named as his deputy by coach Fabio Capello.





World champions Italy also have an injury problem, with key midfielder Andrea Pirlo suffering a calf injury against Mexico on Thursday.





The 31-year-old has been ruled out of Saturday night's final friendly against Switzerland, and is battling to be fit for the Azzurri's Group F opener game against Paraguay on June 14.





Marcello Lippi's team came from behind to draw 1-1, with striker Fabio Quagliarella's 15th-minute goal canceling out Gokhan Inler's opener.





Slovakia defender Martin Skrtel also suffered an injury blow on Saturday when he had to go off in the 16th minute of the 3-0 friendly win over Costa Rica after damaging his ankle.





The center-back, who plays for English club Liverpool, had previously played only once since breaking a bone in his foot in February. He is expected to be fit for the World Cup after resting his injury.





In Saturday's other friendlies, the United States beat fellow qualifiers Australia 3-1 with two goals from Edson Buddle and another from fellow forward Herculez Gomez, who came on as a substitute.





The 29-year-old Buddle, starting in place of the injured Jozi Altidore, netted his first goals for his country as he continued the form that has him at the top of the Major League Soccer goalscoring charts this season.





Midfielder Tim Cahill leveled for Australia in the 19th minute.





Hosts South Africa notched another morale-boosting win by beating fellow qualifiers Denmark 1-0 in Atteridgeville, as striker Katlego Mphela netted his fourth goal in three matches in the 76th minute.





Coach Carlos Alberto Parreira's team will kick off the tournament against Mexico in Johannesburg's new Soccer City stadium on Friday.





Ghana won 1-0 against Latvia in England with

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Britain's Prince William is starting a two-month attachment with the Royal Navy on Monday, part of the future king's continued experience with various branches of the military, the Ministry of Defense said Saturday.



Prince William and his father, Prince Charles, at his graduation from the Royal Air Force in April.



William, 25, will spend the first part of his attachment on a basic sea safety course training in sea survival, firefighting and ship damage repair, according to the ministry.



If William passes the course, as expected, he will join the HMS Iron Duke in the Caribbean, the department said.



The ship's function is to support overseas British territories in the event of a hurricane and to carry out counter-narcotic operations.



The prince, who will be called Sub Lieutenant Wales in the Navy, is expected to spend time aboard a frigate, a mine hunter, a submarine and helicopters during his attachment, which ends August 1, the Ministry of Defense said.



William completed a four-month attachment with the Royal Air Force this year and received his pilot's wings upon graduating in April.



He learned to fly three different aircraft during the attachment and is known as Flying Officer Wales within the RAF.



William is also a second lieutenant in the British Army, where he serves in the Blues and Royals regiment of the Household Cavalry.



The attachments are designed to provide the prince with military experience for when he becomes head of the armed forces as king.



"When he becomes king, he needs to know his armed forces -- instinctively be very familiar with them -- and so he is doing this visit to the Royal Navy," said Rear Adm. Bob Cooling, the assistant chief of naval staff.



William's father, Prince Charles, had a five-year career in the navy in the 1970s. Charles served on the guided missile destroyer HMS Norfolk and two frigates before qualifying as a helicopter pilot and joining a naval air squadron that operated from the aircraft carrier HMS Hermes.



Prince Charles spent his last nine months in the navy in 1976 in command of the coastal minehunter HMS Bronington.



William's uncle Prince Andrew served 22 years in the Royal Navy as a helicopter pilot, seeing active service during the Falklands War between Britain and Argentina in 1982.



Queen Elizabeth II's husband, Prince Philip, William's grandfather, spent more than 13 years in the Royal Navy. He saw active service throughout World War II and was in Tokyo Harbor when Japan surrendered.

***

YANGON, Myanmar (CNN) -- Myanmar opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi and an American man who swam to her lakeside home went on trial in the military dictatorship Monday behind closed doors inside a prison compound.



Soldiers guard the entrance to Insein Prison on Monday in Yangon, Myanmar.



The trial is expected to last about three months, said Nyan Win, spokesman for her National League for Democracy party.



Suu Kyi's lawyer asked the court to open up the hearings but was turned down because of security concerns, Win said.



Police put up roadblocks on the streets leading to the Insean Prison near Yangon, with a half-dozen officers at each station. Shops around the prison were closed, according to opposition exile groups.



A group of diplomats from Germany, Italy, Australia and Britain tried to pass through the barricades to attend the trial. They were stopped and turned away.



"It was a way of signaling our concern at what's happening and the need for the proceedings in the court to take place in an open and transparent fashion," Britain's ambassador to Myanmar, Mark Canning, told CNN.



About 100 supporters of Suu Kyi waited outside.



The American visitor, John Yettaw, is charged with immigration violations and trespassing into a restrictive area, charges that carry a maximum sentence of five years in prison.  Watch more on Suu Kyi's trial »



He is accused of staying overnight in Suu Kyi's lakeside home earlier this month, violating the conditions of her house arrest, according to the country's ruling military junta, which rarely grants her visitors.



The central Missouri man was appointed a lawyer selected by the U.S. embassy, Win said.



Suu Kyi, the 1991 Nobel Peace Prize laureate, and two of her maids have been detained under Section 22 of the country's legal code -- a law against subversion -- according to Nyan Win, spokesman for Suu Kyi's National League for Democracy.



Suu Kyi, 63, had been scheduled to be released from house arrest later this month after being incarcerated 13 of the past 19 years. She is now being held in a specially built area of Insein Prison, where Yettaw also is detained, a U.S. Embassy official told CNN on Friday.



The timing of Suu Kyi's detention raised suspicion among her supporters, who said the government's action was an excuse to extend her house arrest.  Watch former U.S. president Jimmy Carter discuss Aung San Suu Kyi »



"This is the cunning plan of the regime to put Daw Aung San Suu Kyi in continuous detention beyond the six years allowed by the law they used to justify the detention of her," said the U.S. Campaign for Burma, a pro-democracy group fighting for her release. "Daw" is an honorific.



The southeast Asian country was known as Burma before the military government changed it to Myanmar. Those who oppose the junta still use the old name.



Suu Kyi's lawyer, U Kyi Win, blamed her prison detention on Yettaw.



Local media said Yettaw, a 53-year-old former military serviceman from Falcon, Missouri, swam almost two miles across Inya Lake on May 3 and sneaked into Suu Kyi's home. Police maintain a round-the-clock presence outside the house. And swimming in the lake is forbidden.



U Kyi Win told CNN that Yettaw arrived at his client's house that day and that she asked him to leave immediately. U Kyi Win said Yettaw refused to leave, first saying he didn't want to swim in daylight for fear of being captured, and later blaming leg cramps. Yettaw finally left May 5.



Suu Kyi didn't tell authorities about the visit because she didn't want Yettaw or anyone else to get in trouble, Win said, nothing that several of her party members and supporters are already in jail. He added that Yettaw would likely be in the courtroom during the trial.



Little else is known about Yettaw's role in the Myanmar incident or his intentions, apart from local media reports that said Yettaw, a diabetic, told Suu Kyi's two housekeepers he was tired and hungry after

***

(CNN)  -- Over 28,000 Liverpool fans marked the 20th anniversary of the Hillsborough disaster in a special memorial service at Anfield on Wednesday.

Liverpool supporters at the Kop end paid their respects in an emotional afternoon at Anfield.

A total of 96 supporters died on April 15, 1989 before the FA Cup semifinal between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest at Sheffield Wednesday's stadium, the worst-ever tragedy in English sporting history.

To commemorate the anniversary, the city of Liverpool came to a standstill at 3.06 pm (1406 GMT) with the bells of the two cathedrals and its civic buildings ringing out in memory of those fans who lost their lives.

On Anfield's famous Kop, 96 candles were lit while commemorations took place at Hillsborough and also in Nottingham.

Members of the current Liverpool team stood somberly as hymns were played before a roll call of the dead was read out. Club legend Kenny Dalglish, who was Liverpool manager at the time of the disaster, then read a short prayer.

The mayor of Liverpool, Steve Rotherham, who was at the game 20 years ago, helped organize the emotional memorial.

"Hillsborough affected so many lives, not just on Merseyside but across the whole of the UK," he said.

"I attended the match 20 years ago and the passing years do not diminish the importance and the poignancy of this occasion."

Liverpool captain Steven Gerrard, whose 10-year-old cousin Jon-Paul Gilhooley was the youngest victim of the tragedy, spoke of his feelings this week.

"Time has gone by, but the scars will never ever be healed and the fans will never ever forget. So you can always rely on our supporters to be there for you when you need them."

The Liverpool fans died in a crush which started just before the kick-off as the gate at the Leppings Lane End was opened with terrible consequences. The match started but when the scale of the tragedy became clear, it was swiftly abandoned at 3.06 pm.

In the immediate aftermath, the British government commissioned Lord Justice Taylor to conduct an inquiry which would have a far-reaching impact on football.

Taylor was deeply critical of the police operation at Hillsborough, but his most significant recommendations were the removal of perimeter fencing and the creation of all-seater stadia.

His report also cleared Liverpool fans of blame for the tragedy after lurid tabloid headlines provoked revulsion on Merseyside.

Prime minister Gordon Brown paid reference to the controversy in an interview released on Liverpool's official television channel.

"It was wrong for people to blame, as some did, Liverpool fans on that day," he said.

"That's probably what matters most -- that people understood that the behavior of Liverpool fans in helping each other was magnificent.

"Let's never forget the fans who cruelly lost their lives on a day when we know the people of Liverpool were trying to help each other," he added.

However, the people of Liverpool are still angry and bitter at the lack of justice for those who died -- and that frustration surfaced when Andy Burnham, the   Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport took to the stand to address the crowd.

As Burnham spoke, the crowd rose as one to sing "Justice for the 96". The Kop chant boomed around the stadium and Burnham, an Everton fan, was left in no doubt about the strength of feeling over the lack of accountability from officialdom over the tragedy.

Fittingly, the ceremony was concluded with Gerry Marsden leading the fans in singing Liverpool anthem 'You'll Never Walk Alone'.

***

(CNN) -- When Barack Obama is sworn in as the 44th president of the United States, the wish list that has been building abroad may have grown longer than he or anyone else can deliver.

The world's newspapers marked Barack Obama's election win. Now, world governments want him to act.

There are the apparently eternal conflicts of the Middle East and Kashmir, between India and Pakistan, that have already reared their ugly heads almost as a warning even before Obama took office. Between them, they engulf most of the grievances and violence that shape the Islamic world and its relations with the United States.

Intense U.S. involvement will be needed to help resolve both of the conflicts. This will require imagination, creative out-of-the-box diplomacy, and the courage to see it through both from the United States and leaders on the ground. Going back even to the status-quo ante will no longer be sufficient.

The 30-year-old rupture in relations between the United States and Iran is also expected to be addressed as a key priority by the new administration. Both the president-elect and his secretary of state-designate have said they want to abandon the silent treatment and isolation of previous administrations and try engaging Iran, as a way of resolving difficult issues such as its nuclear program and its influence in Iraq and Afghanistan.  Watch Amanpour talk about world views of Obama »

The United States remains bogged down in hot wars in both of those countries. While the Obama administration plans to increase troops and nation-building in Afghanistan, it is also signaling it will not give President Hamid Karzai's government the "free ride" he is thought to have received from the Bush administration. Karzai will be expected to root out corruption and better address the needs of the Afghan people.

The new administration will also try to revive nuclear arms agreements that have been abandoned over the last eight years and try to forge a more constructive relationship with Russia, while persuading that country to meet its international obligations too.

While many allies -- and adversaries -- welcome the new U.S. administration's declaration to use diplomacy and soft power, the question remains: Will Washington's allies also pull their weight in helping set their common agenda?

Many nations and governments say they welcome America's vital global leadership, and the question at the start of the Obama administration is: Will they rise robustly to the occasion, and not just carp from the sidelines? While much is expected from Obama, much, too, will be expected from his allies.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- With thousands of Americans looking for jobs, many businesses are saying: Sorry, we're not hiring. The Federal Bureau of Investigation is sending out another message: Come right this way.

Donna Gill Lumpkin is one of more than 270,000 people to apply for about 2,950 jobs at the FBI.

After years of being outgunned in the battle for job applicants by corporations who could pay bigger salaries, hundreds of thousands of job seekers are applying for FBI positions.

The FBI announced a hiring blitz in January to fill more than 2,100 professional staff positions. The job postings run the gamut from scientists to accountants to auto mechanics. In addition, the bureau said it wants to hire 850 FBI agents.

What happened next caught many at the FBI by surprise. More than 270,000 people applied over about six weeks. The FBI said about 70,000 people seek positions in a normal year.

But this isn't a normal year. Just ask Donna Gill Lumpkin, a divorced mother of two who lives in Maryland. Gill Lumpkin lost her job selling radio ad time in November. "The competition is really stiff," she said. "There's a lot of people out of work. A lot of people looking for a job."

Gill Lumpkin has applied for a job as an FBI recruiter. If the FBI thinks she has the skills for the post, that's just one step toward a job. She'll have to undergo an FBI background check and take polygraph and drug tests.  Watch the applications pile up at the FBI »

The FBI official in charge of human resources concedes the FBI is benefiting a bit from the sour economy and getting a flood of applications this year. "In years past it was often difficult to find people with the science and technology background or chemistry background or a biology background because we were competing with the private sector," said FBI Assistant Director John Raucci.

Raucci said during the dotcom explosion, the FBI had a difficult time competing with dotcom start-up salaries. "Now, what we offer is stability, we offer a job and I think a very exciting environment in which to work," said Raucci.

Raucci said the average starting salary at the FBI is about $35,000 per year. But he adds those with extraordinary academic credentials and prior job experience start at a much higher rate.

Donna Gill Lumpkin said the stability of a job with the federal government and the good benefits such as health insurance attracted her to apply. "In this tough economic climate right now the federal government, I think, is one of the most steady and stable places anyone could be."

The stakes are high for Gill Lumpkin, who has a 12-year-old daughter and a 14-year-old son. She said her children are covered under her ex-husband's health insurance. But she needs coverage for herself. And she is not able to put any money away right now for her children's college years. "Right now the college fund is on pause," said Gill Lumpkin. "It's the survival fund. We are trying to survive."

***

(CNN) -- Unlike many of Thailand's flood-ravaged zones in the central plains, Bangkok residents have been given the rare luxury of time -- a window of at least two days to prepare for what officials warn could be the worst flooding the city has seen in decades.





Scenes vary dramatically in the city, with life carrying on as usual for many while others scramble to protect their possessions from the expected deluge that will hit as waters from the flooded central plains rush in.





Gallery: Bracing for Bangkok floods





Outside homes, businesses and schools in low-lying areas of Bangkok that the government has warned are at risk of being worst hit, people can be seen erecting flood walls out of sandbags to safeguard against the incoming waters. Others are simply moving valuables to higher ground.





For some residents, it's too late. Rising water levels on the Chao Phraya River and city canals have left many restaurants, shops and homes flooded, while public piers are covered in makeshift walkways and sandbags to keep ferry passengers dry.





"Our homes have been flooded for two weeks," says Khun Lek, 76, who lives in Bangkok's riverside Wat Tewarat community near Sanghee Bridge. "Every year it's like this. The government comes to check on things and tries to help by building elevated paths for us. But we don't need much help ... we're used to this. Not like the people in Ayutthaya. If the floods move in, all we can do is move out to the road."





At Bangkok's Boon Chuay Muay Thai gym, fighter Jaroensak Sorwapin says they've been dealing with flood waters for a month.





"We can't fight as the water is bad for the skin on our feet, while jogging is impossible in the neighborhood, so we have to travel to another part of the city. The gym is losing money too as we used to get foreign boxers coming to train, but they've stopped coming."





At city supermarkets, many Bangkokians have been stocking up on water and food over the last few days as a precaution should flooded streets block access to shops, though the city's governor has told media there's no need to panic.





"Discount stores crowded with people stockpiling dried food and water in the face of unprecedented floods threatening to rage," said Twitter user KimEkkanant.





The governor's suggestion is difficult for many to follow given the thousands of images Bangkok residents are seeing in the media of their fellow Thais suffering in nearby provinces like the former ancient capital Ayutthaya, where residents have had their livelihoods destroyed by the floods.





Yet it is these images of hardship that are prompting some Bangkokians to join forces to help those affected by the floods in other parts of the country, with many using Facebook and Twitter to organize supply drives, fundraising events and spread news on how people can help.





"In two hours time our community raised enough money for 69 boats! Only 31 until we reach our target of 100!" tweeted Bangkok's NIST International School.





As was the case with the 2010 protests and eventual government crackdown, social media is indeed playing a key role in spreading information on the latest Thailand flood news.





Many Twitter users are simply choosing to vent their frustration at the uncertainty, wondering if and when their homes will be hit. Others are sharing personal photos of flooded neighborhoods and rising water levels.





Overall though, little has changed in the city as it waits for the expected floods to hit. In many parts of Bangkok, where the floods are expected to have a minimal impact, life is continuing as normal as people go about their daily lives.





The government has dismissed calls to declare a state of emergency and issue a special holiday decree for Bangkok, so businesses and government offices remain open and public transportation is running.





Major events are also going on as planned, including Tuesday afternoon's World Cup qualifier match between Thailand and Saudi Arabia at Bangkok's Ratchamangala Stadium.





In terms of preparation, government workers have reportedly been told by Prime Minister Yingluck Shinawatra they have two days to build three major