(CNN) -- In the second such incident in three days, fighter jets escorted a diverted commercial flight on Friday after an unruly passenger caused alarm onboard.



The military sent up two F-16s in response to reports of an unruly passenger aboard AirTran Flight 39, the North American Aerospace Defense Command  said in a statement.



The passenger had become belligerent and refused to leave the restroom, airline spokesman Tad Hutcheson told CNN on Friday. The passenger appeared to be intoxicated, he said.



The flight, bound for San Francisco, California, left Atlanta, Georgia, at 9:48 a.m. ET, according to AirTran's Web site.



NORAD dispatched the fighters at 1:44 p.m. ET, escorting the aircraft to a safe emergency landing in Colorado Springs, Colorado, officials said. The passenger was detained there and FBI agents from Denver, Colorado, were called to question passengers, Hutcheson said.



The other passengers were scheduled to continue their trip at 4:30 p.m. ET, he said.



On Wednesday, NORAD escorted a Hawaii-bound plane back to its origination city of Portland, Oregon, after a passenger gave a flight attendant a note that was interpreted as being threatening, the federal complaint and supporting affidavit said Friday.



The passenger, Joseph Hedlund Johnson, 56, told the FBI he hadn't intended to scare anyone with the note, which began, "I thought I was going to die," and referenced the television show "Gilligan's Island."

***

(CNN) -- Kids dig in the sand at the beach all the time, but the fun nearly turned fatal for an 11-year-old Pennsylvania boy this week.



The 11-year-old was given CPR and revived before being taken to a local hospital.



The boy was digging a tunnel with friends on a beach in Ocean City, Maryland, on Tuesday when part of it collapsed on top of him, authorities said.



Lifeguards rushed to pull him out, but it first appeared that they were too late. The boy was not breathing, and he had no pulse, Beach Patrol Capt. Butch Arbin told CNN on Wednesday.



But rescue crews revived the boy by performing CPR, said Arbin, who was at the scene.



There was a lot of emotion on the beach when the boy's pulse came back, he said.



"He basically went from dead to life," Arbin said, adding that the boy's mother called the rescue a "miracle."



As he was being rolled into an ambulance on a stretcher, the boy -- perhaps not realizing the trauma he had just survived -- complained to his mother that he had sand in his eyes, Arbin said.



The child, whose family did not want to be identified, was initially taken to Atlantic General Hospital and later flown to the A.I. DuPont Hospital for Children in Delaware, he said.



He's recovering there and probably will be released later Wednesday, Arbin said.

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN) -- Investigators have found the knife believed to have been used in the stabbing of a University of California, Los Angeles student in a chemistry lab, authorities said Friday.



A student stabbing victim is recovering at UCLA Medical Center, authorities say.



The 20-year-old, whose identity has not been released, is being treated at the UCLA hospital for multiple stab wounds, including ones to her neck, sustained in the Thursday attack.



Police have arrested Damon Thompson, a 20-year-old UCLA senior, who is accused of stabbing the woman at the lab in Young Hall. He is being held on $1 million bail.



The knife was found at the scene of the attack on Thursday, Detective Mike Pelletier told CNN, though he did not disclose details about the weapon.



A statement Friday from the victim's family said, "She is showing signs of improvement, and her surgeons expect a good result as she continues to heal."



Last month, Connecticut authorities found the body of a 24-year-old pharmacology graduate student inside a wall of a lab building at Yale University. She had been strangled.



Raymond Clark III, 24, a lab technician at Yale, is charged with murder in Annie Le's death.



CNN's Monica Trevino and Sonya Hamasaki contributed to this report.

***

(PEOPLE.com) -- Liv Tyler highly approves of her rock-star father Steven's choices -- both in love and career.





Asked about the "American Idol" judge's recent engagement to Clear Channel executive Erin Brady, Liv tells PEOPLE that she's an enthusiastic supporter of it, explaining that the two have been together "for a long, long time" and adding, "I like her very much."





Speaking to PEOPLE at the Sundance Film Festival, where she's promoting her new movie "Robot and Frank," the actress, 34, also revealed that she's finally following in her father's footsteps -- into the music business.





"I got to record a cover of INXS's 'I Need You Tonight' for a Givenchy commercial," says the model, who has a longstanding beauty contract with the European cosmetics company. "It was fun and terrifying and wonderful," she says of recording the song, which is due out soon.





It's a logical step for a woman whose roots are in music.





"I always thought when I was a little girl that I'd be a singer," she says. "My mom [Bebe Buell] was always in bands. My dad. And my stepfather, Todd Rundgren, is an incredible musician."





As for her dad's dicey performance of The Star-Spangled Banner on Sunday? Liv hadn't seen it yet. "Somebody told me my dad just sang the national anthem," she said. "I've got to go Google it."





Or, you know, maybe not.





See the full article at PEOPLE.com.





© 2011 People and Time Inc. All rights reserved.

***

LONDON, England (CNN)  -- Four British Coastguard helicopters of the same model as the one that crashed off Canada last week have been grounded in Scotland to replace a gearbox mounting part, and all those models worldwide are expected to be grounded as well.



Sikorsky's Web site says the S-92 "is the most advanced aircraft"  in its civil product line.



This move comes after the Transportation Safety Board of Canada indicated on Friday that the components must be replaced on Sikorsky-92 A helicopters across the globe.



The Canadian agency said the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration will issue an emergency airworthiness directive, effectively grounding all Sikorsky S-92 A helicopters worldwide until the parts are replaced.



On March 12, 17 people died when a Sikorsky S-92 A operated by Cougar Helicopters crashed or ditched in the Atlantic Ocean off the coast of Newfoundland. One person survived.



Canada's transportation board on Friday said investigators found a broken main gearbox component that had been addressed in a January alert from Sikorsky.



Sikorsky's alert, on January 28, said the "main gearbox filter bowl assembly mounting titanium studs should be replaced with steel mounting studs." This "one-time modification" was to be done within 1,250 flight hours or within a year of the alert's issue date.



According to Britain's Maritime and Coastguard Agency, Sikorsky on Friday notified helicopter contractor CHC that aircraft operating out of Stornoway and Shetland in Scotland need the "urgent modification."



The British agency said that when it is clear how long the helicopters will be grounded or need to undergo engineering work, the agency "will take a decision on implementing a contingency plan for longer term air coverage. The aircraft on the south coast are unaffected."

***

BEIRUT, Lebanon (CNN)  -- U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton arrived in Lebanon on Sunday to pledge U.S. support for the country and its push for free elections.



Lebanon President Michel Sleiman greets U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton on Sunday.



"The people of Lebanon must be able to choose their own representatives in open and fair elections, without the specter of violence or intimidation, and free of outside interference," Clinton said during an unannounced visit to Beirut.



It was Clinton's first time visiting the country since taking office.



Lebanon is preparing for legislative elections in June that analysts say could bring the militant group, Hezbollah, to power.



The Obama administration backs the unity government of Sleiman, while Syria is allied with Hezbollah.



"Both of us are committed to supporting President (Michel) Sleiman's efforts to build a peaceful, prosperous, sovereign and democratic Lebanon."



Clinton is expected to meet with Sleiman and lay a wreath at the tomb of former Lebanon Prime Minister Rafik Hariri, who was killed in a bomb attack in 2005.



Many Lebanese, as well as the United States, accused Syria of orchestrating the assassination of Hariri, an outspoken opponent of Syria. Damascus denied responsibility.



But massive popular protests after Hariri's death led to the pullout of thousands of troops that Syria maintained in Lebanon from the 1970s.



A senior state department official said Clinton's visit is intended to reassure Lebanon that the United States will not forgo its support of the country as it opens dialogues with Syria and Iran.



"Beyond the election, we will continue to support the voices of moderation in Lebanon, and the responsible institutions of the Lebanese state they are working hard to build," Clinton said.



CNN's Jill Dougherty contributed to this report.

***

(PEOPLE.com) -- Giuliana Rancic said Monday that she has breast cancer, having discovered a tumor during a mammogram while undergoing another round of in-vitro fertilization in an effort to get pregnant.





The E! News and Style Network host, 36, made the emotional announcement on NBC's "Today" show. She will undergo surgery this week and then have six weeks of radiation therapy.





The cancer has been detected early, and the prognosis is good, she said.





Rancic was going to wait until 40 to have a mammogram, but her IVF doctor suggested she have one now. She says she will still push to have a baby, following one IVF attempt that ended in a miscarriage and a second that didn't work.





"I still want this baby ... because this baby has saved my life," she said. "I truly feel God was looking out after me ... If I had gotten pregnant later down the line, I could have been a lot sicker."





She also says her husband, Bill Rancic, has been "unbelievable. The best thing about Bill is, he lets me cry when I want to cry."





Coincidentally, Rancic recently filmed some on-the-street interviews to bust breast-cancer myths for the non-profit Bright Pink as part of National Breast Cancer Awareness Month, which marks its 25th anniversary this year.





See the full article at PEOPLE.com.





© 2011 People and Time Inc. All rights reserved.

***

(CNN) -- NBA players and owners did not reach a deal early Thursday on the bitter labor struggle that has postponed the basketball season, but the two sides agreed to meet again later in the day to continue with the negotiations.





NBA commissioner David Stern had said that players had until 5 p.m. Wednesday to accept the terms of a labor offer that would give players between 49% and 51% of basketball revenues. If it didn't accept the deal, the NBA would offer another proposal that would offer players 47% of basketball revenues.





Stern said he had frozen that deadline to allow negotiations to continue.





"Every day that we lose another game it causes both sides to recognize the damage," Stern told reporters.





Both sides met for about 12 hours Wednesday and early Thursday morning.





"We spent a lot of time covering all of the issues that we still have remaining, but we can't say there was significant progress made today," Fisher said.





The NBA season has been canceled through at least November 30, and the two sides are hoping they can reach a resolution before more games are called off.





Stern has said the 2010-2011 season was not profitable for most of the league's 30 owners, who want cost-cutting help from players. The league lost as much as $300 million last season, according to Stern.





One of the battles has focused on the owners' rejection of calls by the players' union for an average $7 million player salary in the sixth year of a new labor deal. The current average salary is about $5 million. Other big issues include a fight over a move by owners to gain the bigger share of revenues and whether the NBA will strengthen its salary cap.





The league's owners began a lockout of players in early July.

***

(CNN) -- A Dutch tourist says she recently spotted missing 4-year-old Madeleine McCann at a French restaurant near Montpellier, McCann family spokesman Clarence Mitchell said Wednesday.



A handout photo, released September 16, 2007, of missing child Madeleine McCann.



The tourist said she recognized Madeleine from the many media reports about the child's May 3 disappearance and may have even seen the well-publicized defect in the little girl's eye, Mitchell said.



"She and a friend saw a child that they immediately took to be Madeleine," said Mitchell. "They actually called out her name.



"A man who was with the child scooped the child up and took her out of the cafe before the girls could take a photograph with their mobile phones," he said.



Mitchell said there is a surveillance tape of the girl in the L'Arche restaurant and Madeleine's parents are hoping to be able to use it to determine if it is their missing daughter.  Mitchell explains how the sighting came about »



But The Associated Press, quoting an unnamed police official, is reporting that investigators have determined it was not the missing child.



Police watched the closed-circuit video footage, and despite the child looking like Madeleine, it was not her, said the official, who did not want his name published because he is not authorized to speak to media about the case.



Madeleine disappeared May 3, days before her fourth birthday. Her parents, who were vacationing with her in Portugal, have said she disappeared from their room at a resort while they dined in a nearby restaurant.



Despite a global search and the attention of celebrities like Virgin Chairman Richard Branson, author J.K. Rowling and soccer star David Beckham, there have been no major breaks in the case.



Portuguese investigators in September named the McCanns official suspects in their daughter's disappearance. The McCanns deny involvement, saying they believe Madeleine may have been abducted by pedophiles and taken to North Africa.



A few months ago, there was a reported sighting of Madeleine in Belgium, but nothing came of that report.



Last year, excitement grew when a video surfaced of a Moroccan woman carrying a child on her back who looked very similar to Madeleine.



Authorities determined that it was the woman's child. E-mail to a friend

***

PARIS, France (CNN) -- Debris from Air France 447, which crashed en route from Brazil to France last month, killing 228 people, has arrived in France, the French air accident investigation agency BEA said Wednesday.



Searchers have discovered hundreds of pieces of wreckage from Air France Flight 447.



"The debris ... will be sent to Toulouse where they will be examined at the Center of Aeronautics Tests of Toulouse (a branch of the Defense Ministry) under the control of the police and the BEA investigators," said the French air accident investigation agency BEA.



The wreckage was transported to France from Brazil by the ship "La Ville de Bordeaux," according to the plane's manufacturer Airbus. It will be taken overland to Toulouse by truck.



Flight 447 went down in the Atlantic Ocean in stormy weather as if flew from Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, to Charles de Gaulle Airport in Paris, France on June 1. Only 51 bodies were recovered, and the search is ongoing for the cause of the crash.



The search for the data and voice recorders from the plane entered a second phase last week, according to France's accident investigation agency.



The flight data recorder and the cockpit voice recorder -- commonly known as "black boxes" -- stop giving out acoustic broadcasts after 30 days. But investigators decided to continue listening for the "pings" for another 10 days after that.



On July 10, two U.S. naval vessels and the French Navy submarine called off their search for the recorders, which investigators hope will shed light on exactly how and why the plane crashed.



The second phase of the search will involve France's oceanographic ship "Pourquoi Pas?" which carries specialized exploration and intervention vehicles, according to the BEA.



The French vessel will conduct new searches using diving equipment and towed sonar, the BEA said.



Finding the recorders is of "capital importance" and "no effort must be spared in achieving this end," Air France has said. "We want to stress that for the sake of the families, we hope that the search for the black boxes will be successful," an Air France representative told CNN.



The crash was the worst in Air France's 75-year history.



Earlier this month, investigators revealed that the plane bellyflopped intact into the Atlantic Ocean. Investigator Alain Bouillard said it was still not clear what caused the crash.



The mountainous ocean floor in the search area ranges from 3,280 to 15,091 feet, BEA officials have said in the past, making the search for the recorders -- and the rest of the plane's debris -- difficult.



"It is as if it fell in the Andes (mountains)," Olivier Ferrante, chief of the BEA search mission said.



Brazil called off the search for bodies on June 27, having found 51 of the 228 people who died, according to the military.



Investigators have also found more than 600 parts and structural components of the plane, along with luggage, Bouillard said.

***

(CNN) -- Twenty-three suspects, including nine American Airlines employees, were arrested Tuesday for allegedly transporting nearly $20 million worth of cocaine on flights into and out of Puerto Rico, federal authorities said.



Manuel Santiago-Alvarado, an American Airlines control crew chief, is among the suspects arrested Tuesday.



Most of the commercial flights carrying suitcases stuffed with illicit drugs came into San Juan, which was a transshipment point for drugs bound for cities on the U.S. mainland, authorities said.



The drug trafficking organization headed by defendant Wilfredo Rodriguez Rosade had been operating since 1999, according to the Drug Enforcement Administration and the FBI, which participated in the long-running investigation.



In a September 9 indictment unsealed Tuesday, Justice Department officials also moved to seize $18 million worth of property owned by the suspects, including seven homes, three businesses and an apartment complex.



All but one of the arrests occurred in Puerto Rico. The lone arrest on the U.S. mainland was in Miami, Florida.



Drug Enforcement Special Agent in Charge Javier Pena said the airline industry cooperated in the investigation.



"By denying the drug traffickers alternate smuggling routes, we disrupt the flow of drugs into Puerto Rico and discourage the use of the island as a transshipment point in the Caribbean," he said in a news release.



The agency said that if they are convicted, the defendants taken into custody would face sentences ranging from 10 years to life in prison and personal fines of up to $4 million.



American Airlines issued a statement confirming some employees had been arrested, but could not confirm the number because of its privacy policy, spokesman Tim Wagner said in an e-mail. The airline has been working with authorities, he said.



"As a company, we hope that the actions of a few employees don't reflect negatively on the tens of thousands of ethical American Airlines employees who work hard to serve the public daily," Wagner wrote.

***

(CNN) -- DNA test results reveal that a Michigan man is not a Long Island, New York, boy who went missing 54 years ago, according to the FBI.



John Robert Barnes claims a DNA test shows he's Steven Damman, who vanished in 1955.



John Robert Barnes, of Kalkaska, Michigan, approached police in New York twice in March claiming to be Steven Damman, a toddler who vanished while on a shopping trip with his mother in 1955.



Barnes tracked down Pamela Damman Horne, Steven's sister, and the two had private tests performed that showed a "probability" they were siblings, according to Nassau County, New York, detective Lt. Kevin Smith.



But samples from Barnes and Horne analyzed by the FBI Laboratory in Quantico, Virginia, determined that they do not share the same mother, the FBI in Detroit said Thursday.



Sandra Berchtold, spokeswoman for the FBI Detroit bureau, said the FBI follows strict testing protocols and used mitochondrial DNA to determine Barnes and Horne were not linked to the same mother.



Marilyn Damman took her toddler, Steven, and his baby sister, Pamela, to a food market in East Meadow, Long Island, in 1955. The mother went inside to do some quick shopping, leaving her 2-year-old son and baby girl in the stroller outside.



But Damman told authorities that when she returned, her children were gone. A short time later, blocks away, the baby girl was found unharmed and the stroller was intact, but Steven was missing, Smith said.



CNN's Stacey Newman contributed to this report.

***

(CNN)  -- Security forces aboard a U.S. naval vessel fired warning shots toward two approaching small boats off the Somali coast Tuesday, the U.S. military said Wednesday.



The USNS John Lenthall is one of 14 fleet refueling ships operated by Military Sealift Command.



The rounds landed in the water, prompting the boats to turn around, and no casualties were reported, the military news release said.



It is unclear whether the boats were trying to attack the 41,000-ton USNS John Lenthall, the military said.



"It is clear they were not following the international rules of the road observed by mariners around the globe," it said.



The release noted that the location of the incident, the types of boats involved and the maneuvering were all "consistent with reports from previous attacks on merchant vessels in the region."



The USNS John Lenthall is one of 14 "fleet replenishment oilers" in the Military Sealift Fleet Support Command, according to a U.S. Navy Web site. Oilers refuel Navy ships at sea and any aircraft they may be carrying.



Attacks by pirates have increased dramatically off the northern coast of  Somalia in the past year, prompting the United States and other nations to step up patrols in the region.



In May, the U.S. Navy warned merchant ships to stay at least 200 miles off the Somali coast. But the U.S. Maritime Administration warns that pirates sometimes issue false distress calls to lure ships closer to shore.



The pirates are often armed with automatic rifles and shoulder-fired rockets, according to warnings from the agency.

***

(CNN) -- Toulouse striker Andre-Pierre Gignac has been handed his first call-up to the France squad for their two World Cup qualifiers against Lithuania.



Gignac has been rewarded for his superb form this season with a first call-up to the France squad.



The 23-year-old forward is the top scorer in French Ligue 1 with 17 goals this season -- and has been selected by coach Raymond Domenech ahead of Paris St-Germain striker Guillaume Hoarau.



Defenders Patrice Evra and Ladil Rami return, but fellow-defenders Eric Abidal (Barcelona), Jean-Alain Boumsong (Lyon) and Julien Escude (Sevilla) are all ruled out through injury.



There is also no place in the squad for captain Patrick Vieira, who has struggled to find his best form for Inter Milan this season.



France are currently third in European Group Seven with just one win to show from their first three matches. They trail Serbia and Lithuania by five points but have a game in hand on both nations.



France initially face Lituania in Kaunas on March 28, with the return match at the Stade de France in Paris on April 1.



France squad:



Goalkeepers: Hugo Lloris (Lyon), Steve Mandanda (Marseille), Cedric Carrasso (Toulouse).



Defenders: Gael Clichy (Arsenal), Rod Fanni (Rennes), William Gallas (Arsenal), Philippe Mexes (Roma), Bacary Sagna (Arsenal), Sebastien Squillaci (Sevilla), Patrice Evra (Manchester United), Adil Rami (Lille).



Midfielders: Alou Diarra (Bordeaux), Lassana Diarra (Real Madrid), Yoann Gourcuff (Bordeaux), Samir Nasri (Arsenal), Jeremy Toulalan (Lyon), Abou Diaby (Arsenal), Franck Ribery (Bayern Munich).



Forwards: Nicolas Anelka (Chelsea), Karim Benzema (Lyon), Jimmy Briand (Rennes), Thierry Henry (Barcelona), Andre-Pierre Gignac (Toulouse).

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- As he awaits a crucial progress report on Iraq, President Bush will try to put a twist on comparisons of the war to Vietnam by invoking the historical lessons of that conflict to argue against pulling out.

President Bush pauses Tuesday during a news conference at the  North American Leaders summit in Canada.

On Wednesday in Kansas City, Missouri, Bush will tell members of the Veterans of Foreign Wars that "then, as now, people argued that the real problem was America's presence and that if we would just withdraw, the killing would end," according to speech excerpts released Tuesday by the White House.

"Three decades later, there is a legitimate debate about how we got into the Vietnam War and how we left," Bush will say.

"Whatever your position in that debate, one unmistakable legacy of Vietnam is that the price of America's withdrawal was paid by millions of innocent citizens, whose agonies would add to our vocabulary new terms like 'boat people,' 're-education camps' and 'killing fields,' " the president will say.

The president will also make the argument that withdrawing from Vietnam emboldened today's terrorists by compromising U.S. credibility, citing a quote from al Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden that the American people would rise against the Iraq war the same way they rose against the war in Vietnam, according to the excerpts.

"Here at home, some can argue our withdrawal from Vietnam carried no price to American credibility, but the terrorists see things differently," Bush will say.

On Tuesday, Democratic Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid said, "President Bush's attempt to compare the war in Iraq to past military conflicts in East Asia ignores the fundamental difference between the two. Our nation was misled by the Bush Administration in an effort to gain support for the invasion of Iraq under false pretenses, leading to one of the worst foreign policy blunders in our history.

"While the President continues to stay-the-course with his failed strategy in Iraq, paid for by the taxpayers, American lives are being lost and there is still no political solution within the Iraqi government. It is time to change direction in Iraq, and Congress will again work to do so in the fall."

The White House is billing the speech, along with another address next week to the American Legion, as an effort to "provide broader context" for the debate over the upcoming Iraq progress report by Gen. David Petraeus, the top U.S. military commander, and Ryan Crocker, the U.S. ambassador in Baghdad.

President Bush has frequently asked lawmakers -- and the American people -- to withhold judgment on his troop "surge" in Iraq until the report comes out in September.  Watch Bush criticize the Iraqi government »

It is being closely watched on Capitol Hill, particularly by Republicans nervous about the political fallout from an increasingly unpopular war.

Earlier this month, Defense Secretary Robert Gates said he would wait for the report before deciding when a drawdown of the 160,000 U.S. troops in Iraq might begin.

Bush's speeches Wednesday and next week are the latest in a series of attempts by the White House to try to reframe the debate over Iraq, as public support for the war continues to sag.

A recent CNN/Opinion Research Corporation poll found that almost two-thirds of Americans -- 64 percent -- now oppose the Iraq war, and 72 percent say that even if Petraeus reports progress, it won't change their opinion.

The poll also found a great deal of skepticism about the report; 53 percent said they do not trust Petraeus to give an accurate assessment of the situation in Iraq.

In addition to his analogy to Vietnam, Bush in Wednesday's speech will invoke other historical comparisons from Asia, including the U.S. defeat and occupation of Japan after World War II and the Korean War in the 1950s, according to the excerpts.

"In the aftermath of Japan's surrender, many thought it naive to help the Japanese transform themselves into a democracy. Then, as now, the critics argued that some people were simply not fit

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- A Fort Drum soldier has been arrested in the deaths of two fellow soldiers found stabbed in an apartment near the upstate New York military base, the Jefferson County Sheriff's Office said.



The suspect, Joshua Hunter, 20, is being held at an undisclosed location in Ohio after being charged with two counts of second degree murder, Undersheriff Tim Dowe told CNN.



The sheriff's office identified the victims as Spc. Waide T. James, 20, of Cocoa, Florida, and Spc. Diego A. Valbuena, 23, of Port St. Lucie, Florida.



The two men were found dead with multiple stab wounds Tuesday in an apartment at Meadowbrook Apartments in LeRay, New York, Dowe said. The complex houses mostly military families near the main entrance of Fort Drum, he said.



The motive is unknown at this time, Dowe said.



Sheriff's deputies were called to the apartment complex after the soldiers were reported missing for duty, but the sheriff's office could not say when that report was filed.



James and Valbuena, who joined the Army in 2007, worked as motor transport operators with the Headquarters and Headquarters Battalion, 10th Mountain Division, according to a Fort Drum press release. Both had served in Iraq, it said.



Police and Fort Drum officials would not release information about the suspect, including his rank or relationship to the victims.



CNN's Evan Buxbaum contributed to this report.

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN) -- Michael Jackson's memorial service will take place Tuesday morning in the Staples Center, the 20,000-seat coliseum in downtown Los Angeles where Jackson rehearsed his show the night before he died, according to a person who has been briefed by a representative of the family.



Michael Jackson was rehearsing at Los Angeles' Staples Center. His memorial will now be there.



No other details about the service, set to begin at 10 a.m. Tuesday, have been revealed.



Thursday, CNN learned the family trust created by Jackson to receive all of his assets includes his mother, his children and a list of charities, according to a person with direct knowledge to the contents of the trust.



Katherine Jackson's 40 percent share would go to Michael Jackson's three children after her death, the source said.



The children -- ages 7, 11 and 12 -- will also share 40 percent of the estate's assets and the remaining 20 percent will benefits charities designated by the executors of the will, the source said.



Jackson's will did not specify where he wished to be buried.



Many of his fans had hoped they'd get a chance to pay last respects at Neverland Ranch, which Jackson purchased in 1987, filled with animals and amusement rides, and named after the fictional world in J.M. Barrie's "Peter Pan."



Planning had been under way for a motorcade to carry Jackson's body from Los Angeles to the ranch in Santa Barbara County, California, which state and local officials suggested would be difficult and costly.



A public viewing at the ranch on Friday also had been under consideration, law enforcement sources said.



Gregory Son, a 31-year-old musician, was among many fans who had planned to ride to the ranch to say goodbye to Jackson.



"I think he was a modern-day prophet," Son said outside Grauman's Chinese Theater in Hollywood. "We kind of lost our father."



DEA joins investigation



On Wednesday night, a federal law enforcement official said Wednesday night that the Drug Enforcement Administration had joined Jackson's death investigation, once again fanning speculation that drugs may have been involved in the pop icon's passing.



Two law enforcement officials separately confirmed the DEA probe, saying agents would look at various doctors involved with Jackson, their practices and their possible sources of medicine supply.



Neither official wanted to be identified because they could not comment publicly on the matter.



Officially, a DEA spokeswoman referred questions to the Los Angeles, California, police department -- which would not confirm the involvement.



"We routinely offer assistance to any agency regarding the Federal Controlled Substance Act," said Sarah Pullen of the DEA. "However, at this time, we have nothing further to comment about the death of Michael Jackson."



Speculation about the role of drugs has been swirling since Jackson died on June 25 at his rented estate in Holmby Hills. The cause of his death, at age 50, was pending toxicology results.



On Wednesday, police released a car belonging to Jackson's cardiologist, Dr. Conrad Murray. They had impounded the vehicle Friday, saying it might contain evidence -- possibly prescription medications.



Police did not say whether they found anything.



Murray's lawyers issued a statement, asking the public to reserve judgment about the cause of death until the coroner's tests are complete.



"Based on our agreement with Los Angeles investigators, we are waiting on real information to come from viable sources like the Los Angeles medical examiner's office about the death of Michael Jackson," the statement said. "We will not be responding to rumors and innuendo."



The comments were in reaction to a claim by a nutritionist who said Jackson suffered from severe bouts of insomnia and pleaded for the powerful sedative, Propofol, despite knowing its harmful effects.



"I told him this medication is not safe," said Cherilyn Lee, a registered nurse. "He said, 'I just want to get some sleep. You don't understand. I just want to be able to be knocked out and go to

***

(CNN) -- Events at a West Virginia air show were canceled for a second day Sunday after a crash a day earlier that killed a stunt pilot, show organizers said.





No one on the ground was injured in the crash Saturday.





Investigators with the National Transportation Safety Board arrived in Martinsburg on Sunday to begin piecing together what went wrong.





The crash occurred about five minutes into a planned 15-minute flight, said NTSB investigator Tim Monville.





Some victims of Nevada air race crash identified





"During one of the planned aerobatic maneuvers ... two opposing airplanes were to pass each other laterally," then pull up and perform a roll, Monville said. The plane that crashed "did not complete the maneuver."





Monville declined to identify the pilot.





CNN iReporter Jennifer Clark took pictures of the 2:30 p.m. ET crash, showing flames and black plumes of smoke rising from the ground.





"We saw a flash of light ... and heard the explosion sound," she told CNN's Don Lemon on Saturday. "It was scary."





"You just heard the whole crowd gasp simultaneously and everybody just kind of went silent and was just watching what was going on," she said.





Event organizers on Sunday urged those who witnessed the crash "to seek out support if they feel that viewing the accident traumatically affected them."





The West Virginia crash came one day after another deadly air crash.





A pilot lost control of his vintage plane during an air race in Reno, Nevada, on Friday, plummeting toward thousands of spectators before narrowly missing a grandstand and slamming into box seats. Nine people, including the pilot, died in that accident, according to local police.

***

(CNN)  -- Ohio has executed its second inmate using a new one-drug method, officials said Thursday.





Vernon Smith, 37, was pronounced dead at 10:28 a.m., according to a statement from the Ohio Department of Rehabilitation and Correction.





Smith was convicted of killing Toledo, Ohio, store owner Sohail Darwish during a robbery in 1993.





According to court documents, Darwish did not resist Smith's orders to open the cash register and hand over his wallet, but Smith shot him anyway, saying he "moved too slow." Darwish bled to death from a single gunshot wound to the chest, the documents said.





Darwish, a 28-year-old from Saudi Arabia, had a year-old daughter, and his wife was pregnant with another daughter, the Columbus Dispatch newspaper reported Thursday.





The execution was Ohio's second using the one-drug method. Kenneth Biros, 51, was put to death in December. It was Ohio's first execution since September, when Gov. Ted Strickland and federal courts halted capital punishment in the state after a botched attempt to execute another prisoner, Romell Broom. The prison staff could not find a suitable vein for Broom's lethal injections.





The one-drug method used on Biros had never been tried on U.S. death row inmates. It relies on a single dose of sodium thiopental injected into a vein. A separate two-drug muscle injection was available as a backup, officials said. The one-drug method has been used to euthanize animals.





The same drug, sodium thiopental -- but at a much lower dosage -- is the first ingredient in the three-drug method previously used in Ohio, as well as in all but one of the other 34 states with the death penalty.





CNN's Ashley Hayes contributed to this report.

***

Editor's note: Rich Roll, one of Men's Fitness magazine's "25 Fittest Guys in the World" in 2009, was the first athlete to compete in the Ultraman World Championships on an entirely plant-based diet. He's sharing insights today as part of Dr. Sanjay Gupta's "Four Months to Fitness" effort.



Before: At 40 years old, Rich Roll called himself "fat, unhappy and fed up."



(CNN) -- I can still remember it, vivid as yesterday. It was the eve of my 40th birthday, and I walked upstairs to take a shower. And I was winded. I mean very winded. As I was trying to catch my breath, I took off my shirt, looked in the mirror and tried to convince myself that I was still that fit guy I had always thought I was.



Somehow, I had been able to skate by on this delusion for all too many years. But the denial had finally caught up to me. I saw my true reflection, and I couldn't lie to myself anymore. I was in the worst shape of my life. I was fat, unhappy and fed up.



It's the typical story. First it's the career. Then comes marriage, followed by kids. Your time is no longer your own, and you resign yourself to "maturity," "filling out" or whatever euphemism for middle age that soothes that idea that you are simply overweight, unfit and unhealthy.



I'm here to say that it doesn't have to be that way. I don't care how busy you are. I don't care how old you are, how many kids you have or how little time you think you have. The power rests within yourself to enact any change in your life you desire. And I can say this because I have seen it happen in myself and countless others.



After that fateful day of clarity, I made a decision to change my life. Not a vague, wishy-washy notion that I should "get in shape," maybe "eat better" or possibly "go on a diet," but rather a specific long-term plan to enhance my wellness in a way that would not only stick, but fit within the parameters of my busy life as a full-time lawyer, husband and father of four small children.



In my case, it began with a well-researched and supervised seven-day fruit and vegetable juice cleanse (during which time I weaned myself off caffeine), followed by an entirely plant-based nutrition program -- an animal-product-free regimen I have adhered to ever since. The immediate result was a rather surprising and unexpected increase in my energy levels, leading to a very gradual return to exercise, building up slowly over an extended period of time.



The results were hardly overnight. But two years later, I had lost well over 30 pounds. And not only did I keep the weight off, I was the most fit I had ever been in my life.



At 42 years old, I competed in the Ultraman World Championships, a grueling three-day uber-endurance triathlon circumnavigating the Big Island of Hawaii that involves 6.2 miles of swimming, 260 miles of cycling and culminates with a 52.4-mile double marathon run. I placed 11th overall and was the third-fastest American. To top it off, Men's Fitness magazine recently named me one of the "25 Fittest Guys in the World." (Not that I actually believe I deserve such an honor!)



Quite an extreme contrast from that day I looked in the mirror. I'm not advocating that everyone should test himself or herself so severely. But my point is that change starts with a decision followed by baby steps along a new, consistent trajectory that, over time, can lead to dramatic results.



I'm nothing special. I'm not a professional athlete. I'm just a normal family guy. But if I could experience such a vast transformation in my own life, I know with certainty that everybody has within himself the

***

(CNN) -- Rangers restored their four-point lead over Celtic despite conceding the fastest goal in Scottish Premier League history on Sunday.



The Glasgow side went behind after only 12.4 seconds as Hibernian striker Anthony Stokes surpassed the previous mark set by Saulius Mikoliunas for Edinburgh rivals Hearts back in 2006, but bounced back to register a 4-1 away victory.



Scotland striker Kenny Miller scored in each half, while goals from fellow frontmen Kris Boyd and Nacho Novo ensured that third-placed Hibs' unbeaten run of 13 league games came to an end.



Celtic had closed the gap to one point after beating Hamilton Academicals 2-0 on Saturday.



Rangers, meanwhile, expect to have Madjid Bougherra available for Wednesday's home clash with fourth-placed Dundee United, but the Algeria defender will leave for African Nations Cup duty in Angola before next Sunday's Old Firm derby showdown with Celtic.



"That's the way it's looking at the present moment," manager Walter Smith said.



Smith will also be without United States winger DaMarcus Beasley for the next few weeks after he suffered an injury in training before the Hibs game.



"He has a tear in his thigh. I'm not sure how long that will keep him out -- two or three weeks maybe," Smith said.



"It's disappointing in the sense that he is just back in the team and doing exceptionally well, so it was disappointing it happened."



However, Beasley's international teammate Maurice Edu boosted his chances of playing at next year's World Cup finals in South Africa after making his first appearance this season.



The midfielder, who suffered a serious knee injury in the final SPL game of last season, came off the substitutes' bench for the final 15 minutes at Easter Road.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Britain is prepared to send more troops to Afghanistan, the head of the British Army said in an interview published Friday.



Britain currently has 8,300 troops in Afghanistan.



Richard Dannatt, the chief of the general staff, did not say how many troops he would be prepared to deploy. Britain currently has 8,300 troops in Afghanistan.



Dannatt told The Times newspaper that elements of the 12th Mechanized Brigade had been "earmarked for Afghanistan." He said there are no plans to send the whole brigade of 4,000 troops.



"If we're asked for more and we say we can, it's not going to be 4,000 -- it's going to be something in between" that and the current troop level, Dannatt told the Times. The Ministry of Defense confirmed his remark.



British defense sources told The Times that a rise of 1,700 to 2,000 was "the uppermost ceiling."



U.S. President Barack Obama is expected to announce a new strategy for Afghanistan on Friday that includes sending another 4,000 troops to the country with hundreds of civilian specialists, senior administration officials told CNN.



The troops -- which are in addition to the 17,000 that the president announced earlier would be sent to Afghanistan -- will be charged with training and building the Afghan Army and police force. The plans include doubling the Army's ranks to 135,000 and the police force to 80,000 by 2011, the officials said.



Military officials told CNN earlier that the Afghan government had requested the additional troops.

***

Tehran, Iran (CNN) -- Faezeh Hashemi, the daughter of former Iranian president, Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, was sentenced to six months in prison for making anti-government statements, semi-official Mehr News Agency reported Tuesday.





Hashemi was arrested last year for taking part in anti-government protests, and the announcement of her sentence comes as parliamentary elections near.





Her father, Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, is a powerful cleric and former parliament speaker. In the past, Rafsanjani has been one of the government's most vocal critics.





Rafsanjani served two terms as president from 1989 to 1997, and is still widely believed to be one of the wealthiest and most politically powerful men in Iran.





He had long been a staunch critic and bitter political rival of Iran's President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad.





Weeks after the 2009 elections, Rafsanjani condemned the regime's violent crackdown against the opposition movement and spoke out for the people's right to peacefully protest in a speech delivered at Tehran's Friday prayers.





In recent months, Rafsanjani had toned down attacks and made statements of apparent support of the regime and the supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei.





Last March, Rafsanjani was replaced as head of Iran's Assembly of Experts, a powerful committee charged with electing and removing the leader of the Islamic Revolution and supervising his activities.

***

(CNN) -- Police in Zimbabwe Monday failed to bring to court an opposition activist who was scheduled to become a government minister on Friday but was arrested instead.

Zimbabwe police officers at Mutare Magistrates Court where Roy Bennett's scheduled appearance was postponed.

Roy Bennett of the Movement for Democratic Change was supposed to be sworn in as deputy agriculture minister last week under a power-sharing agreement between the MDC and President Robert Mugabe's ZANU-PF party.

Bennett was charged with conspiracy to commit terrorism, sabotage and banditry. Police added another charge, contravening the Immigration Act, on the day he was scheduled to appear in court. They accuse Bennett of attempting to leave the country illegally.

His party has decried the charges as "trumped up."

His lawyer said Monday's court proceedings were canceled because prosecutors were unable to make it from the capital Harare to the court where the proceeding was to take place, in Mutare, 132 miles (213 km) away. It is unclear why local prosecutors are not being used.

Bennett's lawyer Trust Maanda says he hopes his client will appear on Tuesday.

"He is doing fine considering the conditions of the cells he is being kept in," Maanda said. "There is no food or running water, sanitation facilities are not working, the cells are overcrowded and there are no blankets."

Bennett was arrested on Friday while on his way to South Africa, where he has been living for three years.

Bennett, who is also the MDC party's treasurer, was pulled from an aircraft at the airport in Zimbabwe's capital, Harare, the MDC said.

Police accuse him of funding the acquisition of weapons to commit the crimes he is charged with.

Bennett, a white coffee grower, is an old foe of Mugabe's government.

His farms were seized during the country's controversial land reform program. He has previously been jailed for assaulting Justice Minister Patrick Chinamasa in parliament.

The arrest happened the same day that other MDC ministers in the new unity government took their oaths of office.

The power-sharing agreement came into effect only after months of on-again, off-again negotiations between Mugabe, who has ruled Zimbabwe since independence in 1980, and the MDC, led by Morgan Tsvangirai.

Under Mugabe's government, the country has gone from being one of the breadbaskets of Africa to dire poverty.

A cholera epidemic is raging, much of the population lacks adequate food and water, many public sector workers are on strike, and the country suffers such severe inflation it recently knocked 12 zeroes off its currency.

--CNN's Nkepile Mabuse contributed to this report.

***

ISLAMABAD, Pakistan (CNN) -- Back-to-back suicide bombings killed at least five people at a university here Tuesday and wounded nearly two dozen, authorities said.



Police investigators collect evidence at the suicide blast site at Islamic International University in Islamabad.



The explosions occurred at the International Islamic University in the Pakistani capital, said police official Bin Yamin.



Naeem Iqbal, Islamabad police spokesman, said three men and two female students were killed, and 22 people were injured.



At least four of the injured were in critical condition, said Altaf Hussein, a doctor at a hospital. All the victims are between the ages of 18 and 25.



Usman Virk, a student, said he heard one explosion in the men's section of the university, followed by a blast in the cafeteria in the women's section of the university.  Watch more about the attacks »



Virk said he saw several injured students with blood-soaked clothes being taken away by rescue crews.



More than 12,000 foreign and local students, including 5,500 women, are enrolled in the 29-year-old university.



The university Web site describes the school as a "unique center of learning in the Muslim world which strives to combine the essentials of the Islamic faith with the best of modern knowledge."



In recent weeks, Pakistan has been relentlessly rocked by a wave of suicide attacks as Islamic militants retaliate against a military offensive to rout insurgents operating along the Pakistan-Afghan border.



On Friday, a suicide car bomber detonated near a police station in Peshawar, the capital of the North West Frontier Province. The blast killed at least 13 people, most of them civilians.



A day earlier, militants attacked two police training centers and the country's Federal Investigation Agency in Lahore in eastern Pakistan.



At least 30 Pakistani police officers and civilians were killed in those attacks. At least 10 attackers also died.



And on October 10, militants held dozens of hostages for 22 hours inside an army headquarters in Rawalpindi, which neighbors Islamabad. Eleven military personnel, three civilians, and nine militants were killed in the siege.



CNN's Reza Sayah contributed to this report.

***

New York (CNN) -- Emmy-winning "Golden Girls" actress Rue McClanahan died of a stroke in a New York hospital early Thursday, her manager said. She was 76.





McClanahan, who suffered a cerebral hemorrhage last Monday, was surrounded by family when she died at New York-Presbyterian Hospital, according to manager Barbara Lawrence.





The actress' career began on the New York stage in the 1950s, but her long television career was first boosted when producer Norman Lear cast McClanahan in his hit CBS series "All in the Family" in 1971. She appeared in Lear's "Maude" a year later.





Her most memorable TV role was as Southern belle Blanche Devereaux on "The Golden Girls," which ran from 1985 through 1992. McClanahan won an Emmy for best lead actress in a comedy in 1987.





Betty White is the last surviving member of the four "Golden Girls" stars.





"Rue was a close and dear friend," White said Thursday. "I treasured our relationship. It hurts more than I even thought it would, if that's possible."





Estelle Getty passed away in 2008, and Bea Arthur died last year.





McClanahan requested that no funeral be held for her, but memorial services will be announced for later this summer in New York and Los Angeles, California, Lawrence said.





Fans can pay their respects online, a family statement said.





"Please join us in celebrating Rue's amazing life" by visiting a memorial page established for her on Facebook, the family said.





McClanahan's last comedic TV role was in an episode of Tyler Perry's "Meet the Browns," taped in 2009.





She carried the Devereaux character to three other TV series, including "The Golden Palace," "Empty Nest" and "Nurses."





She was married six times and had one child. Her son, Mark Bish, was born in 1958 during a brief first marriage.





Her present marriage to Morrow Wilson, starting in 1997, was her longest. Her book "My First Five Husbands ... And the Ones Who Got Away" was published in 2007.





McClanahan was born in Healdton, Oklahoma, on February 21, 1934, to parents with Scottish and native American heritage.





CNN's Jack Hannah contributed to this report.

***

(InStyle.com) -- A hit TV show. An Emmy. A summer blockbuster. A new company. A wedding! Katherine Heigl has every reason to smile for our camera. A star -- and a trio of gorgeous looks -- is born.

The Ingénue: "This is my favorite look of the three just because it's sexy but not overtly so," Heigl says. "I like simple hair and makeup."

There has been a self-tanning mishap

As Katherine Heigl crosses the parking lot of the sandwich shop at the Roosevelt Golf Course at Griffith Park in Los Angeles, she walks stiffly, holding her arms away from her like a paper doll and apologizing profusely for running 10 minutes late.

Earlier, she'd sprayed her entire body with self-tanner, which refused to dry. She resorted to having her fiancé, musician Josh Kelley, take a blow-dryer to her (didn't work). So here she is, in a strapless, ankle-length Juicy Couture sundress (donned to accommodate the residual stickiness), fanning herself and wondering how mottled the tan will be when (or if) the lotion ever sets.

Not that one bum experience could turn her off beauty products.

"I love everything new," says Heigl, 28, who, in addition to being nominated for an Emmy for best supporting actress on "Grey's Anatomy," just started a production company at Fox. "When I was in Rhode Island filming this summer, I went to Sephora for the first time. It was like my holy mecca."

She recently had her bathroom vanity renovated with a high counter to make more room for the large drawers below that hold her well-organized loot. Then there's her deal with Coty to be the face of Nautica's new women's fragrance in January.

Considering this fondness for all things beauty -- as well as Heigl's impressive acting range -- she plays TV dramedy as deftly as cinematic romantic comedy, as in the mega-hit "Knocked Up" and next year's 27 Dresses -- it seems natural for her to be In Style's first ever triple-cover girl.

These three looks take her from girl-next-door to red-carpet knockout to pixie-coiffed vamp. The star, whom pals call Katie (and Hollywood calls the Next Big Thing), popped out her retainer to talk about makeup, breakouts and what boys like.

KATHERINE HEIGL: I'm so sorry, I have to take out my Invisalign before I eat.

IN STYLE: Who knew you wore them? I guess that's the point of Invisalign.

KH: I got them because of this wonky tooth. I was like, OK, I can't take it. It's awesome because every two weeks you switch to a new retainer. Pretty much the perfect way to describe Invisalign is Netflix for your teeth.

IS: Right -- the things we do for beauty. So, how did you like being transformed into three such different looks?

KH: It was fun. I was working with such great hair and makeup people. And to have these professionals turning you into someone else is pretty neat.

IS: Do you ever go without makeup?

KH: There was a time when I would. Now that I get followed by photographers, I'm really paranoid about it. I do not want to be the "Look What This Celebrity Looks Like Without Makeup" picture. I'm clearly vain, and I don't need that. Plus, I like products.

IS: How often do you go through your drawers and purge?

KH: Often, because people send me a lot of stuff now, which is exciting. I love getting those boxes. [Into the tape recorder:] Send me a box of makeup, Stila! When that happens, I feel like I have to clean out and give stuff to my sister, mom and friends because there comes a point of gluttony that I can't accept.

IS: How do you think you express your personality

***

MOSCOW, Russia (CNN) -- A cult member who spent several months holed up in a cave with dozens of other people anticipating the end of the world claimed Wednesday that two women died and were buried inside.



An above-ground kitchen used by the doomsday cult in the Penza region during the summer.



The former cave-dweller, Vitaly Nedogon, relayed his claims to Russian TV journalists, according to Anton Sharonov, a spokesman for the administration of Penza, a region southeast of Moscow.



The official said Nedogon did not report the information to police or authorities. Once the rest of the apocalyptic sect leaves the cave, investigators will move in to try to confirm Nedogon's report, Sharonov said.



Nedogon and others left the cave, said to be near the village of Nikolskoye, about 700 kilometers (435 miles) from the Russian capital, about a week ago, after part of its ceiling collapsed.



He claimed two women died at different times during the cult's seclusion, which began in November 2007. One woman died of cancer and the other from excessive fasting, he told the media.



"However," Sharonov told the Russian news agency Interfax, "the Penza regional administration is of the view that these deaths must be proven legally, which is possible only if all the people leave the cave so that investigative officials can examine it."



Sharonov said those who remain in the cave told Penza officials during negotiations that they would come out by the Russian Orthodox Easter, on April 27. He said officials believe 11 people are left in the cave, but only nine will be alive if Nedogon's report is true.



According to Interfax, Penza Deputy Governor Oleg Melnichenko, who is leading the local effort to resolve the situation, said he was unaware of any deaths in the cave.



The cave ordeal began when Kuznetsov, the group's leader, told his followers to hide themselves to await the end of the world, which he predicted would take place in May.



They had threatened to commit mass suicide if authorities tried to intervene.



Thirty-five sect members are believed to have entered the cave initially, Interfax said. E-mail to a friend



From CNN's Maxim Tkachenko in Moscow.

***

(CNN) -- If someone had asked Kelly Pless to describe herself three years ago, the word "fit" would have never crossed her mind.

Kelly Pless weighed 220 pounds at her heaviest. She lost 95 pounds through diet and exercise.

For most of her adult life, the 31-year-old graduate student from Sunny Isles Beach, Florida, has struggled with her weight. She started gaining as a teenager and by the time she graduated from high school, she was carrying 215 pounds on her 5' 2" frame.

Prom, she says, was a nightmare.

"I had to go to three different stores to buy a dress," Pless said. "I had to buy the biggest, also the ugliest, prom dress the store had because it was the only one that would fit."

After high school, she lost 50 pounds. But because she hadn't done it in a healthy way, her weight crept back up to 220 pounds.

At 28, she started having trouble breathing and doctors told her the weight was to blame. She reached her breaking point.

"I remember being heavy and feeling like being fit just wasn't something I could be," said Pless. "I remember feeling like even if I tried, it wasn't something my body was capable of."

Despite her doubts, Pless decided to do something. Fortunately she didn't have to look far for inspiration.  See before and after weight loss photos from CNN.com I-Reporters »

"My manager at the Kennedy Space Center ran marathons, and he was the same age as my father," she said. Because her own father had diabetes and was in poor health, he seemed much older, she said.

Over the next three to four months, she began walking, without any real goal or expectation. Pless believed that if she just focused on eating less and moving more, everything would fall into place.

"At first, it was hard to start exercising because I was worried people would make fun of me," Pless said. "But then I just told myself, if that's the worst that could happen ... I just got out there and didn't care."

Eventually, she started to run or "shuffle" as she jokingly recalls. She also adopted an "eat to live" philosophy and satisfied her cravings for sweets by eating lots of fruit.

"I changed how I felt about food and what it meant to me," said Pless, who occasionally indulges in a bite of birthday cake or a piece of chocolate.

"One of the first things I cut out was cakes and cookies. That was my weak spot. After a few months of cutting those things out, I focused more on portion control," said Pless. "I pretty much eat when I'm hungry and don't eat when I'm not and really try to pay attention to when those times are. Make sure I'm not eating out of boredom or [at] social events, I try to make sure I'm not overeating, just because everyone else is."  Kelly Pless shares her weight loss secrets »

Pless pays close attention to societal pressure, which she believes is the reason many people overeat. Restaurant servings are about three times bigger than a normal portion size, she says. She makes sure she doesn't overeat when dining out simply because the food is there.

"What's hard is to change how you feel about foods that you love or that aren't necessarily good for you, or actually change how you look at food. That was the hardest part for me."

Instead of giving in to the temptation or convenience of calorie-laden or fatty foods such as cheeseburgers from the drive-through, Pless asks herself, "What do I really want to eat? Or, what does my body really want right now?"

All of the hard work and determination paid off. Pless has lost 95 pounds and kept it off for 1½ years. As a result, she says,

***

(CNN) -- Al Qaeda's second-in-command called on Pakistanis to back Islamic militants in the country's tribal areas against what he called an ongoing assault by American "crusaders" and the Pakistani army.



Al-Qaeda's second-in-command, Ayman al-Zawahiri appears in a video released on September 2, 2006.



Punishment from God was promised for Muslims who did not follow the words of Ayman al-Zawahiri in a video that appeared on radical Islamist Web sites Thursday.



"The war in the tribal areas and Swat [Valley] is an inseparable part of the crusaders' assault on the Muslims the length and breadth of the Islamic world," al-Zawahiri said in the video, titled "Path of Doom."



"This is the battle, briefly and plainly; and this is why anyone who supports the Americans and Pakistan army -- under any pretext, ploy or lie -- is in fact standing with, backing and supporting the crusaders against Islam and Muslims."



The Pakistani military is fighting Taliban militants in the country's north, and missile attacks from suspected U.S. drones have targeted militant leaders -- one of them killing Baitullah Mehsud, the leader of the Pakistani Taliban.



Reports from the region suggest government troops have dislodged the Taliban from many areas of the North West Frontier Province, but militant attacks continue daily.



In the video, Al-Zawahiri suggested that the United States has wider goals in the region.



"They want to eliminate the Mujahedeen (Islamic militants) in the tribal areas so they can seek to smother the Jihad in Afghanistan," he said.



NATO-led forces are battling the Taliban across the border in Afghanistan as well. U.S. and British forces launched offensives in Helmand province this summer.



Al-Zawahiri warned Muslims that they have a religious duty to support the jihad, or struggle, or face punishment from God.



"No people abandons Jihad without Allah giving them a general punishment," he said, quoting the Quran.



Al-Zawahiri also prayed for the annihilation "the Americans and Jews" and anyone who might help them.

***

(CNN) -- The main airport in St. Louis is expected to operate a full flight schedule Tuesday, less than four days after a powerful tornado tore through the facility, airport officials said.





But restoration efforts are far from over at Lambert-St. Louis International Airport, where the Friday night storm shattered windows and ripped off part of a roof.





"It obviously just took a couple of minutes for the damage to occur," Airport Director Rhonda Hamm-Niebruegge told CNN's "American Morning." "It will take weeks, maybe a couple of months, to clean up all of it."





Still, Hamm-Niebruegge said efforts to get the facility up and running again have been "miraculous."





American Airlines returned to service on Monday, officials said, leaving only Cape Air among the airport's 13 airlines still out of service because of storm damage. Cape Air will resume flights on Tuesday, airport officials said in a statement Monday evening.





American and Cape Air were among the hardest hit after the storm, which devastated the airport's C concourse.





The tornado damaged 750 homes near the airport, Missouri Gov. Jay Nixon said. And preliminary National Weather Service estimates released Saturday show the tornado packed winds between 111 and 165 miles per hour when it hit the airport.





There were no fatalities reported -- a fact that Nixon characterized as "absolutely amazing."





At the airport, Hamm-Niebruegge said the facility's design -- and the way people responded to warnings -- played a key role.





"It is a historic building, and it's built very, very well. I think that had a part to do with it, but we also had very early warnings," she said.





Besides damage to homes and the airport, the strong winds also hit businesses and tore through the roof of a Ferguson, Missouri church, where dozens had gathered on Good Friday to watch the movie "Passion of the Christ."





Officials have said inspections of buildings will take several days and hauling off debris will take longer.





Elsewhere in Missouri, storms over the weekend left behind water on the runways at a regional airport, forcing authorities to shut down the facility temporarily.





The Cape Girardeau Regional Airport, located about 100 miles south of St. Louis, has been shut down since Sunday, administrative coordinator Katrina Atkins said.





Crews were activating a pumping system to remove the standing water Monday, she said, but authorities had not determined when the airport would reopen.





CNN's Tom Laabs contributed to this report.





Watch American Morning weekdays 6am to 9am ET. For the latest from American Morning click here.

***

(CNN)  -- Defending World Cup champion Gregor Schlierenzauer of Austria claimed the second leg of the famous Four Hills ski-jumping tournament at Garmisch on New Year's Day.



Schlierenzauer could only finish ninth in the first event at Oberstdorf on Tuesday, but made no mistake with leaps of 136.5 and 137.5m and good style marks for a total of 277.7 points.



It gave him a comfortable advantage over fellow Austrian Wolfgang Loitzl, who twice jumped 135m for 272.5 points.



Switzerland's double Olympic champion from 2002 in Salt Lake City, Simon  Ammann, showed he is running into form for Vancouver next February, after jumping 132 and 143.5m for 272.4 points and third place.



Austrian Andreas Kofler, who won at Oberstdorf, maintained the overall lead in the four-event competition as he came in fourth with leaps of 136 and 137m for 271.9 points.



Finland's five-time Four Hills champion Janne Ahonen, second at Oberstdorf on his comeback from retirement, finished sixth after jumps of 129.5 and 137m gave him 259.2 points.



Kofler leads the standings with a 20-point lead over Loitzl with Ahonen third ahead of the next competition at Innsbruck on Sunday.



The Four Hills concludes in Austria, at Bischofshofen on January 6.



Ammann still leads the overall World Cup standings with Schlierenzauer closing up in second place and Kofler third.



In other pre-Olympic news, leading U.S. snowboarder Kevin Pearce suffered serious injuries in training for the halfpipe event in Utah.



Reports said Pearce hit head on the halfpipe while attempting a complex move and was taken to a hospital in Salt Lake City.



He was among the favorites for gold at the 2010 Vancouver games having beaten 2006 Olympic gold medallist Shaun White in recent competitions.

***

Orlando, Florida (CNN) -- An autopsy report released Wednesday confirmed that a SeaWorld trainer killed after a 12,000-pound killer whale pulled her underwater died of drowning and traumatic injuries to her body, including her spine, ribs and head.





Dawn Brancheau, 40, was working with a whale named Tilikum in knee-deep water at SeaWorld in Orlando on February 24 when the animal grabbed her by the ponytail and pulled her underwater in front of shocked onlookers at the park's Shamu Stadium.





The autopsy report by the Orange County, Florida, medical examiner's office says Brancheau's spinal cord was severed, and she sustained fractures to her jawbone, ribs and to a cervical vertebra, in addition to the drowning.





Rescuers were not immediately able to reach Brancheau because of the "whale's aggressive nature," the county sheriff's office said. SeaWorld staff members recovered Brancheau after Tilikum was coaxed into a smaller pool and lifted out of the water by a large platform on the bottom of the smaller tank, authorities said.





Video shows Tilikum performing before attack





A source at SeaWorld told CNN in February that after seizing her, the whale dove deep underwater. Brancheau's body was recovered about 40 minutes later.





Tilikum has been linked to two other deaths. He and two other whales were involved in the drowning of a trainer at a Victoria, British Columbia, marine park in 1991. The trainer fell into the whale tank at the Sea Land Marine Park Victoria and was dragged underwater as park visitors watched.





In 1999, Tilikum was blamed for the death of a 27-year-old man whose body was found floating in a tank at SeaWorld, the apparent victim of a whale's "horseplay," authorities said then. The Orange County Sheriff's Office said the man apparently hid in the park until after it closed, then climbed into the tank.





Because of Tilikum's history, as well as his size, trainers did not get into the water with him and specific procedures were in place for working with him, SeaWorld officials have said.





Two days after Brancheau's death, the head of SeaWorld said Tilikum "is a wonderful animal" and "will remain an active and contributing member of the team despite what happened."





"He's a very special animal that requires special handling," said Jim Achison, president of SeaWorld Parks & Entertainment. "Obviously, the procedures that we've had in place are something we're revisiting at this point."





Tilikum's size and weight -- 12,000 pounds, compared with 6,000 to 9,000 pounds for the facility's other killer whales -- were one reason separate procedures were in place for him at the Orlando facility.

***

(CNN) -- Honduras' de facto president said Thursday that he is willing to resign and let ousted President Jose Manuel Zelaya back into the country, as long as Zelaya gives up his quest for leadership.



Ousted Honduras leader Jose Manuel Zelaya may be allowed to return to his country under certain conditions.



The new proposal calls for the person next in line, as required by the constitution, to succeed de facto President Roberto Micheletti. Under terms of the proposal, Zelaya could return as a private citizen, but not be allowed to resume his post.



Presidential elections held after both resigned would be monitored by international observers such as the Organization of American States and the European Union, according to the proposal.



Zelaya did not immediately issue a response to the offer.



Until now, Micheletti has made clear that Zelaya would be arrested if he returned.



The offer comes two months after Zelaya was seized by the military in his pajamas and forced to leave the country.



Micheletti has insisted that Zelaya was not overthrown and was replaced through constitutional means.



The political crisis stemmed from Zelaya's plan to hold a referendum that could have changed the constitution and allowed longer term limits. The country's congress had outlawed the vote and the supreme court had ruled it illegal.



The Organization of American States sent a delegation to Honduras on Tuesday to promote the so-called San Jose Accord, which seeks an end to the political turmoil and the return of Zelaya to office. Micheletti's government declined to sign the agreement.



On Thursday, the United States said it was considering cutting off all aid to Honduras. Washington froze its assistance to Honduras after Zelaya was removed from office and stopped issuing visas in the Central American country earlier this week. Further steps could choke off as much $200 million in additional aid dispensed by the Millennium Challenge Corporation, funded by the U.S. government.



The United Nations and the European Union also have said that they do not recognize Micheletti's provisional government.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- China has canceled or postponed several military exchanges with the U.S. in reaction to last week's announcement that the U.S. is selling weapons to Taiwan, a Defense Department spokesman said Monday.

Apache attack helicopters are part of the $6.4 billion weapons deal between the U.S. and Taiwan.

Officials announced last week an intention to sell $6.4 billion in arms to Taiwan, though the deal still needs to be approved by Congress.

Maj. Stewart Upton said the sale does not violate the Taiwan Relations Act, which allows the United States to provide Taiwan with items for self-defense

Taiwan split from the Chinese mainland in 1949 and the United States has vowed to support them if China initiates an unprovoked attack.

The arms deal comes at a time when the United States needs China in negotiations over Iran's and North Korea's nuclear programs.

"The Chinese reaction is unfortunate and results in missed opportunities," Upton said. "We feel that the global security environment calls for U.S. and [Chinese] officials to maintain close relations to address common security challenges."

The "bilateral events" China called off or postponed involve "senior level visits and humanitarian assistance/disaster relief exchanges" scheduled to happen by the end of November, he said.

The Chinese ambassador was said to be on his way to the State Department Monday afternoon to protest the proposed weapons sale to Taiwan.

One U.S. official said the tension with China will not affect the role China is playing in negotiations with Iran or North Korea over its nuclear program.

The official declined to speak for attribution because of the sensitive diplomacy involved.

The arms deal package includes a variety of U.S.-made weapons systems, including Patriot III anti-missile system, Apache attack helicopters, Harpoon missiles and Javelin anti-tank missiles.

***

(CNN) -- When it comes to the sport of wrestling, longtime adversaries Iran and the United States are friendly enemies.

Andy Hrovat, right, seen wrestling Reineris Salas of Cuba, is among the U.S. wrestlers touring this winter.

A U.S. freestyle men's wrestling team will go to the Islamic republic -- where the sport is widely popular -- for a prestigious tournament in March.

Nine American wrestlers will take part in the Takhti Cup competition, scheduled for March 12-13, according to state Iranian media and USA Wrestling -- the national governing body for Olympics wrestling in the United States.

"In Iran, wrestling and soccer are the two major sports," said Gary Abbott, director of communications for USA Wrestling in Colorado Springs, Colorado. "They know their wrestling as well as anyone in the world. They treat our athletes like kings."

Relations between the United States and Iran ended after Iranian militants seized the U.S. Embassy in Tehran in 1979 and held Americans hostage there for 444 days.

More recently, the two countries have been at odds over Iran's nuclear ambitions and have been sharply critical of each other's policies and actions in the Middle East.

But Abbott said there has been a history of U.S. and Iranian wrestling exchanges despite the politics. Both sides are always looking for opportunities to compete.

Abbott said Iran is one of the top wrestling powers in the world, along with countries such as the United States, Russia, Turkey and Ukraine. Competing in a wrestling-crazy society like Iran is special to Americans, who look forward to getting on the mats before large crowds in sold-out arenas.

"For the common citizen, an American wrestler in Iran is like Michael Jordan going over there," Abbott said, referring to the world-famous American basketball legend.

USA Wrestling said the trip is one of several overseas events this winter for American wrestlers.

U.S. teams also will also be competing in Russia, Ukraine, Sweden, Cuba, Bulgaria, Belarus, Turkey, Serbia, Hungary and Slovenia. The team going to Iran includes four men who have represented the United States in the Olympics.

***

(CNN) -- Randy Pausch, the professor whose "last lecture" became a runaway phenomenon on the Internet and was turned into a best-selling book, died Friday of pancreatic cancer, Carnegie Mellon University announced on its Web site.



Randy Pausch emphasized the joy of life in his "last lecture," originally given in September 2007.



Pausch, 47, a computer science professor, delivered the lecture, "Really Achieving Your Childhood Dreams," at Carnegie Mellon in September 2007, a month after being told he had three to six months to live because his cancer had returned.



The lanky, energetic Pausch talked about goals he had accomplished, like experiencing zero gravity and creating Disney attractions, and those he had not, including becoming a professional football player.



He used rejections he was handed when he applied for jobs at Disney to comment on the importance of persistence.



"The brick walls are there for a reason ... to show us how badly we want something," he said. "Because the brick walls are there to stop the people who don't want it badly enough. They're there to stop the other people."  Watch what Pausch did for his wife »



Starting with a joke about "a deathbed conversion" -- "I just bought a Macintosh" computer -- the educator went on to say that one of his childhood dreams was to write an entry in the World Book Encyclopedia.



"I guess you can tell the nerds early,"  he added.



An expert in virtual reality, Pausch did go on to write an encyclopedia entry on the subject.



He discussed his fondness for winning stuffed animals at fairs, showed a slide of them, then -- pretending to be concerned his audience would think the image had been digitally manipulated -- produced them onstage.



Donning silly costume items like a vest with arrows sticking out of it and a Mad Hatter's hat, he described working with students as a way to help other people achieve their dreams.



He also played down his own importance, saying that after he got a Ph.D., his mother took to introducing him as "a doctor, but not the kind who helps people."



The lecture has been viewed more than 3.2 million times since it was posted on YouTube in December.



Pausch co-founded the university's Entertainment Technology Center and was known for developing interdisciplinary courses and research projects that attracted new students to the field of computer science. He also spent his career encouraging computer scientists to collaborate with artists, dramatists and designers, Carnegie Mellon said.



The university's president, Jared Cohon, described Pausch as "a brilliant researcher and gifted teacher."



"His love of teaching, his sense of fun and his brilliance came together in the Alice project, which teaches students computer programming while enabling them to do something fun -- making animated movies and games," Cohon added. "Carnegie Mellon -- and the world -- are better places for having had Randy Pausch in them."



Pausch describes Cohon urging him to talk about having fun in his lecture, and telling him it's difficult because it's like asking a fish to talk about water.



"I don't know how not to have fun," he said. "I'm dying and I'm having fun. And I'm going to keep having fun every day I have left."



Pausch is survived by his wife, Jai, and three children.

***

ROME, Italy (CNN) -- The Italian capital Rome was spared major damage Saturday as some of the heaviest flooding in the past century reached its peak without bursting the banks of the Tiber river.



A rescue boat patrols the swollen River Tiber in central Rome early Friday.



Italian Civil Protection officials said the river will take several days to return to normal levels but there was no longer a risk of flooding.



Civil Protection teams were also coordinating the removal of two barges that crashed against bridges after breaking their moorings on Friday.



Italian media report that last night a young man from Ireland fell in the Tiber, but his body has not been found yet.



Hundreds of volunteers and officials had been deployed around Rome ahead of the flood's peak, while sandbags were lined up to contain any possible river overflow.



Firefighters Thursday had to rescue dozens of motorists stranded in their cars. Because of the intense rain, the streets of some northern Rome neighborhoods were already flooded by water and covered in thick brown mud.



One woman died near Rome early Thursday when her car was submerged by a wave of water and mud in an underpass. The body of a second victim was found in the southern region of Calabria after a bridge collapsed.



Earlier this month, much of the Italian city of Venice was underwater as some of the heaviest floods for several decades burst the city's famed canal networks and inundated historic landmarks such as St. Mark's Square.

***

(CNN)  -- The body of a woman was found near her car Wednesday, the apparent victim of an ammonia leak from a nearby plant in Swansea, South Carolina, police said.



The leak occurred at the Tanner Industries plant as a hose had been connected from a delivery trailer containing anhydrous ammonia (purified ammonia) to a storage tank in the facility, said David Binder, director of quality safety and regulatory affairs for Tanner Industries.



"During that operation, a hole burst in the hose," he said. "That released ammonia gas."



The leak from the plant, located about 24 miles south of Columbia, was reported to the Lexington County Sheriff's Department shortly before 8 a.m., said Maj. John Allard, a public information officer for the department.



Firefighters arrived within 10 minutes at the plant, where they saw a large, light-colored, dense plume, and closed area roads to traffic, he said.



The ammonia hovered first over U.S. 321, then moved into a wooded area, blackening its foliage, Allard said.



Public safety personnel searched the vicinity for any people or animals affected by the leak, and -- at 9:30 a.m. -- found the woman's body next to her vehicle, which was parked on the side of U.S. 321, he said.



Officials were speculating that the woman had been driving north when she encountered the plume and tried to turn around, but her car stalled.



She apparently got out of the vehicle and was overcome by the fumes, Allard said. An autopsy has been ordered.



The woman's name was not released pending notification of her family.



Seven people were taken to Lexington County Medical Center in stable condition with respiratory problems, none of which was life-threatening, Allard said. Five were plant workers; the other two were nearby residents.



The road was reopened at 2 p.m., after the plume had dissipated, he said.



The U.S. Chemical Safety Board -- an independent agency charged with investigating industrial chemical accidents -- announced it is deploying an investigation team to the site of the ammonia release.



Tanner's Binder described the occurrence as "tragic," adding that nothing similar had occurred in the plant's more than 13 years of existence. "This is just heart-wrenching," he said, adding that there were no immediate plans to reopen the plant.



Ammonia, a strong irritant that affects the respiratory system, is used in a variety of industries, including the manufacture of fertilizers and in commercial refrigeration systems.



CNN's Anna Rhett Cobb contributed to this story

***

(CNN)  -- Eight people were arrested Tuesday, one on a charge of murder, in connection with the fatal shooting of a woman at a remote Louisiana campsite during what police say was an initiation ceremony for the Ku Klux Klan.





Chuck Foster is charged with second-degree murder in the woman's death.





The woman, whose identity has not been confirmed, was recruited over the Internet to join the Klan by the suspects, said Capt. George Bonnett of the St. Tammany Parish Sheriff's Office.





The woman traveled from Oklahoma to Louisiana for the ceremony and was taken to a campsite near Sun, Louisiana, about 60 miles north of New Orleans.





On Sunday, the woman asked to be taken from the camp to a nearby town. An argument ensued, and the woman was fatally shot by the group's leader, Bonnett said.





Some of the suspects then tried to conceal the killing by burning the woman's personal items, he said.





Police received a tip about the killing and found the woman's body hidden under loose brush alongside a road, Bonnett said. The suspects, most of whom were still in the woods near the campsite several miles from where the body was found, were taken into custody without incident, he said.





The group's leader, identified as Chuck Foster, 44, was charged with second-degree murder. The others were charged with lesser crimes related to trying to conceal the killing, Bonnett said.





Authorities found weapons, several flags and six Klan uniforms in the area, he said.





Bonnett said he has not seen any Klan activity in the area in three years he has worked there. According to the Southern Poverty Law Center, there were seven active Klan organizations in Louisiana in 2007, the last time the civil rights law firm tracked hate groups.





None of these organizations was in the Sun area.





CNN's Marylynn Ryan contributed to this report.

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- When the Emperors Club VIP said it was sending Kristen, a call girl it described as a "petite, very pretty brunette, 5 feet 5 inches, and 105 pounds," Client 9 was pleased.



Ashley Alexandra Dupre writes on her MySpace page: "I have been broke and homeless."



"Great, OK, wonderful," he told the escort service's booking agent, according to a federal affidavit.



Client 9, later revealed to be New York Gov. Eliot Spitzer, was caught arranging the liaison on a federal wiretap. It was the beginning of the end for him.



For the woman at the heart of the prostitution scandal, it was just another step on what she calls an "odyssey" of degrading abuse and high aspirations.



Court documents reportedly identified Ashley Youmans -- now known as Ashley Alexandra Dupre -- as Kristen, the high-priced prostitute who met with Spitzer at the Mayflower Hotel in Washington on February 13.



Dupre is a 22-year-old would-be singer from New Jersey, the New York Times reported Wednesday.



She has not been charged with any crime.  Watch a report from Dupre's apartment building »



Dupre made a brief appearance Monday in U.S. Magistrate Court as a witness against four people charged with operating Emperor's Club VIP, the prostitution ring, the Times said.



Spitzer announced his resignation Wednesday as governor of New York, two days after reports of his connection to the Emperors Club VIP emerged.



Dupre told the Times she's mostly gone without sleep since the case became public.



"I just don't want to be thought of as a monster," Dupre told the newspaper. She revealed little else in the interview, but her MySpace page offered some insight into her background.



Dupre writes that she left home at 17 to begin "my odyssey to New York."



"It was my decision, and I've never looked back," she writes. "Left my hometown. Left a broken family. Left abuse. Left an older brother who had already split. Left and learned what it was like to have everything, and lose it, again and again.



"Learned what it was like to wake up one day and have the people you care about most gone. I have been alone. I have abused drugs. I have been broke and homeless. But, I survived, on my own. I am here, in NY because of my music."  Watch Kyle Youmans describe his sister as "tough" »



In her profile, Dupre says she moved to Manhattan to pursue her music career.



"I am all about my music, and my music is all about me," she writes on her MySpace page. "It flows from what I've been through, what I've seen and how I feel."



The page includes a picture of Dupre with the slogan "what destroys me, strengthens me." It also features a song titled "What we want" recorded by Dupre, with lyrics including "I know what you want, you got what I want, I know what you need, can you handle me?"



On the MySpace page, Dupre lists singers Etta James, Aretha Franklin and Celine Dion, as well as her brother, as her influences.



She also offers some advice for those experiencing hard times.



"I made it. I'm still here and I love who I am. If I never went through the hard times, I would not be able to appreciate the good ones," Dupre writes.



"Cliché, yes, but I know it's true. I have experienced just how hard it can be. I can honestly tell you to never dwell on the past, but build from it and keep moving forward."



Her brother, Kyle Youmans, told CNN he would not comment on the case or how his sister earns money, but he said she is "the best sister you could have."



"I'm sticking by my sister, doing everything so

***

(CNN) -- A sharp increase in the number of reported cases of the H1N1 virus in Australia may prompt the World Health Organization (WHO) to declare the first global pandemic in over forty years.



Australian rugby league star Karmichael Hunt is one of several players being tested for the H1N1 virus.



The number of Australian cases of the virus, commonly known as swine flu, has reached more than 1,200, with state and federal medical officers set to hold an emergency meeting in Sydney to review the country's swine flu protection measures.



"We will take each decision along the way in response to the expert medical advice," Prime Minister Kevin Rudd told the Australian Broadcasting Corporation (ABC).



On Wednesday it was announced that the entire Brisbane Broncos rugby league squad had been placed into quarantine after one of their players was suspected of having the virus.



The Queensland club confirmed on its Web site that full-back Karmichael Hunt was being tested for the virus, while the sport's governing body, the National Rugby League (NRL), said Hunt had tested positive for the common flu, influenza A.



With over 26,000 H1N1 cases worldwide, the WHO could move to Phase 6, the highest on its pandemic alert system.



"It's really a matter of making sure that countries are prepared as possible. We do not want people to overly panic," Keiji Fukuda, WHO's Assistant Director General, told ABC.



In a statement a day earlier, Fukuda said the WHO had been working extremely hard preparing countries for what a potential move to a global pandemic would entail.



"I want to point out that by going to Phase 6 the activity has become established in at least two regions of the world," he said.



"It does not mean that the severity of the situation has increased and that people are getting seriously sick at higher numbers or higher rates than they are right now."

***

(CNN) -- It certainly isn't your average help wanted ad.



A publication in Denver, Colorado, is looking for a journalist to review marijuana dispensaries.



"Do you have a medical condition that necessitates marijuana? Do you have a way with words? If so, Westword wants you to join the ranks as our freelance marijuana-dispensary reviewer."



The local "burgeoning medical marijuana scene" in Denver, Colorado, is growing and the weekly publication Westword wants to be on the forefront, said Joe Tone, the paper's Web editor. "We want someone who can get in and relay to our readers what it is like inside these dispensaries."



It's not exactly like a food critic job. The online-only reviewer won't be showing up anonymously and sampling the wares.



"They are to review the places, not the weed," Tone said.



"We can't have our reviewer be stoned all the time," he quipped.



But, he said, the ideal applicant should have "the ability to write and be in the position of holding a state medical marijuana card." The reviewer, he said, should know his or her way around dispensaries and be "passionate about the issue of medical marijuana."



Colorado is one of 14 states where medical marijuana is legal by state law -- federal law still bans its use. But this week, the Obama administration announced a new policy loosening the rules regarding prosecuting criminal activity associated with medical marijuana.



The Justice Department now says that prosecutors can go after traffickers but not medical marijuana patients and their caregivers.



Though Westword is no longer accepting applicants for its dispensary reviewer position, they are actively working through the 120 they received and have culled the list down to under 20. The applicants run the gamut of 20-something stoners to well-educated engineers in their 50s.



Some have even offered to work for free, Tone said, adding "We won't accept that." The pay is "meager," he said, but it's legitimate.

***

ISLAMABAD, Pakistan (CNN) -- Pakistani security forces say they have killed at least 16 militants overnight in the country's volatile tribal region.



Pakistani security personnel patrol the Buner district.



This appears to be separate from the hostilities in the military's week-long crackdown in northwestern Pakistan against a Taliban militant advance in the country's North West Frontier Province.



However, this reflects the tensions in the region and could signal a spread of fighting resulting from the crackdown.



The Pakistani offensive started in the province on Sunday and it came after Taliban militants moved into Buner district last week, a move that alarmed U.S. and Pakistani officials.



In this latest incident, about 100 militants attacked a Frontier Corps checkpost in the Mohmand Agency, an area where militants hold great sway. Troops returned fire and killed the 16 militants, the military said.



Mohmand is in the country's Federally Administered Tribal Areas that borders a volatile region in war-torn Afghanistan and Pakistan's North West Frontier Province.



The military on Saturday released details about other incidents in the province that occurred over the last 24 hours.



Troops conducted a successful operation against militants in the district, in the Ambela-Daggar area in the Buner district. They secured a key road and cleared roadside bombs, the military said.



In the province's Upper Dir district, militants abducted and then released 10 troops and seized their weaponry and ammunition. And two civilians were wounded when militants lobbed hand grenades.



In the province's Swat district, militants attacked a security forces checkpost on Khawazakhela Bridge and Sambat Ridge. In Langer, security forces and militants exchanged fire and forces found military uniforms that militants were using for terrorist activity. Three Afghan nationals were among five militants arrested while planting a roadside bomb.



Earlier this year, Pakistan entered into an agreement with militants, allowing them to enforce Islamic, or sharia, in parts of Swat Valley in exchange for ceasing violence. The Swat Valley is a broader area that includes several provincial districts, including Chitral, Swat, Shangla, Malakand, Upper Dir, and Lower Dir.



But Pakistani officials say the armed militants' advance into Buner district violated the agreement and briefly halted peace talks between both sides in North West Frontier Province.



Representatives from Pakistan's government and the Taliban restarted their negotiations on Friday and were planning to have another session soon, a provincial spokesman said.



The Pakistani government has been criticized for not cracking down on militants along its border with Afghanistan. As a result, the U.S. military has carried out airstrikes against militant targets in Pakistan, which have rankled relations between the two countries.

***

(CNN)  -- A commuter airliner that crashed Thursday in upstate New York, killing 50 people, underwent violent pitching and rolling seconds before impact, with passengers experiencing twice the normal force of gravity, a federal investigator said Sunday.

Only a few pieces of the Continental Connection Dash 8 turboprop were recognizable after the crash.

The plane's final 800-foot fall took five seconds, Steve Chealander of the National Transportation Safety Board said.

The aircraft crashed into a home in Clarence Center, New York, near Buffalo, on Thursday night, killing all 49 people aboard. A 61-year-old man in the house died also, but his wife and daughter survived.

Final motions of the aircraft were so drastic that the plane's autopilot automatically disengaged and warnings sounded, Chealander said, citing information from the plane's flight data and cockpit voice recorders. Also, a "stick-shaker" device, which noisily vibrates an airplane's controls to warn the pilot of imminent stall, kicked in, he said.

The flight crew of Continental Connection Flight 3407, operated by Colgan Air, discussed "significant" ice buildup on the aircraft's windshield and wings before the crash, and icing has become a focus as a possible cause.  Follow the plane's path Â»

Chealander said the plane's de-icing system was turned on 11 minutes after the flight left Newark, New Jersey, for Buffalo, and remained on for the entire flight. He said the pilots were told before departure from Newark that there was "light to moderate icing" in the Buffalo area but that no other pilots had reported problems with their landings at the Buffalo airport.

"It was really not a bad-weather day, and they chose to launch [from Newark]," Chealander said of the pilot and the first officer.

The plane was on autopilot during its approach to the Buffalo airport, Chealander said. As to questions about whether the autopilot should have been turned off, Chealander said using it even in bad weather situations "is normal."  Watch Chealander discuss autopilot options Â»

"You're encouraged to use the autopilot to help you with the workloads of these high intense weather situations that we fly into all the time," he said.

He said the NTSB in the past has recommended to the Federal Aviation Administration, which oversees civil aviation including commercial airlines, that in severe icing conditions, "it might be best to disconnect autopilot so that the pilot might have a better feel" for the aircraft's conditions.

However, severe icing is "not what we saw here," Chealander said, adding that the FAA has no such disengagement rule in effect.

"To say that they should not have been flying on autopilot is not correct," Chealander said.

The pilots' recorded remarks about "significant" icing did not indicate "severe" icing, he said.

The NTSB has said problems for the 74-seat Bombardier Dash 8 Q400 occurred when the pilots lowered the landing gear and tried to set the wing flaps to slow the aircraft for landing.

Offering more details, Chealander said Sunday that the plane's nose pitched up 31 degrees, then down 45 degrees. The aircraft rolled left 46 degrees then right 105 degrees, or past the 90-degree vertical point, he said.

Inside the cabin, he said, conditions went from lower than normal gravitational force to twice the normal force as the plane rocked through the sky. iReport.com: Send your photos, videos from the scene

Chealander said the NTSB's investigation of the crash site indicated that the two propellers on the turboprop aircraft were in place when the crash occurred.

"The airplane hadn't lost anything prior to impact. It came down intact," he said.

Meanwhile, local authorities working to recover remains of the victims said Sunday that a federal team of more than 40 people using some $2.8 million worth of scientific equipment would begin on Monday to help establish positive identification of the victims. But because of the intensity of the crash and a subsequent fire, "whether we can identify everybody or not remains to

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN) -- Only a few states have laws that adequately equip teen victims of dating violence with tools for protection and safety, according to a new report from a watchdog group.



Twenty-three states received sub-par grades in a report focusing on state laws focusing on protective orders.



The report by Los Angeles, California-based Break the Cycle includes state-by-state report cards that measure how each state treats teen victims of dating violence in comparison with the treatment of adult domestic violence victims.



Only five states -- California, Illinois, Minnesota, New Hampshire and Oklahoma -- received As, while nine states received B's. Twenty-three states received sub-par grades, including 11 getting Fs.



"I think what the state report cards are telling us is that states have a long way to go before they are protecting minors in abusive relationships," Marjorie Gilberg, Break the Cycle's executive director, told CNN Radio.



The report focuses on how easy it is for a teen to obtain a protective order in the event of abuse, including whether state law allows a minor to take out an order, if adult permission is required and whether an order can be issued against another minor.



New Hampshire, which got an A, is the only state where the law specifically allows minors to apply for a protection order, according to the report. Missouri, which got an F, makes such orders available only to adults.  See how the different states scored »



Nine states allow minors to obtain protective orders without adult approval if they meet certain criteria, such as being a minimum age, often 16, or having a specific relationship with the abuser, such as having a child together.



"What we hope to achieve with this is to call out the states that are not doing a good job protecting minors and help people in those states call on their legislators to make change," Gilberg said.



One in five teens who have been in a "serious relationship" report being hit, slapped or pushed by a partner, according to the National Teen Dating Abuse Helpline. One in three girls who have been in such a relationship say they've been concerned about being physically hurt by their partner.



Gilberg said that since the 2008 report cards came out, several states worked to change their laws to address the rights of minor victims in domestic violence statutes, though some were more successful than others. This year's report noted that eight states improved their grades.



Among them, Florida jumped from a D to a B for making protective orders "relatively accessible" to teen victims without an adult's approval if they are dating the abuser. The process was described as "extremely difficult" the previous year because state law did not specify whether a minor could petition for one alone.



"Even when you have an A grade," Gilberg said, "you still can do things to make the law more protective of minors who are in teen dating violence relationships."

***

PARIS, France (CNN) -- Interpol is chasing more than 200 leads on the potential identity of a pedophile suspected of molesting young boys, just one day after launching a global manhunt.



Interpol has launched a global appeal to find this man, accused of abusing young boys.



The organization, which facilitates global cooperation among police agencies, said its Web site logged 30 times more visitors than in an average day after it made its plea for the public's help Tuesday.



Interpol is trying to locate a man who is pictured sexually abusing young boys in hundreds of images on the Internet.



"'The public's response has been very positive," said Kristin Kvigne, assistant director of Interpol's Trafficking in Human Beings unit, in a news release.



"The smallest piece of information from anywhere in the world could be crucial in identifying this man."



The man is featured in 100 photographs sexually abusing at least three boys between the ages of six and 10, Interpol said.



The organization posted six pictures of the suspect on its Web site.



The pictures came to light in 2006, when Norwegian authorities discovered them in the possession of a man they arrested.  Watch a report on Interpol's man-hunt »



"While these images were only discovered two years ago, we believe the photographs were taken between April 2000 and May 2001, so clearly this man will be older than he appears in the pictures," said Kvigne.



Last October, Interpol disseminated pictures of another man whose face appeared in more than 200 images of sex acts with children. It dubbed its operation Vico, because the images were thought to have been taken in Vietnam and Cambodia.



Ten days later, Christopher Paul Neil -- a 32-year-old Canadian man who had been working as an English-language teacher in South Korea -- was arrested in Thailand and charged with child abuse.



Following the success of that operation, the organization's general assembly approved a resolution allowing Interpol to seek public help in child sex abuse investigations.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Iran may be holding a former FBI agent in a bid to exchange him for Iranians seized by U.S. troops in Iraq in 2007, a U.S. senator suggested Tuesday.

Christine Levinson, wife of Robert Levinson, went to Tehran in 2007 to try to learn her husband's fate.

Robert Levinson disappeared from Iran's Kish Island in March 2007. Iranian authorities have repeatedly said they don't have any information on him, but that is widely doubted in the United States.

"On several diplomatic occasions when Bob Levinson's name has been brought up to Iranian officials, the standard answer is, 'We don't know anything about that.' But the next thing out of the Iranian officials' mouths are to discuss the matter of the Iranians held by the Americans in Irbil, Iraq," Sen. Bill Nelson, D-Florida, told reporters. "You can draw your own conclusions."

U.S. troops arrested five Iranians accused of being members of an elite Iranian military unit during a January 2007 raid in the Kurdish city of Irbil. They were accused of supporting Shiite militias in Iraq, but Iran said they were diplomats and accused the United States of violating international law by raiding a consulate.

The United States said the men were taken at a liaison office that lacks diplomatic status. Two were released the next November.

Nelson and Florida Democratic Rep. Robert Wexler, whose district includes Levinson's Coral Springs home, are trying to jump-start efforts to find the missing man. Wexler said Iranian authorities have not assisted the Levinsons, saying they have "zero knowledge" of his whereabouts and are stonewalling "any effort to gain pertinent information."

Levinson's wife, Christine, said her husband was working as a private investigator on a cigarette smuggling case when he disappeared.

"It's been extremely difficult for my family," she said. "We hope to resolve this as soon as possible."

Wexler and Nelson said they plan to introduce legislation in their respective houses calling on Iran to cooperate with the United States and come up with information about Levinson. Nelson said Iran could use Levinson's case as a show of good will toward the incoming Obama administration, which has said it wants to engage Iran after three decades without diplomatic relations.

"We hope that Iran will take this moment in time to show a change in the relationship with the United States by doing this humanitarian gesture for this family," he said.

In a January 22 letter to Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, Wexler asked that the case be raised "at the highest levels." Nelson raised Levinson's status during Clinton's confirmation hearing.

Nelson said the Iranian ambassador to the United Nations has discussed Levinson's case with him under the "fiction" that he represents the people of Florida, not the U.S. government. But he said the Iranians have never acknowledged holding the former federal agent.

Levinson had been working as a private investigator in Dubai and was last heard from on March 8, 2007. His family said he checked into a hotel on Kish Island and then checked out the next day to go back to the United States, but he never boarded his flight.

Levinson family members have met with local Iranian officials and have traveled to Iran to retrace his steps. Christine Levinson also flew to the United Nations in September to ask questions about her husband, whom she says suffers from diabetes and high blood pressure. The family has offered a $5,000 reward for information leading to his safe return.

The State Department and FBI have consistently denied Levinson was working for the government and have demanded Iran free Levinson -- if it is holding him. State Department spokesman Robert Wood said the U.S. government has called on Iran to provide more information about the matter "for some time."

"His family's extremely concerned, as you can understand, that no information has been forthcoming," Wood said. "So, again, we call on the Iranians to provide whatever information they have on Mr. Levinson so that we can hopefully return this gentleman to his family."

***

(RollingStone.com) -- Arcade Fire manager Scott Rodger has responded to allegations by media mogul Steve Stoute and record industry gadfly Bob Lefsetz that the band closed out the Grammy Awards this year with a second performance because the Recording Academy knew the group would win the ceremony's final award for Album of the Year.





Grammy Awards: Complete Coverage





In an email to Lefsetz's newsletter The Lefsetz Letter, Rodger explained that the Arcade Fire performed last at the show because ratings are typically low at the end of the broadcast, and the band was one of the least-known acts on the bill. (He wrote that he would have preferred if the band had played earlier in the program.)





Rodger also insisted that the band's second performance was not part of a "big plot" but rather an agreement with Grammy producers to play out the show's credits, depending on how much time was left in the broadcast. He said that the band was never guaranteed time at the end of the ceremony.





Photos: Arcade Fire's Greatest Performances





Rodger later asserted that the Arcade Fire did not lobby for their Grammy in any way, and that the band, not its label Merge Records, paid their own overhead in order to perform at the event.





A letter from Arcade Fire's manager (in reaction to Steve Stoute's Open Letter to The Grammys)

***

HAVANA, Cuba (CNN) -- "Che" the movie met Che the myth in Cuba this weekend, and the lengthy biopic of the Argentinean revolutionary won acclaim from among those who know his story best.



Actor Benicio Del Toro stars in "Che," which details Che Guevara's role in the 1950s Cuban revolution.



The movie was screened Saturday in the Yara movie theater in central Havana as part of the 30th International Festival of the New Latin American Cinema.



"Che" also played Sunday at Havana's Karl Marx Theater.



"Che" stars Oscar winner Benicio Del Toro in the title role, for which he won a best actor award at this year's Cannes Film Festival.



But it's one thing to make a movie about Ernesto "Che" Guevara and the Cuban revolution and show it in France, quite another to screen it in Cuba.



Speaking to CNN outside the Karl Marx Theater, the bilingual Puerto Rican actor admitted some anxiety.



"This is Cuban history, so there's an audience in there that probably, that could be the biggest critics and the most knowledgeable critics of the historical accuracy of the film," Del Toro said.  Watch Del Toro talk about the movie in Cuba »



It appears he needn't have worried.



Audiences gave the movie hearty ovations. And Granma, the official mouthpiece of the Cuban government, gave Del Toro a glowing review.



"Del Toro personifies Che in a spectacular manner, not only his physical appearance but also his masterly interpretation," the state newspaper said.



After the showing, Del Toro characterized the public reaction as "sensational, a shot of adrenaline," Granma said. "The dream was to make this movie and to bring it here, where it all began."



The movie has two parts: "El argentino," which portrays Guevara's role in the 1950s Cuban revolution, and "Guerrilla," which shows Guevara's efforts in Africa and Bolivia, where he was killed in 1967. It was directed by Steven Soderbergh, who also directed Del Toro in the 2000 film "Traffic," for which Del Toro won an Oscar.



At 4 hours and 17 minutes, "Che" can test viewers' stamina. But that wasn't a problem in Havana.



It's a story Cubans know by heart. But this time, it's told by outsiders.



Catalina, a history professor who would give only her first name, was a tough critic.



"The movie is well-done. It has good intentions," she said. "But in my opinion, in the first part, the scenes in the jungle seemed a bit like a caricature."



Though some debated the details of this story they know so well, most -- like a young Guevara lookalike who identified himself only as Daniel -- were pleased.



"It has captured history to perfection," he said. "It has been well thought out and well-created."



Others, like student Susel Paraza, were torn about seeing their history told by others.



"What hurt me a little," she said, "is that it wasn't us, the Cubans, who thought to make a movie like this but instead a foreign director with foreign actors who have recreated this story very well."



Other foreign actors have played Guevara, most notably Egyptian-born Omar Sharif in a 1969 U.S. production titled "Che!"



Soderbergh's "Che" has been shown at six film festivals worldwide and will have a limited opening in the United States on December 12. It is scheduled for widespread U.S. distribution starting January 24.



Although many may not know Guevara's history, his image is recognized worldwide from a photograph taken by Alberto Korda at a Havana memorial service in March 1960.



Titled "Guerrillero Heroico" (Heroic Guerrilla), the image of a somber, long-haired and bearded Guevara wearing a beret with a lone star became what the Maryland Institute College of Art called "the most famous photograph in the world and a symbol of the 20th century

***

Lagos, Nigeria (CNN) -- Nigeria's ailing President Umaru Yar'Adua, who gave amnesty to armed militants in the troubled oil-rich Niger Delta region, died Wednesday, the country's information minister said. He was 58.





Yar'Adua had not been seen in public since November, when he went to Saudi Arabia for treatment of an inflammation of tissue around his heart. He was diagnosed with that condition, acute pericarditis, last fall after he complained of chest pain.





He returned to Nigeria in February but had remained out of sight.





Vice President Goodluck Jonathan has served as the country's acting leader since Yar'Adua fell ill.





Yar'Adua took office in 2007 in an election mired in controversy and accusations of vote-rigging.





"There was ballot snatching, voters were molested, voters were beaten ... and also payment inducement to vote for certain candidates," said Eneruvie Enakoko of the Civil Liberties Organization, a human rights group in Lagos.





The president, a soft-spoken and unassuming figure who did not bask in the media spotlight like past leaders of the West African nation, pledged to fight to improve the country of 150 million people despite the accusations.





"Our collective goal is to deliver for our children a Nigeria better, stronger, more peaceful, more secure and more prosperous than we met it," Yar'Adua said.





President Barack Obama issued a statement late Wednesday expressing his condolences to Yar'Adua's family and the Nigerian people.





"President Yar'Adua worked to promote peace and stability in Africa through his support of Nigerian peacekeeping efforts as well as his strong criticism of undemocratic actions in the region," Obama said in the statement. "He was committed to creating lasting peace and prosperity within Nigeria's own borders, and continuing that work will be an important part of honoring his legacy."





His election followed wide support from his predecessor, leading critics to label him a puppet of the former president, Olusegun Obasanjo.





After he was elected, Yar'Adua replaced some of Obasanjo's top officials, including the head of the army, a move analysts said was aimed at shedding off his predecessor's influence.





One of Yar'Adua's biggest successes was offering amnesty to militants in the troubled oil-rich Niger Delta region, a move that brought fragile peace to the area after years of conflict. The well-armed Niger Delta rebels have been battling Nigeria's armed forces over oil profits, which they say are unequally distributed.





While he has hospitalized in Saudi Arabia, the militants called off the truce, dealing a blow to plans to end violence that has crippled oil production in the nation.





Analysts say he did little to institutionalize reform in a country where two-thirds of the population lives on less than a dollar a day.





"Because many people feel disillusioned economically and as long as they have those sentiments -- I think the risk of radical uprisings in places like northern Nigeria and certainly southern Nigeria in the Delta will continue regardless of who is in power," said Rolake Akinola, an analyst at Control Risks West Africa.





Yar'Adua, a former chemistry teacher, was married twice and has nine children.





CNN's Faith Karimi and Christian Purefoy contributed to this report.

***

(Rolling Stone) -- Maybe you thought since Adam Sandler is playing boy-and-girl twins in "Jack and Jill" that the movie would be double the fun.





Ha! On a scale of 1 to 10 on the laugh meter, "Jack and Jill" is a negative 10. A total bust, a stupefyingly unfunny and shamelessly lazy farce packed with cringe-worthy jokes and overt product placement.





L.A. ad exec Jack Sadelstein (Sandler the guy) is gritting his teeth over a holiday visit from his loudmouthed, overweight twin Jill (Sandler in drag, showing an unfailing grasp of the obvious). The siblings pick at each other relentlessly between Jill's bouts with farting and dropping chimichanga bombs.





No peace, even with the help of Jack's peacemaker wife (Katie Holmes looks so trapped in this thankless role you ache to save her). It's odious to watch the movie make fun of Jill's looks, weight, and flatulence problems only to switch gears into gooey sentiment at the end and tell us we should love her. "Jack and Jill" wants to have its hypocrisy and eat it too.





Look, I'm not a Sandler hater. He was terrific in Judd Apatow's "Funny People" and Paul Thomas Anderson's "Punch-Drunk Love." And I still treasure fun memories of "Billy Madison" and "Happy Gilmore," made before Sandler turned cynical and contemptuous of his audience. "Jack and Jill" plays like the kind of crap Sandler's comedian character skewered in "Funny People."





The plot is a stew of half-baked ideas that quickly turns rancid. Jack has problems at work; his company will go under if he can't persuade Al Pacino to play himself in a Dunkin' Donuts commercial. Watching the Oscar winner bust a move and freestyle rap while he extols the virtues of sipping a Dunkachinno is to witness desperation incarnate.





Sandler and director Dennis Dugan must have something on "The Godfather" to make him lower himself to these depths. "Burn it," says Pacino after watching the commercial Sandler creates. "No one must ever see this." The same goes for the movie.





Rolling Stone rating: Zero stars





See the full article at RollingStone.com.

***

ST. GEORGE, Utah (CNN) -- A young man whose arranged marriage to a young cousin led to the conviction of polygamist sect leader Warren Jeffs was charged Wednesday with her rape.



Prosecutors filed the rape charge against Allen Steed, 26, a day after a jury found Jeffs guilty of two rape-accomplice counts in connection with Steed's ill-fated 2001 marriage to Elissa Wall.



Jurors found that Jeffs used his authority as leader of the Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, or FLDS, to push the girl into a marriage she did not want.



Steed was 19 and his bride, who also was his first cousin, was 14 when Jeffs "sealed" them in spiritual marriage at a motel in Caliente, Nevada, where many FLDS weddings were performed. Three other couples also were married that day in separate ceremonies, according to testimony.



Steed is accused of having sex with the girl against her will several weeks into the marriage.



Steed testified for the defense at Jeffs' trial. He said his new wife was affectionate to him in private, but cold in public. He denied that he or Jeffs had forced sex on her.



Wall agreed to be identified publicly as the trial ended in hopes of encouraging other women who feel trapped by polygamy to come forward.  Watch Wall urge other girls to be brave »



She testified that she told Steed she was not ready and that her first sexual encounter made her feel dirty, used and trapped.



Her pleas to church leaders to end the marriage were ignored, and Jeffs told her to submit "mind, body and soul" to her new husband, Wall told the jury.



Her sisters testified that most of the women in the family also opposed the marriage but were powerless to stop it.



According to the criminal complaint, the trial established that the pair had sex and that the young woman had convinced jurors she did not consent.



Wall left the marriage and the FLDS in 2004. She is now remarried.



An attorney for Steed could not be reached.



Jeffs, 51, leads the 10,000-member FLDS, which is based in the twin border towns of Hildale, Utah, and Colorado City, Arizona. Followers believe him to be God's prophet, who can lead them to eternal salvation.  Listen to an example of Jeffs' preaching »



Jeffs could be sent to prison for the rest of his life when he is sentenced November 20.  E-mail to a friend

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Since it was founded in 1994, the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation has been instrumental in encouraging innovative research that will combat the biggest health issues affecting the developing world.



One Gates Foundation grant aims to help reduce malaria among Nigeria's nomads.



The foundation has pledged $100 million in grants to get new scientific research off the ground, as part of Grand Challenges Explorations (GCE).



On Tuesday, GCE launched its latest round of grant applications, open to anyone with a unique approach to solving  problems in the developing world.



The idea is to develop creative thinking from people who may not have traditionally taken part in health research.



Begun in 2008, current projects receiving GCE funding include work in Hong Kong to develop flu-resistant chickens and efforts to prevent the transmission of HIV through breast milk.



To speed up the grant allocation process, applicants only need to fill in a two-page form and submit it online. Successful applicants get a $100,000 grant and the chance to receive more than $1 million in future grants.



The latest round of GCE grants invites applicants to focus on four areas: new technologies for contraception, new ways to induce and measure mucosal immunity, low-cost diagnostics for priority global health conditions, and new ways to protect against infectious disease.



Click on the "Explainer" tab above to take a look at some of the groundbreaking research being funded by GEC.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Last year's inaugural Prix Pictet photography award for environmental sustainability produced a stunning shortlist of photos.



Ed Kashi has documented the impact oil has made on the Niger Delta in Africa.



This year is no different with 12 photographers in the running for the first prize of 100,000 CHF ($97,500).



The theme in 2009 is described simply as "Earth." The aim is to highlight how man exploits the planet's resources and how this impacts the landscapes and communities surrounding them.



In an extraordinary series of photos Canadian Christopher Anderson captures how the quest for raw materials affects Venezuela.



In "The Diminishing Present," Portuguese-born Edgar Martins records forest landscapes in the moments before they are engulfed by flames.



In "Curse of the Black Gold: 50 Years of Oil in the Niger Delta," Ed Kashi captures the impact of the oil industry on Nigeria's environment and people since it was first discovered five decades ago.



Kashi, an American photojournalist, spent three years compiling his photos of the Niger Delta, making a total of five trips to the troubled region.



Kashi told CNN: "It was truly one of the most graphic examples of economic inequity that I have ever seen. Especially with the backdrop of hundreds of billions of oil wealth that has been generated over the previous 50 years."



As a result of his work, Kashi says that his photos are now being used by universities and NGOs to raise awareness to try and effect change. To him, this has been one of the most gratifying and exciting by-products of his work.



One of this year's most intriguing entries is by Sammy Baloji, who superimposes colonial black and white archive photos of Belgian-run mines in the Democratic Republic of Congo and places them over his color images of the decaying mines as seen today.



Nadav Kander's images of China's Yangtze River depict communities adjusting to the changes caused by the re-routing of the country's largest river. And, Andreas Gursky has captured an extraordinary image of an ocean of rubbish at a landfill site in Mexico City.



Darren Almond's ethereal images of China's Yellow Mountain Range are made all the more magical through the knowledge that they were shot using only the light of the Moon.



All the nominees' pictures showcase the power of the camera when in the hands of master craftsmen.  Click here to view some of the short-listed images »



The winner will be announced by Prix Pictet honorary president, Kofi Annan, on October 22 at the Passage de Retz gallery in Paris. All the short-listed photos can be seen at the same gallery for one month after the award.



Further exhibitions are planned in Greece and Dubai and the Netherlands.



If you can't attend the exhibitions, there is a book entitled "Earth," published by teNeues which showcases the work of all Prix Pictet nominees.

***

Singapore (CNN) -- U.S. President Barack Obama, on his first Asia trip since taking office in January, arrived Saturday in Singapore to attend the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Forum.





In addition to the meetings with the APEC heads of state, Obama planned to hold three bilateral meetings -- with the leaders of Russia, Indonesia and Singapore.





APEC's 21 member nations represent more than half of the world's economic output. The forum sees its goal as "facilitating economic growth, cooperation, trade and investment in the Asia-Pacific region."





Obama will become the first U.S. president to take part in a summit of the 10-member Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) economic alliance. The formal meeting is Sunday.





Earlier Saturday, Obama told a packed house at Tokyo's Suntory Hall that all Americans should know that what happens in Asia "has a direct effect on our lives at home."





The president leaves Sunday for Shanghai, China.





The trip, which lasts more than a week, is Obama's first to Asia since taking office in January. In his Tokyo speech, Obama touted himself as America's "first Pacific president," and pledged a renewed engagement with Asia Pacific nations based on "an enduring and revitalized alliance between the United States and Japan."





He touched on nearly every part of the Asia Pacific region during his speech, and talked about a boyhood visit to Japan with his mother, his birth in Hawaii, a childhood spent partly in Indonesia and the United States' position as a Pacific nation.





"There must be no doubt: as America's first Pacific president, I promise you that this Pacific nation will strengthen and sustain our leadership in this vitally important part of the world," he said.





He emphasized that the United States was not interested in containing the emerging economic growth in China.





Obama also called on Myanmar to make more definitive moves toward democracy, including releasing all political prisoners.





He urged North Korea to return to the Six-Party Talks so the reclusive nation can be reintegrated into the world stage and pledged America's support for eliminating nuclear weapons and efforts to reduce the global effects of climate change.





In China, Obama will continue efforts to define and strengthen the United States' relationship with the world's largest emerging economy, which has a growing influence in Asia, said Jeffrey Bader, the National Security Council's senior director for East Asian affairs.





Bader cited North Korea's nuclear weapons program, the economy, climate change, human rights and Afghanistan as among the top issues for the China swing. On human rights, Bader said Obama is likely to address "freedom of expression, access to information, freedom of religion, rule of law and, certainly, Tibet."





Obama will make clear to Chinese President Hu Jintao that he intends to meet with the Dalai Lama, the exiled Tibetan spiritual leader, Bader said. China, which rejects Tibetan aspirations for autonomy, opposes such high-level contacts with the Dalai Lama.

***

(CNN) -- A slaughterhouse that has been accused of mistreating cows agreed Sunday to recall 143 million pounds of beef in what federal officials called the largest beef recall in U.S. history.



Officials said this is the largest recall in the United States, surpassing a 1999 recall of 35 million pounds.



Keith Williams, a U.S. Department of Agriculture  spokesman, said investigators have found no cases of illness related to the recalled meat.



But Dick Raymond, the undersecretary of agriculture for food safety, said there was a "remote probability" that the meat from the Westland/Hallmark Meat Packing Company in Chino, California, could cause illness in humans.



The amount of beef -- 143 million pounds -- is roughly enough for two hamburgers for each man, woman and child in the United States.



The largest U.S. meat recall before Sunday came in 1999, when about 35 million pounds of product possibly contaminated with listeria were ordered off shelves. USDA officials said that was Class I recall, involving a known risk to human health.



Sunday's action was a Class II recall, under which authorities say there is little risk of illness.



Raymond said cattle that had lost the ability to walk since passing pre-processing inspections were slaughtered without an inspector having examined them for chronic illness -- a practice he said violated federal regulations and had been going on for at least two years.  Watch video of cows being abused »



Federal regulations are aimed at preventing the spread of bovine spongiform encephalopathy, or BSE -- the scientific name for "mad cow" disease.



It's important to keep downed cattle out of the food supply because they also may pose a higher risk of contamination from E. coli or salmonella because the animals tend to wallow in feces and have weaker immune systems, according to AP.



Raymond said the average age of the cattle involved is 5-7 years, meaning they were likely born long after a 1997 ban on ruminant feed, and that the incidence of BSE in U.S. cattle is "extremely rare."



"We do not know how much of this product is out there at this time. We do not feel this product presents a health risk of any significance," he said. "But the product was produced in non-compliance with our regulations, so therefore we do have to take this action."



About 37 million pounds of the meat went to school lunch programs and other federal nutrition programs since October 2006, said Ron Vogel, of the USDA's Food and Nutrition Service.



The recall dates back to February 1, 2006, and Raymond said "the great majority" of the meat has probably been eaten already. USDA officials have begun tracing the products covered by the recall, he said.



"A lot of this is fresh, raw product and with ground beef, etcetera, that has a very short shelf life and refrigerator life," he said.



Most of the beef was sent to distribution centers in bulk packages. The USDA said it will work with distributors to determine how much meat remains, the AP reports.



In January, the Humane Society of the United States accused Westland/Hallmark of abusing "downed" cattle, releasing video that showed workers kicking cows, jabbing them near their eyes, ramming them with a forklift and shooting high-intensity water up their noses in an effort to force them to their feet for slaughter.



Federal inspectors halted operations at the plant earlier this month after finding "clear violations" of USDA regulations.



California prosecutors on Friday announced animal cruelty charges against two former employees of the plant.



In a statement issued February 3, Westland Meat President Steve Mendell said the company was cooperating with the USDA and called the practices depicted in the humane society video as "a serious breach of our company's policies and training."



"We have taken swift action regarding the two employees identified on the video and have already implemented aggressive measures to ensure all employees follow our humane handling policies and procedures," Mendell said. E-mail to a friend



CNN's Jen Pifer contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Eight-time gold medal winner at the Beijing Olympics and multiple world-record holder Michael Phelps warmed up for the Swimming World Championships in Rome by setting a new men's world record in the 100 meters butterfly.



Michael Phelps attacks the pool in Indianapolis to set a new world mark in the 100m fly.



The 24-year-old American shaved 18-hundredths of a second from the previous mark set by compatriot Ian Crocker in 2005, with a time of 50.22 on the third day of competition at the U.S. National Championships in the Indianapolis.



"I was pretty happy with my swim. I really wanted to break 50 seconds, but that is something to shoot for," Phelps told the event's official Web site.



"Ian Crocker texted me after prelims. He wished me all the luck. That really meant a lot to me as a competitor and as a friend," he added.



The new time takes Phelps's personal tally of individual world records to five, to add to the three he can claim from relay events, and means he has qualified for three events at the upcoming World Championships in Rome thus far.



Places were booked with wins in the 200m freestyle and 200m butterfly on Wednesday while a further slot could be confirmed via the 100m freestyle.



Phelps, who was banned for three months when he was pictured smoking drugs at a party after returning from Beijing, has been eager to regain his Olympic form after his enforced exile from the pool.



"This is something that I really, really wanted to accomplish," Phelps told the LA Times. "Crock and I had a lot of great history, a lot of great races with one another. I've wanted that record ever since he took it in '03 worlds. . . . After the race, you could tell I was pretty fired up and excited."



Elsewhere, twelve-time Olympic medallist Dara Torres qualified for the World Championships team in the 50m freestyle.



The American told the LA Times there was still work to do despite the result: "My coach was telling me I probably lost four or five tenths [of a second] on the start," said Torres.



"The adrenaline kind of took over so I didn't really feel (my knee injury). It's a great feeling to be able to be out there and still race [at age 42], but that time won't medal at the world championships," Torres added.



The men's 50m freestyle saw four Olympians battled for the gold, with Nathan Adrian beating his 2008 Olympic teammates Cullen Jones and Garrett Weber-Gale by 0.3 seconds.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Drugmaking giant GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) has agreed to buy independent U.S. skincare specialist Stiefel Laboratories for up to $3.6 billion.





The new business will operate under the Stiefel identity within the GSK Group.





In a statement Monday, the two companies said the deal would create a new world-leading specialist dermatology business with combined revenues of $1.5 billion.





Under the terms of the agreement GSK will acquire the total share capital of Stiefel for $2.9 billion. GSK also expects to assume $400 million of net debt upon closing. A further $300 million cash payment will be made depending on future performance.





GSK's existing prescription dermatological products will be combined with Stiefel's and the new specialist global business will operate under the Stiefel identity within the GSK Group.





The new business will have a broad portfolio of dermatology products including Stiefel's leading brands: Duac, for acne, Olux E for dermatitis and Soriatane for the treatment of severe psoriasis. GSK's key dermatology brands include: Bactroban, Cutivate and the recently launched Altabax.





Stiefel, part-owned by buyout firm Blackstone Group, is the world's largest independent dermatology company, with a range of prescription and over-the-counter products. According to Reuters.com it was put up for sale a month ago and attracted interest from a number of large pharmaceutical companies, including Novartis and Johnson & Johnson.





Following the announcement, GSK Chief Executive Andrew Witty said: "As part of our strategy to grow and diversify GSK's business, we are continuing to make new investments through targeted acquisitions. This transaction will create a new world-leading, specialist dermatology business and re-energize our existing dermatology products.





"The addition of Stiefel's broad portfolio will provide immediate new revenue flows to GSK with significant opportunities to enhance growth through leveraging our existing global commercial infrastructure and manufacturing capability. We look forward to working with Stiefel to develop this exciting opportunity."

***

(CNN) -- The military is investigating a "shocking and deplorable" YouTube video that seems to show a Marine throwing a puppy off a rocky cliff.





YouTube.com removed the video for violating the Web site's terms of use.





The black-and-white puppy makes a yelping sound as it flies through the air.





"That's mean, that was mean," one companion says off-camera, addressing the alleged puppy thrower by his last name. The fate of the animal is not known.





The Marine is identified on the video and in other Internet postings as a lance corporal stationed at Marine Corps Base Hawaii in Kaneohe.





It's not clear where the video was shot, although the man who appears to throw the puppy and another Marine are in full combat gear with helmets.





YouTube.com had taken down the video by 12:30 p.m. ET Tuesday "due to terms of use violation," according to a banner on the Web site.





"This is a shocking and deplorable video that is contrary to the high standards that we set for every Marine," Marine Corps spokesman Maj. Chris Perrine said at a news conference Monday night.





"We will investigate this and take appropriate actions," Perrine said.  Watch other Marines and civilians react to the video »





He said the Marine is being kept safe in view of the anger over the alleged incident.





Perrine added that the majority of Marines conduct themselves honorably.





"There are many examples of Marines who adopt pets and bring them back from Iraq and demonstrate their compassion on a daily basis," he said.





If the video is deemed legitimate, the lance corporal could face a charge of conduct unbecoming a Marine, Perrine said. There could be administrative action, nonjudicial punishment or a court-martial, he added.





"It's all governed by the Uniform Code of Military Justice, and anything from reduction in pay to reduction in rank to confinement to discharge from the Marine Corps" is possible, Perrine said. If others are involved, they too will be disciplined, he said.





"Certainly, there's a lot of outrage, and a lot of people are upset about it. I think every Marine is upset about this video," he said. "We hope that it turns out not to be what it looks like." E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- The space shuttle Discovery is on pace for a Sunday launch after NASA engineers repaired a leaky gas venting system, officials said Saturday.



Space shuttle Discovery readies for launch, which now appears on pace for Sunday.



The leak had canceled a planned launch on Wednesday.



NASA hopes the seven-member crew can take off around 7:40 p.m. Sunday on a mission to the international space station, where they will deliver supplies needed to expand the station's crew to six people.



"The vehicle is looking real good ... ," lead shuttle flight director Mike Moses said. "Basically, I think I can sum this up by just saying we're good to go tomorrow and we're looking forward to getting the count going."



A leak in a hydrogen gas vent line forced Wednesday's delay. Repairs went smoothly, Moses said.



The line funnels flammable hydrogen away from the launch pad during takeoff.



The shuttle crew will be delivering the final parts needed for an expanded solar energy power system that will allow the station to double its crew to six people. The crew also will be dropping off Japanese astronaut Koichi Wakata, who will replace NASA's Sandy Magnus on the space station.



The shuttle also will carry a replacement for a failed unit in a system that converts urine to drinkable water, NASA said.  Watch an explanation of why Wednesday's launch was scrubbed »



Kathy Winters, the mission's chief weather officer, said Sunday appears to offer only a 20 percent chance of weather that would scrub the launch.



The crew, led by commander Lee Archambault, is expected to board Discovery at Kennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral, Florida, at about 4:30 p.m. Sunday.



Officials said the crew has been training and resting for the mission since Wednesday.



Earlier this week, Magnus, station commander Michael Fincke and Russian engineer Yury Lonchakov had to take shelter in their Soyuz spacecraft -- a lifeboat of sorts -- when a piece of debris from an earlier mission hurtled uncomfortably close to the station.



The debris, moving about 20,000 mph, came within three miles of the station but caused no damage.



Wednesday's launch postponement was the latest in a series of delays for Discovery as it tries to make the 28th shuttle mission to the space station.



The launch had been delayed previously to allow time to check a "flow-control valve in the shuttle's main engines," NASA said last week. That resulted from damage being found in a valve on the shuttle Endeavour during its November 2008 flight. Three valves were cleared and installed on Discovery, it said.



CNN's Kim Segal and John Zarella contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- The Scottish Rugby Union has appointed Andy Robinson, formerly coach of bitter rivals England, as the new national team boss.



Andy Robinson will be seeking to revive the fortunes of Scotland's struggling rugby side.



The 45-year-old won eight caps as a flanker for England, and was assistant coach in Clive Woodward's 2003 World Cup-winning set-up before taking over for an ill-fated reign himself in 2004, winning just nine of 22 matches.



Robinson returned to top-class coaching with Celtic League team Edinburgh in 2007, and has sufficiently impressed Scottish officials in the 20 months since then to win favor as the replacement for Frank Hadden.



He had been part of Hadden's backroom staff, and had already been chosen to coach Scotland A this summer. Hadden resigned on April 2 after Scotland again struggled in the Six Nations, finishing second from bottom with just one win from five outings.



Robinson was delighted to be given the chance to return to the international stage.



"With the World Cup in New Zealand in 2011, I believe we have a crop of players who can really challenge the world's best, and preparation for that starts now," he told the SRU Web site.



"I'm looking forward to leading Scotland A into the IRB Nations Cup in Romania next week and thereafter preparing for our Autumn Tests at Murrayfield against Fiji, Australia and Argentina."



Robinson is believed to have headed off the likes of South Africa's World Cup-winning coach Jake White and former Australia boss Eddie Jones for the job.



Former Scotland captain and British and Irish Lion Gordon Bulloch was part of the interview panel that determined the appointment.



"Andy was the outstanding candidate from a quite exceptional shortlist which underlines the allure of coaching the Scotland team," he told the SRU's Web site.



"I know from having had the privilege of his coaching and guidance on Lions tours that he is passionate about his rugby, is a skilled communicator and has values and an ethos which are absolutely at one with developing a winning Scotland team."



Scottish Rugby chief executive Gordon McKie said he was confident Robinson would prove to be successful.



"Andy has proved himself at every level of the game and we are thrilled that he will now be leading the Scotland team as we look towards the challenges of the next three years, including the 2011 World Cup," McKie said.



"He has been part of the Scottish Rugby family for the past two years and has brought success both to Edinburgh Rugby, with their highest ever Magners League finish in successive seasons, and has also guided the Scotland A team to notable successes."

***

Seoul, South Korea (CNN)  -- The Obama administration's first high-level direct talks with North Korea yielded no promise by Pyongyang to return to six-party negotiations aimed at ending its nuclear program, but Secretary of State Hillary Clinton on Thursday nonetheless called the meeting "quite positive."





In Washington, Clinton said she agreed with special envoy Stephen Bosworth that the talks were "very useful," adding, "It does remain to be seen whether and when the North Koreans will return to the six-party talks, but the bottom line is that these were exploratory talks, not negotiations."





North Korea has refused to return to the talks conducted by the United States, Russia, China, South Korea and Japan, insisting that it wants to talk directly with the U.S.





In April, Pyongyang declared the talks "dead" in anger over international criticism of its nuclear and missile tests this year.





Clinton previously said the United States was willing to meet bilaterally with North Korea but only within the framework of the six-party talks. She also has warned the United States will not normalize ties with Pyongyang or lift sanctions unless North Korea takes irreversible steps toward dismantling its nuclear program.





Of his three-day visit, Bosworth said, "My purpose ... was to facilitate the resumption of the six-party talks and to reaffirm the goal of fully implementing the September 2005 joint statement."





Holding a news conference Thursday in Seoul after his visit to North Korea, Bosworth said, "I communicated President Obama's view that complete denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula is a fundamental undertaking of the six-party process ... and that the absence of progress on denuclearization is an obstacle to improving our relations."





As Obama "has made it clear, the United States is prepared to work with allies, partners in the region to offer ... North Korea a different future," he said.





Bosworth said he held talks with North Korean officials, but not President Kim Jong Il, because "we did not ask" for a meeting with the leader. He said they did not make plans for a future meeting.





Many observers are wondering what's behind the North's latest moves, and some said Bosworth's trip is a positive.





"The visit gives North Korea a lot of 'face,' a sense of importance," said Wenran Jiang, political science professor at the University of Alberta in Canada.





Some analysts said North Korea might be trying to buy time.





Earlier reports in Seoul claimed that North Korea is in the final stages of restoring its Yongbyon nuclear plant, which Pyongyang had begun to disable before walking away from the six-party talks. Given the secrecy of the North, those reports could not be verified.





Analysts said North Korea also is desperate to break out of its diplomatic isolation and ease its economic pain, especially after the U.N. Security Council imposed tougher sanctions on the country in response to Pyongyang's nuclear and missile tests.





A joint statement issued by the six-party nations in September 2005 said North Korea had "committed to abandoning all nuclear weapons and existing nuclear programs."





CNN's Jill Dougherty contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Saudi King Abdullah has revoked a flogging sentence for a woman who allegedly flouted the conservative kingdom's strict rules that prohibit women from driving a car, two sources with knowledge of the case said Wednesday.





Amnesty International said a Saudi woman was sentenced to 10 lashes for getting behind the wheel, and had urged the dismantling of the "whole system of women's subordination."





Authorities are not expected to release an official statement, but the woman will not be sentenced, according to a source close to the Royal Court.





A source connected to the country's Interior Ministry also confirmed the revocation.





The move comes just as the country's ruling elite promised greater political participation for women in the Islamic nation.





On Sunday, King Abdullah announced two changes for women that would be historic for Saudi Arabia. He said women will be allowed to serve as members of the Shura Council, the appointed consultative council that advises the king.





He also said women will be allowed to run as candidates and nominate candidates in the next set of municipal elections. It is unknown when those may ultimately take place.





Amnesty said a court in Jeddah handed down the sentence Tuesday. Two other women are believed to be facing charges for driving, one in Jeddah and one in al-Khobar.





The Women2Drive campaign said the woman who was sentenced to 10 lashes has appealed the sentence. She said she did not want to be identified or speak publicly about her case for her own safety.





Women2Drive also said police pulled over women's rights activist Madeah Alajroush for driving in Riyadh on Tuesday. She was taken to police headquarters for questioning and released after she signed a pledge not to drive and called for a taxi home, a statement from Women2Drive said.





The Women2Drive campaign on Facebook and Twitter encouraged women to drive as part of their normal daily activities rather than converge in one place.

***

(CNN)  -- In trendy neighborhoods of Tokyo customers are lining up for vitamin injections that promise to improve health and beauty.





A Japanese woman receives an intravenous vitamin supplement at the Tenteki Cafe in Tokyo.





These intravenous vitamin "drips" are part of the latest quick-fix, health fad catching on in Japan: the IV cafe.





Each drip pack contains saline solution and specific vitamins and minerals to target a particular health ailment or beauty concern.





"I used to take vitamin supplements, but changed to the IV drip because I feel the effects more quickly," a 20-something woman at the Tenteki 10 Café told CNN. She said she receives specific injections to get better skin, burn fat and boost her energy.





There are 10 different varieties to choose from at Tenteki. The "orange" variety touts anti-aging properties, loaded with antioxidants. The "placenta pack" is said to help rejuvenate and ease muscle stiffness.





Prices range from $20-$30 per injection, and nurses see about 30-40 people each day. Their most common patients are Japanese businessmen who work in the same office building.





"I see a lot of businessmen who say they don't have time to sleep. They can't take a break from working and get the vitamin drip for an extra kick of energy," a Tenteki nurse told CNN.





"Blue" is the most requested vitamin pack among these men: a concoction of B1 and vitamin E that claims to offer relief from exhaustion.





Registered nurses and doctors administer the drips at Tenteki, but there's no conclusive medical evidence to back up the health claims.





Many nutritionists actually caution against using injectable vitamin supplements because the quantities are not regulated.





"More is not necessarily better...some vitamins and minerals can be toxic in high doses," particularly the fat-soluble ones which the body stores like Vitamins A, D, E and K, explained Claire Williamson, Nutrition Scientist at the British Nutrition Foundation.





In Europe and the United States vitamin shots are popular among celebrities with hectic lifestyles and little time to sleep, particularly vitamin B 12.





Former Spice Girl Geri Halliwell and singer Robbie Williams have both confirmed they've used the shots as part of their diets to maintain stamina during tours.





Dermatological injections of Vitamin C are also popular among women hoping to keep their skin looking young. Former supermodel Cindy Crawford has admitted using such injections to keep her skin firm and wrinkle-free.





According to Williamson, it does not matter if supplements are injected into the vein or into the skin. "At the end of the day it will go into the blood stream," she said.





Most of these nutrients we can get sufficient from foods, nutrients tend to be better absorbed by the body if they are consumed in foods."

***

(CNN) -- A southwest Illinois man accused of strangling his wife and two young sons appeared in court Wednesday and pleaded not guilty to murder charges, officials said.



Christopher Coleman sits in the back of a police car after his arrest Tuesday in the slayings of his wife and two sons.



Christopher Coleman, 32, will remain jailed without bond pending a June 10 preliminary hearing, according to the Monroe County, Illinois, district court clerk's office.



He is charged with three counts of first-degree murder in the deaths of Sheri Coleman, 31, and sons Garett, 11, and Gavin, 9. Their bodies were found May 5 in the bedrooms of the Coleman's two-story home in Columbia, Illinois, a suburb of St. Louis, Missouri.



The three died of strangulation by ligature -- a string, cord or wire -- police said. Coleman was arrested Tuesday at his parents' home in Chester, Illinois.



As a police patrol car carrying Coleman arrived at the Monroe County courthouse for Wednesday's hearing, a waiting crowd shouted "murderer" and "baby killer," according to video posted on the Web site of CNN affiliate KSDK.



Coleman told police he left the house at 5:43 a.m. the day of the deaths and drove to a gym to work out.  Watch report of Coleman's actions after deaths »



"Shortly thereafter, he started calling his house, realized that nobody was answering and on his way back at around 6:50 a.m. is when he made the phone call to the Columbia Police Department, said Maj. Jeff Connor, commander of the Major Case Squad of Greater St. Louis.



Coleman said he was calling the house to make sure the boys were waking up for school, Connor said.



Threatening messages were found on the walls inside the home, Connor said, but would not disclose the exact wording. In an article posted on the Major Case Squad's Web site, the St. Louis Post-Dispatch newspaper reported the message said something to the effect of, "I told you this would happen."



A glove with red spray paint on it was found along Interstate 255, which would have been on Coleman's route to the gym, the newspaper reported. The message in the Coleman home was written in paint of a similar color, the article said.



Coleman previously worked in the security department for Joyce Meyer Ministries, an evangelical Christian organization based in suburban St. Louis, said spokesman Roby Walker.



Walker told CNN Coleman resigned last week after the two met regarding "a violation of moral conduct." He would not elaborate.



The Post-Dispatch cited police sources as saying Coleman had more than one romantic rendezvous with a Florida woman, a friend of his wife, during out-of-town ministry trips. Neither Coleman nor his attorneys have commented on that report, the Post-Dispatch said.



Police said Tuesday they did not have a motive for the killings.



Joyce Meyer Ministries said in a statement Wednesday that it had learned of the charges against Coleman.



"This horrible tragedy has deeply saddened us all and although nothing can compensate for the loss of this beautiful family, our ministry remains fully behind the diligent efforts of the law enforcement community," the statement said.

***

(CNN) -- Sheriff's investigators in North Carolina launched a search of a turkey farm they say is owned by Butterball -- the largest producer of turkey products in the United States -- on Thursday after an animal rights organization said it infiltrated the farm and videotaped instances of purported animal abuse.





"The organization Mercy for Animals had conducted a covert operation at the farm and documented mistreatment of animals," said Capt. John Kivett of the Hoke County sheriff's office.





"No one has been taken into custody. It's still an ongoing investigation. Nothing has been seized," he told CNN.





The heavily edited videotape from the animal rights group shows what appear to be employees of the farm kicking, dragging and throwing turkeys. During one section of the tape, someone clearly swings what appears to be a metal object, striking one of the birds.





Investigators were trying to determine whether the videotape matches this same facility in Hoke County that they were searching.





"Veterinarians and detectives are inside the birdhouses conducting their investigation and documenting what they see," said Kivett.





"We have no way of knowing if the video is of the same place," he told CNN.





Other sections of the 90-second tape show what appear to be injured, bloodied and, in some cases, dead turkeys.





On its website, the animal rights group bills itself as an organization that promotes a vegetarian diet.





"Our investigation found Butterball employees kicking, throwing, dragging and beating birds. We also documented birds suffering from broken bones, bloody open wounds, and many left to die," said Nathan Runkle, executive director of Mercy for Animals.





The sheriff's department said that Butterball was fully cooperating with the authorities, and that company officials were at the farm.





In a written statement, Butterball said the company was working with Hoke County officials in their investigation.





"Butterball takes these allegations very seriously and fully supports the efforts being made on the part of officials. Butterball has a zero tolerance policy for any mistreatment of our birds or the failure to immediately report mistreatment of our birds by any associates," the company said in a statement.





"We are performing extensive internal and third-party audits as part of our own investigation. Employees found in violation of Butterball's animal welfare policies will be subject to immediate termination."





The company statement did not address the existence or the nature of the videotape.





Butterball did not return CNN's calls for comment.





The animal rights group told CNN that a female member of the organization was hired by Butterball as a driver, and as a worker in the animal sheds. The organization said the unidentified member worked there from the middle of November until the middle of December when the hidden-camera video was shot.





"These animals experience pain and suffering in the same way as dogs and cats. As a civilized society it's our moral obligation to prevent needless cruelty to animals including those raised for food," said Runkle.





North Carolina law states that any person who intentionally wounds, injures, torments or kills any animal could be guilty of committing a misdemeanor or a felony, depending upon the level of infraction as determined by investigators.

***

(CNN) -- North Korea has completed preparations for launching what it says is "an experimental communications satellite," the reclusive nation's state news agency reported early Saturday.



A satellite image shows a rocket sitting on its launch pad in northeast North Korea.



"The satellite will be launched soon," KCNA reported.



How "soon" was anyone's guess.



On Friday, President Obama reiterated that the United States strongly opposes any such launch.



"We have made it very clear to the North Koreans that their missile launch is provocative, it puts enormous strains on the Six-Party Talks and that they should stop the launch," Obama said while on a stop in France.



Obama warned that the United States will join with its allies to take "appropriate steps" to let North Korea know it can't violate United Nations rules and get away with it.



Western nations fear that North Korea plans a ballistic missile test rather than a satellite launch, but the administration's special envoy to the Six-Party Talks, Stephen Bosworth, said it didn't matter if the North Koreans were trying to put a satellite in space or testing a ballistic missile that could threaten Japan or the United States.



"Whether it is a satellite launch or a missile launch, in our judgment makes no difference. It is a provocative act," Bosworth said.



Bosworth said the United States stands ready, in the event of a launch, to participate in U.N. deliberations on new sanctions against North Korea.



A commentary carried by KCNA recently blasted critics for opposing its plans.



"This is nothing but a groundless outcry of the political philistines ignorant of any legality of the study of space for peaceful purposes," the commentary said.



The U.S. Navy is monitoring the expected launch with at least four ships in the region around the Korean Peninsula and northern Japan, according to U.S. military officials.



The ships -- three destroyers and one cruiser -- are capable of tracking and shooting down ballistic missiles using powerful Aegis radar systems aboard each vessel.



Two ships are in the Sea of Japan, the USS Curtis Wilbur and the USS Stethem, both guided-missile destroyers. Two other ships are on the Pacific Ocean side of Japan to monitor the missile if it flies over that nation. Those ships are the USS Shiloh, a guided-missile cruiser and the USS Fitzgerald, another guided-missile destroyer, the officials said.



All four U.S. ships are working with Japanese naval ships in the same region that are also equipped with Aegis radar.  Watch report on launch preparations »



U.S. military officials say Pyongyang seems to still be on track to launch the missile as early as Saturday, but one official told CNN that winds strong enough to delay a launch are predicted for Saturday in the area of the launch site, in northeastern North Korea.

***

(CNN) -- Bea Arthur, the actress best known for her roles as television's "Maude" and the sardonic Dorothy on "The Golden Girls," has died of cancer, a family spokesman said Saturday.



Bea Arthur, right, with "Golden Girls" co-star Rue McClanahan in June 2008.



She was 86.



Spokesman Dan Watt said that Arthur died Saturday morning at her home in Los Angeles, her family by her side.



She is survived by her sons Matthew and Daniel and grandchildren Kyra and Violet, he said.



No funeral services are currently planned, Watt said, adding that the family asked that donations be made to either the Art Attack Foundation or PETA in lieu of flowers.



Arthur's opinionated Maude first appeared on Norman Lear's "All in the Family" as Edith Bunker's cousin, and was so popular that Lear created a spin-off series.



In the '70s, "Maude" was ahead of the social curve, tackling hot topics not usually mentioned on situation comedies -- pornography, race relations and, in an episode titled "Maude's Dilemma," abortion.



That episode spawned demonstrations and generated hate mail for Arthur -- when Maude and husband Walter (Bill Macy) decided on that episode they were too old to raise a child.



But many saw Maude as an enduring icon for women's liberation -- a big deal for the shy, Jewish girl born Bernice Frankel in New York City.



During the Depression, Arthur's family left the Big Apple and opened a clothing store in Cambridge, Maryland. By the time she was 12, Arthur was nearly 5 feet, 10 inches tall, and self-conscious about her height.



But she masked her insecurity with comedy and eventually returned to New York to study acting. Along the way, she had a short-lived marriage she never spoke about, but she kept the last name -- Arthur.



The young Bea Arthur earned a living singing and doing stage work on Broadway and off-Broadway. Critics delighted in her haughty, serpent-tongued deliveries.



Her first television appearance came in 1951 in a long-forgotten series called "Once Upon a Tune," but she quickly made a name for herself with appearances on "Studio One," "Kraft Television Theatre" and "The Sid Caesar Show."



Arthur drew attention in "Threepenny Opera" on Broadway with Lotte Lenya, but she really turned heads in 1964 originating the role of Yente the Matchmaker in "Fiddler on the Roof."



In 1966, Arthur won a Tony Award for the caustic Vera Charles in the play "Mame," playing opposite Angela Lansbury in the title role. Eight years later, she reprised the role in the film version opposite Lucille Ball, but by then she was already well-established as Maude.



Arthur left "Maude" in 1978, making television and some film appearances afterward. She starred in a short-lived series, "Amanda's," in 1983 and then joined the cast of "The Golden Girls" in 1985 with Betty White, Rue McClanahan and Estelle Getty.



Her role as Dorothy Zbornak gave Arthur her other major television success as one of four older women living together in Florida. (Getty played Arthur's mother). The role earned Arthur a second Emmy -- the first was for "Maude."



Arthur left the show after Dorothy remarried at the end of the 1991-92 season. White, McClanahan and Getty continued for another season on the show, renamed "The Golden Palace," but the show lasted only one season without Arthur.



Arthur entered semi-retirement after the show ended in 1992, returning to television in sporadic guest appearances and appearing at several celebrity roasts. In the early part of this decade, Arthur appeared in several one-woman shows.



Her last stage appearance was in 2006. Her last television appearance was on "The View" in 2007.

***

(PEOPLE.com) -- It's been more than two months since their beloved 13-year-old dog Darla passed away from cancer, but Brooke Shields and her family are still reeling from the loss.





"It's very sad, actually," she tells PEOPLE. "We're all in that sort of trauma where we have her ashes and the girls (Rowan, 8, and Grier, 5) carry these little footprints of hers around. She was the only dog we've really ever had."





The American bulldog was given to Shields as a puppy, and was a member of the family, taking a central role in many memories over the years.





"She knew I was pregnant before I even knew I was pregnant," Shields says. "She would circle me and not let me walk anywhere, I was going, 'God, what are you doing, get out from under my feet!' And that afternoon I found out."





The void that Darla has left is immense, and it won't be filled with a new pet anytime soon. "We walk to school everyday and they see all these different dogs, we're kind of [thinking about] what way do we want to go," she says. "We'll probably never get another bulldog. We would just constantly be going, 'That's not Darla.'"





For now, Shields and her family are content on seeing animals from afar -- like Mom's new furry costar: a horse called Odd Job Bob who stars opposite Shields in the new tween flick The Greening of Whitney Brown. In the comedy, Shields plays the mother of a snooty private school teen (played by Sammi Hanratty) who is forced to move to the country where she reluctantly befriends the gypsy vanner horse.





"He's smart and sweet," Shields says of the star stallion who performs all kinds of tricks for the film. "He understands. There's something about him that is human."





A horse lover all of her life, Shields never got to ride Bob because trainers wanted Hanratty to bond completely with the animal, but she did slip him a treat or two on set. "He wasn't demanding at all," she jokes. "He loved [eating] all the carrots and jam."





Watching the sweet family movie with her daughters will definitely be a bright spot in what's been a difficult few months. "They're going to love it," she says. "Anything with horses and animals, they think it's so funny."





See the full article at PEOPLE.com





© 2011 People and Time Inc. All rights reserved.

***

BEIJING, China (CNN)  -- Officials on Monday announced the death of a second child who consumed contaminated milk powder. More than 1,200 others have been sickened, according to China's Health Ministry.



Of that number, 340 infants are hospitalized and 53 are considered to be in serious condition.



Government inspectors are testing baby formula around China and plan to release their results on Tuesday, said Li Changjiang, head of the State Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection and Quarantine, according to the Xinhua news agency.



The manufacturer, Sanlu Group, has recalled more than 8,200 tons of the tainted formula following reports of babies developing kidney stones, Xinhua said.  Watch what Sanlu has done »



Sanlu, one of China's leading dairy producers, has also sealed off more than 2,100 tons of contaminated product, and another 700 tons still need to be recalled, the news agency said.



It is not the first time Sanlu has been connected to a scandal involving tainted milk powder, according to China Daily.



In 2004, at least 13 infants in the eastern Anhui province died of malnutrition after drinking milk powder that had little to no nutrition. The illegally manufactured milk was falsely labeled with the Sanlu brand, according to the paper.



More than 170 other babies were hospitalized as a result of drinking the cheap milk powder.



Chinese police have questioned 78 people -- including dairy farmers and milk dealers -- about the most recent contamination, a Chinese official told Xinhua Saturday. Sanlu would not say whether its employees are being investigated, Xinhua said.



Testing by Sanlu found tripolycyanamide, also known as melamine, in 700 tons of its product, said Zhao Xinchao, the vice mayor of Shijiazhuang, the news agency reported.



Zhao told the news agency that the suspects added water to the milk they sold to Sanlu to make more money, then added the chemical so the diluted milk could still meet standards.



Inspectors found the chemical in Sanlu infant formula produced by one of the company's partner producers in northwest Gansu Province, an official said Sunday.



Two of 12 samples randomly selected from the Sanlu milk powder produced by the Haoniu Dairy Company in Jiuquan City tested positive for melamine, said Xian Hui, the vice-governor of Gansu.



Health experts say ingesting melamine can lead to kidney stones, urinary tract ulcers, and eye and skin irritation.



The chemical is commonly used in coatings and laminates, wood adhesives, fabric coatings, ceiling tiles and flame retardants.



Hundreds of Wal-Mart and Carrefour stores in China are pulling the Sanlu milk powder from their shelves, Xinhua said.



This episode marks the latest in a string of tainted products produced in China.



The U.S. Food and Drug Administration recalled more than 150 brands of cat and dog food last year after finding that some pets became ill or died after eating food tainted with melamine, the same chemical found in the powdered milk.



Two Chinese businesses, a U.S. company and top executives of each were indicted by a federal grand jury in February in connection with tainted pet food, which resulted in deaths and serious illnesses in up to thousands of U.S. pets, federal prosecutors said.



In October 2007, regulators and retailers in the United States recalled at least 69,000 Chinese-made toys over concerns of excessive amounts of lead paint, which can cause hazardous lead poisoning.



In November, shipments of the popular toy Aqua Dots were found to have been contaminated with a toxic chemical that turned into a powerful "date rape" drug if swallowed, causing some children who ate the craft toys to vomit and lose consciousness.



And in February, a Maryland candy distributor pulled Pokemon-brand Valentine lollipops from store shelves after bits of metal were found in the sealed treats, authorities said.



Officials on Monday announced the death of a second child who consumed contaminated milk powder.



Of the more than 1,200 others who have been sickened, 340 infants were hospitalized, and 53 considered to be in serious condition, according to China's Health Ministry.



Government inspectors were testing baby formula around China and plan to release their results on Tuesday, said Li Changjiang

***

(CNN) -- Former Philippines President Gloria Arroyo was stopped from boarding a plane at Manila's Ninoy Aquino International Airport Tuesday, hours after the country's Supreme Court overruled government-imposed restrictions on her travels.





The Philippines government fears that Arroyo, who is facing allegations of corruption and electoral fraud, will flee if allowed to leave the country.





But the Supreme Court ruled 8-5 in favor of a temporary restraining order on the travel ban, declaring it was unconstitutional as Arroyo has yet to be formally charged with a crime. A Supreme Court spokesman, Midas Marquez, told reporters the court's ruling was "consistent with the constitutional presumption of innocence."





Arroyo was reportedly boarding the flight to seek medical treatment abroad for her bone disease diagnosed earlier this year, following three unsuccessful spinal operations in the Philippines. She arrived at the airport in an ambulance and was transported to the departure gate in a wheelchair while wearing a neck brace.





Arroyo's lawyer, Raul Lambino, told CNN that the former first couple was "subjected to indignity and embarrassment at the airport", calling the government's defiance of the Supreme Court order "abhorrent and in violation of the rights of the individual guaranteed by the (Philippine's) constitution and the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights."





But presidential spokesperson Edwin Lacierda described the situation as "all high drama," according to media reports. "They (the Arroyos) want the public to sympathize with them," he added.





He said that while the Arroyo couple would be treated with dignity, the government would be "firm in our decision not to allow them to leave the country." Arroyo's husband, Jose Miguel Arroyo, is also accused of corruption.





The Supreme Court, which is mostly staffed by judges hired under Arroyo, defied current President Benigno Aquino's stated mandate of investigating allegations of corruption during Arroyo's 2001-2010 presidential term. Justice Secretary Leila de Lima said the government intends to appeal the court's decision.





Lambino told CNN that even though the government plans to file a motion for reconsideration, its defiance of the Supreme Court order yesterday was nevertheless "illegal."

***

(CNN) -- Space shuttle Atlantis launched Monday afternoon to deliver key spare parts to prolong the life of the International Space Station.





The shuttle lifted off as scheduled, at 2:28 p.m. ET from the Kennedy Space Center near Cape Canaveral.





The delivery will add years to the station's life after the space shuttle fleet is retired next year, according to NASA. Monday's launch is among six planned before then.





"You'll see this theme in some of the flights that are going to come after ours as well," said Brian Smith, the lead space station flight director for the 11-day mission. "This flight is all about spares. Basically, we're getting them up there while we still can."





Some parts are for systems that keep the station from overheating or tumbling through space, according to NASA.





"We're taking the big ones," Smith said. "And not only are they the big ones -- they're the ones deemed most critical. That's why they're going up first."





The six-member crew will return to Earth with flight engineer Nicole Stott, who launched in August.





CNN iReport: Share your photos, video of shuttle launch





The mission also will include three spacewalks and installation of two platforms to the station's backbone. The platforms will hold spare parts to sustain station operations after the shuttles are discontinued.





"As the only vehicle large enough to carry many of the big pieces of equipment into space, several of the flights are devoted to the task," NASA said. iReporter attends NASA "Tweet-up"





Other items set for delivery include nitrogen and ammonia tank assemblies, a high-pressure gas tank and the station's robotic arm. The tanks help cool and pressurize the station.

***

(CNN) -- T-shirts and other official merchandise from what were billed as Michael Jackson's last concerts are up for sale, the shows' promoter told fans by e-mail Thursday.



Official merchandise from Michael Jackson's "This Is It" tour is for sale, according to the shows' promoter.



The e-mail, which went to people with tickets to London tour dates that were to start in July, reaffirmed an earlier announcement that ticketholders will receive a full refund or, if they chose, a commemorative ticket for the tour.



The concert merchandise includes Jackson belt buckles, socks, hats, wallets, music and a myriad of T-shirts.



"Early in June, Michael Jackson approved a line of official merchandise for you, his fans," said the e-mail from concert promoter AEG Live. "As we mourn the loss of one of the greatest talents the world has ever seen, we are only beginning to feel the impact that Michael left upon us all. A variety of official merchandise commemorates this incredible talent and preserves the legacy that is Michael Jackson."



Fifty sold-out Jackson concerts were scheduled for the O2 Arena in London, starting July 13. The shows were billed as the final concerts of his career and were called "This Is It."



Jackson was expected to earn $50 million from the London shows.



The singer died with debts estimated at $500 million, and his estate will take years to unravel legally.



On Wednesday, Paul McCartney refuted media accounts about the fate of the Beatles song catalog, which Jackson co-owned.



"Some time ago, the media came up with the idea that Michael Jackson was going to leave his share in the Beatles songs to me in his will, which was completely made up and something I didn't believe for a second," a statement on McCartney's Web site said.



"Now the report is that I am devastated to find that he didn't leave the songs to me. This is completely untrue. I had not thought for one minute that the original report was true and, therefore, the report that I'm devastated is also totally false, so don't believe everything you read folks!"

***

(CNN) -- Every day for decades, it was an essential part of the day for millions of listeners. A voice would boom out over the radio airwaves, announcing, "Hello,  Americans, this is Paul Harvey! Stand by for news!"



Paul Harvey gave Brent Burns his "big break," giving one of his songs national exposure for the first time.



After more than 70 years on the air, Harvey died Saturday at the age of 90. His broadcasts were heard on more than 1,200 radio stations, according to his Web site.



iReporters shared their memories of hearing Harvey's program through the generations and told how he affected their lives, and in some cases their careers.



When Anna Hiller of Albany, California, heard of Harvey's passing, she was immediately reminded of spending time at her grandparents' home in Baltimore, Maryland, as a child.



"His voice was inescapable, ubiquitous and energizing, emerging from the silver radio in the kitchen," she said. She describes Harvey's broadcasts as a "ritual" for her grandparents.



"The voice of Paul Harvey would echo throughout the entire first floor, and even though I was too young to follow the stories, I knew my grandmother was listening intently, as was my grandpa from his study."



John Hargis Sr. has memories of his mother listening to Harvey every day as well. "I once asked her why we couldn't watch TV when Harvey was on, and she replied that Harvey gave her honest news," he said



Hargis has since lost 70 percent of his hearing and says that Harvey's voice was one of the few he could understand. He lost his mother in 2001, and Harvey's death reminds him of her. iReport.com: Hargis pays tribute to Harvey, his mother



Bev Cummins of McKees Rocks, Pennsylvania, was captivated as a child by Harvey's skills as a storyteller, as heard on his second daily broadcast, "The Rest of the Story."



"He enriched our young lives with his quiet, warm voice that phrased words so well in my mind," she said. "It had all the comfort of a story being read at bedtime."



Cummins says that she modeled the way she told bedtime stories to her daughter after Harvey. "The lucky ones among us still have the love of a good Paul Harvey story."



For some iReporters, Harvey was not just an important part of their daily lives. He gave one his "big break."



Brent Burns of Gulf Shores, Alabama, was at the beginning of his career in the music business, with a few recordings released but nothing hugely successful. Then, Harvey played his song about the 1970s gas crisis, "Cheaper Crude or No More Food." "It bounced me onto the world stage immediately," he said.



Burns says he appeared in magazines and television after this first major exposure. "It just goes to show how well-loved and listened-to Paul Harvey was," he said. "He was just a brilliant guy who really had a command of the language." Burns believes that his song might be the only one Harvey ever played. iReport.com: 'Integrity was Paul Harvey's middle name'



After entering giant frogs into the famous Calaveras County frog jumping contest in 1990, Andy Koffman of Seattle, Washington, appeared on "The Tonight Show with Johnny Carson" as well as other television programs. "But," he said, "the one thing I will never forget is Paul Harvey's voice talking about me and my giant frogs on the radio."



A retired radio host himself, Gerald Dimmitt of Vancouver, Washington, will never forget hosting a dinner where Harvey was the guest speaker. At first, Dimmitt was unsure if he wanted to take the job because of Harvey's then-support of the war in Vietnam.



"Due to the fact that he was an icon in the business, I went ahead and did it," he said.



Dimmitt and a small group of attendees

***

(CNN) -- Dionne Warwick was one of the thousands of guests to attend Michael Jackson's memorial service Tuesday at the Staples Center in Los Angeles, California.



Dionne Warwick said Michael Jackson brought a new insight to things people should be paying attention to.



Warwick talks with CNN's Larry King about the moving tributes during the service and the legacy left behind by the "King of Pop."



King also talks with Warwick's son, Damon Elliott, who has been a friend of Jackson's since childhood and was writing a song with Michael just before his death.



The following is an edited version of the interview.



Larry King: What did you think of the event, Dionne?



Dionne Warwick: Well, it was probably one of the most emotional mornings and afternoons that I've spent in a very long time. It was done with a great deal of style and class.



King: He would've liked it?



Warwick: He would've loved it. He would've loved it.



King: How did you and Michael hook up, Damon?



Damon Elliott: From Mom. We shared moms. When I was very little, I used to beg her probably at least once a week, "Mom, you have to take me out to the house, you have to take me out to the house." She'd always say, "I'm on tour right now, baby. But when we I get home, we'll go see Michael." And one day we did, and he showed up, I think, in my living room or somewhere.



King: You were writing a song at his death?



Elliott: Yes. Actually, I was working on some music for the new record that I was going to get over to Jermaine. And the night before he passed away, it's crazy we were writing a song.



King: How great a singer was Michael Jackson?



Warwick: Michael was...



King: A singer -- a pure singer?



Warwick: And he could sing. Yes. Yes. It was more than the magic of everything else that he did. He was a brilliant singer.



King: What was he like to work with, if you were working on a song together? What was that experience like?



Elliott: Well, from a distance, I got to work with Michael. I mostly worked through Jermaine, who was another amazing talent. But just all the brothers, you know, they have so much conviction and so much feeling in their delivery.  Watch Jackson family address crowd »



And Michael was like the greatest teacher to all of us -- producers, dancers, singers, songwriters. He just had it all. He would come in and beat box a melody and you'd try to emulate it on a drum machine and it just was impossible. So you'd just keep what he did.



King: What's Michael Jackson's legacy?



Warwick: The wonderful things that he did for this entire world. I think he brought a new insight as to the things that we really should be paying attention to. He did it brilliantly, and I think that's his legacy.

***

(CNN) -- A preliminary autopsy on the body of an energy executive pulled from the Mississippi River in New Orleans, Louisiana, this week revealed a head laceration and evidence of drowning, investigators said Thursday.





The body was found Tuesday, four days after Douglas Schantz, president of Houston, Texas-based Sequent Energy Management, disappeared.





A toxicology report, due back in roughly three weeks, will show "how much Schantz had to drink before falling into the Mississippi" last week, said John Gagliano, lead investigator at the New Orleans coroner's office.





Authorities recovered Schantz's body around noon Tuesday, said police spokesman Gary Flot.





Police said Schantz was found with all his personal belongings, including his wallet, credit cards, identification and jewelry.





Schantz, 54, was last seen outside a Bourbon Street bar at 2:06 a.m. Friday, New Orleans Police Superintendent Warren Riley told reporters Tuesday morning. No one had heard from him since then.





At the Tuesday morning news conference, Riley said detectives reviewed video from "almost every" business in the busy French Quarter. Several cameras captured a "disoriented" Schantz walking alone from a bar toward the Mississippi River, Riley said. Schantz had been drinking, Riley said, and was headed toward a boat at the wharf.





"The last video of Mr. Schantz is when he was near the boat Natchez, walking on a 2- to 3-foot-wide walkway near the river," Riley said. "From 2:40 until 6:40 a.m. video was watched and ... once he [Schantz] walked out of that frame near the Natchez, he never returned on any frames of the video."





Riley said that according to the video, no one approached Schantz during the walk.





Texas Equusearch, a search-and-rescue team, searched the waters with sonar equipment, and the Coast Guard and Harbor Police had also joined the search, according to Riley.





Family and friends said they knew something was wrong Friday morning when Schantz didn't show up at the airport, missed a company meeting, and didn't return calls. Such behavior, they said, was uncharacteristic of him.





"There's never been a time he was out of reach," said Pete Tumminello, vice president of Sequent Energy, on Monday. "I've worked with him for seven years. There's never been a time he's been out of reach."





Schantz missed a flight Friday morning with his daughter, a Tulane University senior, police said. He also did not show up for an office meeting in Houston.





Schantz went to the French Quarter with friends on Thursday night, Sequent Energy spokesman Alan Chapple told CNN on Tuesday. They went there after an earlier event at Tulane University to present a $25,000 donation to the Tulane Energy Institute, Chapple said. Schantz and his colleagues had dinner with professors and students at the school, and later he and some others went to the bar.





Schantz was staying at the Royal Sonesta Hotel, only about two blocks from the bar that he was seen leaving, Chapple said. Members of the party had left the establishment at varying times, he said.





During their investigation, police had not discovered any evidence of a crime, Flot said Tuesday morning. The FBI, U.S. Marshals Service and private investigators were also working the case, Riley said.





Schantz's son, Michael, described Monday the agony his family was feeling as they awaited news.





"My family is distraught, I'm distraught, [in] shock," he said. "We just want him found alive and back with our family."





CNN's Carolina Sanchez and Khadijah Rentas contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Tim Russert, who became one of America's leading political journalists as the host of NBC's "Meet the Press," died Friday, the network said. He was 58.



Tim Russert established himself as the face of NBC's political journalism as host of "Meet the Press."



The network said the award-winning journalist collapsed at work Friday. He was taken to Washington's Sibley Memorial Hospital, where he died, the hospital confirmed.



Colleague and former NBC anchor Tom Brokaw broke the news on the network Friday shortly after 3:40 p.m.



Russert had just returned from a family vacation in Italy with his wife, journalist Maureen Orth, and son, Luke, to celebrate his graduation from Boston College, Brokaw said.



"I think I can invoke personal privilege and say this news division will not be the same without his strong, clear voice," Brokaw said Friday.



"He will be missed as he was loved -- greatly."  Watch Brokaw break the news »



Friends and colleagues remembered Russert on Friday not only as one of the country's most respected and influential political journalists, but also as a friend, a devout Catholic and an avid sports fan, especially when it came to his home team, the Buffalo Bills.  Watch politicians, journalists pay homage to Russert »



"I just loved the guy. He had this enthusiasm about all of the things that life brings to you," said James Carville, who often attended Washington National games with Russert. "My wife and I are in a complete state of utter shock."  Watch as Carville describes his friendship with Russert »



Russert was born May 7, 1950, in Buffalo, New York. His parents were Timothy John Russert Sr., or "Big Russ," a newspaper truck driver and sanitation worker, and Elizabeth Russert.



Buffalo Mayor Byron W. Brown ordered that all flags on city property be lowered immediately to half-staff in Russert's honor.



He was a graduate of Canisius High School, John Carroll University and the Cleveland-Marshall College of Law. He was a member of the bar in New York and the District of Columbia, according to a biography on CNBC.com



Before joining NBC, Russert served as press secretary for former New York Gov. Mario Cuomo and as chief of staff to Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan.



Russert joined the network in 1984 and quickly established himself as the face of the network's political coverage, eventually becoming senior vice president and Washington bureau chief of NBC news.



His career at NBC was marked by a number of milestones. In 1985, Russert supervised live broadcasts of the "Today" show from Rome, Italy, negotiating an appearance by Pope John Paul II -- a first for American television.



He was also the recipient of numerous awards for his work, including an Emmy in 2005 for his coverage of the funeral of President Ronald Reagan.



His rise to prominence coincided with his success as the best-selling author of two books, 2004's "Big Russ and Me" and 2006's "Wisdom of Our Fathers," which documented his journey from blue-collar beginnings to law school to Washington powerhouse.  Watch Russert talk about lessons he learned from his father on CNN's Larry King Live »



The memoirs, both of which were New York Times best sellers, transformed the award-winning journalist into the son of Big Russ, a Buffalo Bills fanatic, and finally, a husband and father.  Watch Russert talk about his son's first tattoo »



"Tim was a true child of Buffalo and the blue-collar roots from which he was raised," Brokaw said Friday. "For all his success, he was always in touch with the ethos of that community."



Russert credited his upbringing with helping him keep his ego in check as he became the man who interviewed presidents and important politicians of the day. iReport.com: Send your memories of Russert



"If you come from Buffalo, everything else is easy. Walking backwards to school, for a mile in the snow, grounds you for

***

(CNN)  -- Storms that killed two people in northern Georgia spread Saturday night into South Carolina, where possible tornadoes downed trees, blew roofs off homes and broke power lines, weather forecasters said.



There was heavy damage in Prosperity, South Carolina, where residents reported seeing a tornado touch down, said Newberry County sheriff's Capt. Todd Johnson. Prosperity is 40 miles northwest of Columbia.



A woman was severely injured when a tree fell on her trailer, trapping her inside, Johnson said.



About 56,000 customers remained without power Sunday morning after storms swept through Savannah knocking out power while the coastal Georgia city was in the midst of its St. Patrick's Day celebrations,  said Carol Boatwright of Georgia Power.



Damage was reported Saturday night in the counties of Newberry, McCormick, Edgefield, Lexington, Aiken and Kershaw.



"We have numerous reports of tornadoes touching down. There is a lot of damage, and we are unable to respond to all of the calls," a dispatcher for the Aiken County Sheriff's Department said.



Meanwhile, the storm danger passed in the Atlanta, Georgia, area. A Friday night tornado packing winds of up to 135 miles per hour cut a path 6 miles long and 200 yards wide through downtown in less than 30 minutes.  Watch a flyover of a damaged area in Georgia »



There was heavy damage to many structures, including the CNN world headquarters. On Saturday, windows were still popping out from a high-rise nearby. Heavy rain and hail passed through in the afternoon.  Watch video of storm damage in Georgia »



Two people died in northern Georgia on Saturday as waves of dangerous thunderstorms pounded the area, and storms continued into Saturday night. A possible tornado destroyed mobile homes in Jefferson County, and another possible tornado was reported in Clarke County, where Athens is located, the weather service reported.



A woman died and her husband was seriously injured when a tornado leveled their home in the Live Oak community, just north of Aragon, Polk County officials said. Aragon is about 50 miles northeast of Atlanta.  Watch damage in Polk County »



Aragon police were assessing damage when they found the house about 12:30 p.m., Polk County Police Chief Kenneth Dodd said. The part-brick, part-frame home was reduced to rubble.



The injured man was taken to a Rome, Georgia, hospital, Dodd said.



Five dead dogs were found in a nearby field, and other injured animals were taken to an animal control agency, he said.



A family across the street from the couple's home lost part of their roof. Another person was seriously injured elsewhere, said Thomas Wilson, Polk County's 911 director.



The second fatality was in Floyd County, about 7 miles southeast of Lindale in the Wax community, where a possible tornado struck about 4:30 p.m., said Scotty Hancock, the county emergency management director.  Watch damage in Floyd County »



The National Weather Service estimated that 20 homes were destroyed in the area.



Damage was also reported in Taylorsville and Cartersville, about 40 miles northwest of Atlanta, and suspected tornado touchdowns were reported in Gainesville in Hall County, near Homer in Banks County and near Maysville in Jackson County.



A tornado was also reported in northern Forsyth County, sheriff's Capt. Michael Honiker said. At least one structure fire was reported, he said.



Hail nearly 3 inches in diameter was reported in Dawsonville, the National Weather Service said.



There were 41,000 people without power statewide Saturday evening, according to Georgia Power.



Saturday's severe weather followed an EF-2 tornado, with top winds of up to 135 mph that ripped through downtown Atlanta on Friday night. There were no fatalities, and only one serious injury was reported.



Rain, wind and hail caused additional power outages Saturday in the Atlanta area and triggered delays of more than an hour for flights leaving Hartsfield-Jackson International Airport, according to an airport spokesman. E-mail to a friend



CNN's Audrey Irvine contributed to this report.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Banana producer Chiquita will pay a $25 million fine and serve five years' probation for once paying millions of dollars to groups in Colombia considered by the U.S. to be terrorist organizations, a Department of Justice spokesman said Tuesday.





A worker at a banana plantation in Santa Maria, Colombia, in December 2000.





In so doing, the banana producer avoided prosecution for the company's now-defunct payoff of Colombian terrorists protecting its most profitable banana-growing operation, according to terms of a plea agreement with the U.S. Justice Department.





If approved by U.S. courts, the $25 million fine would represent the largest U.S. criminal penalty ever imposed under federal global terrorism sanction regulations, said Justice spokesman Dean Boyd. The regulations prohibit transactions with people who commit, threaten to commit or support U.S.-designated terrorists and establish penalties for doing so.





Attorneys from the Justice Department's National Security Division and federal prosecutors for the District of Columbia filed a joint sentencing motion Tuesday asking the court to accept the plea agreement, which was reached March 19, Boyd said. A hearing on the matter is set for Monday.





In its motion, the government asked that Chiquita Brands International be fined and sentenced to probation, as well as being required to implement an effective ethics program in connection with the company's guilty plea, Boyd said.





Federal prosecutors accused the Cincinnati-based company of paying more than $1.7 million to the United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia, a right-wing paramilitary group, in two parts of Colombia where the company grew bananas.





The payments to the group, known as the AUC, went through the company's Colombian subsidiary, Banadex, from 1997 to 2004, according to court documents filed in the case.





Court papers also say Chiquita paid Colombia's two leftist guerrilla groups, the FARC (Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia) and ELN (National Liberation Army) from about 1989 to 1997. At the time, according to court documents, those groups controlled areas where the company grew bananas.





The AUC, FARC and ELN are all combatants in Colombia's decade-long civil war, and all have been designated as terrorist organizations by the United States.





In a written statement issued in March, Chiquita Brands International CEO Fernando Aguirre said the company viewed the plea agreement "as a reasoned solution to the dilemma the company faced several years ago." The company voluntarily disclosed the payments to the Justice Department in 2003, he said, adding the payments were made "to protect the lives of its employees."





Court documents said the company began making the payments after a Banadex general manager met with the then-leader of the AUC, Carlos Castano. Castano told the manager that the AUC was preparing to drive FARC from Colombia's Uraba region and asked for payments to be made to the AUC through private security companies.





"Castano sent an unspoken but clear message that failure to make the payments could result in physical harm to Banadex personnel and property," court documents said.





Charges filed in the case said senior company executives knew about the payments to the AUC and, while checks were written to the security companies, the companies provided no actual services. In 2002, after the U.S. government designated the AUC as a terrorist organization, Chiquita began paying the organization in cash, according to court documents, and continued the payments even after being told by outside counsel that the payments were illegal and should be stopped.





In the motion filed Tuesday, federal prosecutors noted Chiquita's cooperation in the investigation and its voluntary disclosure of its illegal activity, Boyd said. While the government considered filing additional charges in the matter, it decided not to "after an extensive investigation and after considering critical evidence and information that Chiquita provided through its post-plea cooperation," he said.





Chiquita sold Banadex to another company more than two years ago but remains one of the largest purchasers of bananas in Colombia. E-mail to a friend





CNN's Kevin Bohn contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Before the storm hit and the floodwaters took over, Kimberly Rivers Roberts pulled out her new video camera.



Kimberly Rivers Roberts and her husband, Scott, sit outside their flood-damaged Ninth Ward home.



The aspiring rapper and her husband, Scott, were among those trapped in the Ninth Ward in New Orleans, Louisiana, in late August 2005 as Hurricane Katrina raged toward them.



The couple, who've described themselves as street hustlers, compiled amateur footage that captured the horrors experienced in their community and among their neighbors. From the middle of rising waters in attics where people waited to the struggles to find help from and for others, they documented what outsiders couldn't see.



About 1,300 miles away, in Brooklyn, New York, documentary filmmakers Tia Lessin and Carl Deal sat glued to their televisions.



"After a few days of seeing people stranded on roofs, we had to do something," said Lessin, who with Deal had previously worked with Michael Moore.  Watch Lessin and Deal talk about how the film was made »



So they set out, planning to do a film about New Orleans National Guardsmen. But when that was shut down -- " 'Fahrenheit 9/11' screwed it up for all you guys," she remembered hearing -- they found what she called "an unexpected gift" in Kim and Scott, whom they met 10 days after the storm.



The home video material, coupled with archival news footage and film verite capturing the couple's journey, led to the documentary "Trouble the Water," which won the Grand Jury Prize at the 2008 Sundance Film Festival and is up for an Oscar at this year's Academy Awards.



Lessin and Deal, who both directed and produced this documentary that took two-and-a-half years to make, spoke to CNN about their Ninth Ward collaborators, their own experiences and the impact the film's made.



CNN: Tell me about meeting Kim and Scott. Did you know right away that you were on to something?



Tia Lessin: We were in a Red Cross shelter in central Louisiana -- that's where we met the subjects, the hero[es] of our film. They'd been on this five-day journey out of the city to higher ground. ... Everyone had a story to tell, but their story really rose to the top.



Carl Deal: They called themselves "street survivors." Kim said the most support and help they ever got from the government were the skills to survive on their own. They were used to not getting assistance. ... It's a slap in the face for those of us who come from a more privileged place. ... And the home video, it enabled us to ground the film in this inside point of view.



CNN: I can't imagine what it was like to work on this. What was this experience like for you?



Lessin: Originally the film was fueled by a sense of outrage. What it became, I guess, was something a little different. It's really about hope and survival. We were inspired by Kim and Scott's journey, and their commitment to do something different in their lives. The voices on 911 calls, we think about those people all the time, and there's no way to know what happened to them. What keeps us up at night now is that people are still struggling. Levees are still vulnerable, there's a lack of affordable housing, lack of jobs. Schools are a dismal failure. Tens of thousands of people can't return home. We hope in this new administration, things will happen.



CNN: What did you hope this film would inspire in terms of emotion and action?



Deal: We want to challenge people, when they see it, to think about themselves and the impact they can have in the community and the world.



People respond to this film in different ways. We screened at the Democratic National Convention in Denver. Mayor [Ray] Nagin [of New Orleans] came to the screening and walked out after a few minutes. Sen.

***

Mecca, Saudi Arabia (CNN) -- Chanting "Allahu Akbar" -- God is Greater than any -- more than 2 million pilgrims crossed new pedestrian bridges Saturday to perform one of the last rituals of the Hajj season.





Jamarat is a re-enactment of an event when Prophet Abraham stoned the devil and rejected his temptations, according to Muslim traditions.





The ritual stoning of three pillars, which occurs in the tent city of Mina -- about two miles from Mecca, was the scene of stampedes and many deaths in the 1980s and 1990s as pilgrims passed a crowded bottleneck area leading to the small pillars on the ground.





But this year the Saudi government completed a new project that avoids past congestion at the site. The government has erected three massive pillars and completed a $1.2 billion, five-story bridge nearby where pilgrims can toss stones. Authorities and pilgrims say it's a roomier atmosphere and more efficient way to accommodate the faithful.





"Everything went fine so far," Col. Khakled Qarar Mohammadi, head of the emergency forces at Jamarat, told CNN.





"It is an immense responsibility that we had to deal with. About 3 million pilgrims move in a small geographic area at the same time wanting to do the same ritual. So we have been preparing for this for years now."





Irtiza Hasan, a pilgrim from the United States, said all went well at the ceremony.





"The only incident I saw was that there were some handicapped women who were turned away in fears that they get hurt."





But Mohammadi said, "There are 10 vans on the second floor especially designated to serve the elderly and handicapped. Each van can take up to 14 pilgrims."





As a measure to alleviate harm, according to Muslim traditions, the elderly and the handicapped can appoint someone else to stone for them.





The five-story Jamarat bridge is air-conditioned at 19 degrees Centigrade, or 66 Fahrenheit, throughout the day and backed by water sprinklers that can reduce the temperature to about 29 degrees C, or 84 F. The bridge is designed to allow the addition of seven more levels to hold as many as 5 million pilgrims in the future if the need arises.





According to authorities, the bridge is 950 meters (1,039 yards) long and 80 meters (87 yards) wide. Each floor is 12 meters (13 yards) high with three tunnels and 12 entrances and 12 exits in six directions. It has a helicopter pad for emergencies.





According to Mohammadi, the project has 509 advanced closed-circuit television cameras monitoring pilgrims' movements. Those cameras feed into the main operations room, which oversees the Jamarat Bridge and the surrounding areas -- all screened by dozens of security officers on 72 monitors at the operation room.





The stoning ritual is done over at least two days, where pilgrims stone three pillars at Mina -- believed to be where the Prophet Abraham stoned the devil when he tried to dissuade him from obeying God's orders to slaughter his son. According to tradition, the event was a test from God, who gave Abraham a ram to slaughter instead.





The last ritual that marks the end of Hajj is when pilgrims go from Mina to Mecca to make a last visit to al-Masjid al-Haram, Islam's holiest site, before going back home.





The ritual is called Tawaf al-Wada'a -- or farewell circumambulation in the holy mosque. It's where pilgrims go around the black cube seven times counter-clockwise asking that their Lord accept their pilgrimage and grant them another visit to the holy city.

***

(CNN)  -- A roadside bomb in southern Afghanistan killed a female Canadian soldier and wounded four other troops, the Canadian military said Tuesday.

Trooper Karine Blais, 21, is the second Canadian female soldier to die in Afghanistan.

Trooper Karine Blais was killed Monday when the troops' armored vehicle struck the bomb. The attack occurred north of Kandahar in the Shah Wali Kowt District of Kandahar province.

Blais' death was the 117th Canadian troop fatality in the Afghan war, and she is the second Canadian female soldier killed in Afghanistan.

The first, Capt. Nichola Goddard, was killed in a May 2006 firefight with insurgents in Kandahar province, where Canadian troops have been based during the conflict.

Brig. Gen. Jonathan Vance, commander of Canadian troops in Afghanistan, called the 21-year-old Blais "an energetic soldier who gave 100 percent to every challenge she faced using a unique sense of humor based on her honesty and frankness."

Vance said Blais "demonstrated the qualities of a future leader" and was "respected by all members of her squadron."

"Our thoughts are with the friends and family of our fallen comrade during this difficult time," the Canadian Forces said in a news release. "All members of Task Force Kandahar are thinking of the family and friends of our fallen comrades during this sad time. We will not forget their sacrifice as we continue to bring security and hope to the people of Kandahar province."

Blais, from the 12th Canadian Armored Regiment at Valcartier, Quebec, near Quebec City, was serving with the 2nd Battalion, Royal 22th Regiment Battle Group.

A chopper evacuated the four other troops to a medical facility at Kandahar airfield.

Before Monday's attack, the last Canadian deaths in Afghanistan occurred March 20 when four soldiers were killed in two roadside bombings.

***

(CNN)  -- Over 28,000 Liverpool fans marked the 20th anniversary of the Hillsborough disaster in a special memorial service at Anfield on Wednesday.

Liverpool supporters at the Kop end paid their respects in an emotional afternoon at Anfield.

A total of 96 supporters died on April 15, 1989 before the FA Cup semifinal between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest at Sheffield Wednesday's stadium, the worst-ever tragedy in English sporting history.

To commemorate the anniversary, the city of Liverpool came to a standstill at 3.06 pm (1406 GMT) with the bells of the two cathedrals and its civic buildings ringing out in memory of those fans who lost their lives.

On Anfield's famous Kop, 96 candles were lit while commemorations took place at Hillsborough and also in Nottingham.  Watch fans mark Hillsborough »

Members of the current Liverpool team stood somberly as hymns were played before a roll call of the dead was read out. Club legend Kenny Dalglish, who was Liverpool manager at the time of the disaster, then read a short prayer.

The mayor of Liverpool, Steve Rotherham, who was at the game 20 years ago, helped organize the emotional memorial.

"Hillsborough affected so many lives, not just on Merseyside but across the whole of the UK," he said.

"I attended the match 20 years ago and the passing years do not diminish the importance and the poignancy of this occasion."

Liverpool captain Steven Gerrard, whose 10-year-old cousin Jon-Paul Gilhooley was the youngest victim of the tragedy, spoke of his feelings this week.

"Time has gone by, but the scars will never ever be healed and the fans will never ever forget. So you can always rely on our supporters to be there for you when you need them."

The Liverpool fans died in a crush which started just before the kick-off as the gate at the Leppings Lane End was opened with terrible consequences. The match started but when the scale of the tragedy became clear, it was swiftly abandoned at 3.06 pm.

In the immediate aftermath, the British government commissioned Lord Justice Taylor to conduct an inquiry which would have a far-reaching impact on football.

Taylor was deeply critical of the police operation at Hillsborough, but his most significant recommendations were the removal of perimeter fencing and the creation of all-seater stadia.

His report also cleared Liverpool fans of blame for the tragedy after lurid tabloid headlines provoked revulsion on Merseyside.

Prime minister Gordon Brown paid reference to the controversy in an interview released on Liverpool's official television channel.

"It was wrong for people to blame, as some did, Liverpool fans on that day," he said.

"That's probably what matters most -- that people understood that the behavior of Liverpool fans in helping each other was magnificent.

"Let's never forget the fans who cruelly lost their lives on a day when we know the people of Liverpool were trying to help each other," he added.

However, the people of Liverpool are still angry and bitter at the lack of justice for those who died -- and that frustration surfaced when Andy Burnham, the   Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport took to the stand to address the crowd.

As Burnham spoke, the crowd rose as one to sing "Justice for the 96". The Kop chant boomed around the stadium and Burnham, an Everton fan, was left in no doubt about the strength of feeling over the lack of accountability from officialdom over the tragedy.

Fittingly, the ceremony was concluded with Gerry Marsden leading the fans in singing Liverpool anthem 'You'll Never Walk Alone'.

***

(CNN) -- A Florida judge Friday handed a legal victory to a former astronaut accused of assaulting a romantic rival, ruling evidence found in her car and statements she made to police after her arrest were inadmissible at trial.



Lisa Nowak, accused of using pepper spray against a romantic rival, is set to go on trial in April.



Ninth Judicial Circuit Judge Marc Lubet ruled that all were unlawfully obtained.



He said his decision stemmed from a variety of factors, most concerning police tactics in their interview of Lisa Nowak and the fact that no written consent was obtained to search her car.



"In each and every case, this court must ensure that the constitutional protections afforded by our forefathers are scrupulously honored," Lubet wrote in his opinion.



"Unfortunately, in this case those protections were not as thoroughly followed as the law demands."



Nowak, 44, is accused of stalking Air Force Capt. Colleen Shipman and using pepper spray against her in a parking lot at Orlando International Airport in Florida on February 5.



She pleaded not guilty March 22 to charges of attempted kidnapping with intent to inflict bodily harm, battery and burglary of a vehicle using a weapon.



Her trial is set for April. If convicted, she would face a sentence of up to life in prison.



Her defense attorneys had claimed Nowak's comments to police and her consent to search her car were made under duress.



During a hearing held in August, Lubet heard testimony from, among others, Nowak, Shipman and Orlando police detective William Becton, who interviewed Nowak after her arrest.



Lubet said in his ruling that when Nowak asked Becton if she needed an attorney during the interview, he failed to answer her question in a "simple and straightforward manner."



"There was a concerted effort to minimize and downplay the significance of the Miranda rights by referring to these constitutional rights as 'formalities' " during the interview, Lubet wrote.



On the audiotape of the interview, there was no audible response from Nowak on whether she understood that her statements could be used against her in court, and when she was asked whether anyone had threatened or promised her anything to get her to talk to police, Lubet wrote.



"Thus, there is nothing in either the audio recording or the transcript of the interview that demonstrates that defendant understood these two rights and waived them."



Nowak testified at the August hearing she did not respond to Becton's questions because she was confused, Lubet wrote.



In addition, he said, Becton used "legally impermissible" statements and techniques, including threats, to get Nowak's statements and consent.



"Well, what you say can change what you're charged with," Becton said at one point. "Right now we're looking at [a] possible life felony of carjacking."



In a written statement, an Orlando Police Department spokeswoman said it was inappropriate for the department to comment on the case since it is pending in court, and referred questions to prosecutors.



Lubet noted that, although Nowak was given the opportunity to use the restroom and was asked if she wanted something to eat, she was "subjected to a barrage of questions" beginning in the predawn hours and was questioned for six hours without being given the opportunity to sleep or make a phone call.



"Defendant had not slept during the preceding 24 hours," the judge said.



Nowak's consent to search her car, Lubet wrote, "followed illegal police activity, such as a prolonged detention, threats to obtain a warrant and repeated requests for consent."



Prosecutors accuse Nowak of driving nearly 900 miles from Houston to Orlando -- wearing NASA diapers to cut down on the number of stops she needed to make -- and donning a disguise before following Shipman from baggage claim to a parking lot.



Her attorney has strongly denied that she wore the diapers.



Shipman told police that after she got into her car, Nowak feigned distress and knocked on the window.



When Shipman cracked it to talk to her, Nowak sprayed her in the face with pepper spray

***

(CNN) -- Grace, Kara and Trichelle were created to fill a void for young black girls who for so long have been playing with dolls that don't look like them.



Stacy McBride-Irby, creator of the new Barbie, poses with the dolls.



The new black Barbies released by Mattel have fuller lips, curlier hair and other features that the company says more accurately represent African-American women.



Some have cheered the new dolls. Others jeered them, saying they're not black enough.



"I love the black Barbie. It's about time," Jua Simpson said on CNN's iReport, a user-generated news community. "But the hair is still a step backwards, since most of our hair is not straight and light brown."



Others disagree with critics who say the dolls should have had more natural black hairstyles, such as afros or braids.



"Many people have criticized the dolls for either having hair that's too long or too straight, but I have long, straight hair that I straightened. But it's my hair and a part of me," said Tanisa Zoe Samuel, an African-American iReporter from the Turks and Caicos, in the Caribbean. "Black women come in all shades, shapes and varieties that there is just no way to capture everyone with three dolls." iReport.com: Samuel shares her thoughts on the new Barbie



The dolls were created by Stacy McBride-Irby, an African-American who watched her daughter play with dolls and wanted to create a doll that looked more like her.



McBride-Irby said she has heard the criticism, but she also has received many kudos.



"They mean so much to me because they did come from a positive place," McBride-Irby said. "My daughter loves the dolls. I've had dads thank me for creating this line of dolls that represent their little girls. These dolls are for girls all over the world."



This is not the first time Mattel has released an ethnic doll that drew criticism.  See photos of the black Barbie dolls »



In 1997, Mattel collaborated with cookie maker Nabisco to create Oreo Fun Barbie. The black version of the doll, which sported an Oreo-shaped purse, was criticized by some who noted that "Oreo" is a derogatory term in the black community. The word is used to describe someone who is perceived as black on the outside and white on the inside.



For some, the talk about dolls is not just child's play. Some think early play with dolls can affect a girl's self-esteem later in life.



Actress Nia Long, who appears in comedian Chris Rock's new documentary, "Good Hair," recently talked about the issue on CNN.



"Historically, the Afrocentric features have not been celebrated," Long said. "This makes us question the integrity of our beauty standard for ourselves."

***

(CNN) -- Two men charged in the 1978 disappearance of five teenagers in Newark, New Jersey, pleaded not guilty to five counts of murder Wednesday morning as about 40 family members of the victims looked on.





Lee Anthony Evans, 56, and Philander Hampton, 53, were arrested Monday night. That was about 18 months after the investigation into the disappearance of the five boys was given new life; a witness came to detectives with information that the 1978 arson of an abandoned building in Newark was connected with the case, acting prosecutor Robert Laurino said.





Evans and Hampton also pleaded not guilty to arson charges.





Evans' attorney, Michael A. Robbins, maintains his client's innocence, citing Evans' full cooperation with authorities during the 1978 investigation into the disappearance of Randy Johnson, 16, Melvin Pittman,17, Ernest Taylor, 17, Alvin Turner, 16, all of Newark; and Michael McDowell, 16, of East Orange.





"In a case such as this, where the evidence has been lost, great care must be taken to prevent outrage, anger and emotion acting as a substitute in court for competent testimony, evidence and proof," Robbins said. "The magnitude of the tragedy in the case should not diminish the very sacredness of Mr. Evans' right to a fair trail."





Hampton is being represented by John McMahon from the Essex County public defender's office.





The family members of the victims sat silently as they watched Evans and Hampton enter their pleas.





Evans had been under suspicion in 1978 but was released after passing a lie detector test. Witnesses said they had seen the boys getting into Evans' pickup truck.





Helen Simmons, Michael's aunt, said she had never let go of her suspicion of Evans.





"Five kids did not run away. They were not runaways. They had no reason to run away. Five kids did not run away all at the same time, all having been picked up by Lee Anthony Evans," said Simmons, who was in the courtroom Wednesday.





"Michael's mother, my sister, died just 13 months after this, never knowing what happened to her son," she said.





"We have not forgotten Michael the last 32 years," she added. "Michael is always with us. It's just that now we do feel that we will achieve the most we can get from justice, which is empty, which is to have [Evans and Hampton] to spend the rest of their lives in jail. I would love for [Evans] to live at least another 32 more years. In jail."





Authorities believe that the alleged killings were in retaliation for the teens' breaking into one of the defendants' homes to steal marijuana. The remains of the victims have never been found.





A third suspect, Maurice Woody-Olds, died in March 2008.





Officials allege that Evans and Hampton, with the aid of Woody-Olds, lured the five boys at various times into Evans' pickup and took them to the abandoned building on Camden Street, where they held them at gunpoint before setting it ablaze, officials said.





The case will next be presented to a grand jury on a date to be determined.





Evans and Hampton are being held at Essex County Correctional Facility in lieu of $5 million bail.

***

(CNN) -- Ecological and conservation groups are praising a move by the Environmental Protection Agency to impose new restrictions on rat poisons to help reduce the threat of accidental exposure to children and wildlife.



The rules say only farmers, livestock owners and certified rodent control employees can buy rat poison in bulk.



"We are very happy that the EPA has done all it can to get these products off of the consumer market," said Michael Fry, director of conservation advocacy for the American Bird Conservancy. "By putting these restrictions in place, they are allowing a compromise to be made between themselves and organizations who have been working on this problem for a long time."



The EPA's new measures, which were handed down Thursday, require that rat poisons be kept in bait stations above ground and in containers that meet agency standards.



Loose bait, such as pellets, and the four most hazardous types of pesticides, known as "second-generation anticoagulants," will no longer be sold for personal use.



Under the new restrictions, only farmers, livestock owners and certified rodent control employees will be allowed to purchase rat poison in bulk. Bags larger than 8 pounds will no longer be sold at hardware and home-improvement stores.



Children who come into contact with highly toxic pellets can experience terrible symptoms from digesting them. They include internal bleeding, nosebleeds, hair loss and extensive bruising.



Between 2001 and 2003, rat poison was responsible for nearly 60,000 poisonings, according to a study done by the American Association of Poison Control Centers. About 250 of these yearly exposures result in serious injuries or death.



The EPA said it believes the restrictions will not only keep the products out of children's hands, but also reduce the ecological and wildlife risks associated with exposure to rat poison.



Bait blocks that are typically placed on the ground use fish and other flavors that attract endangered species, including mountain lions.



"In California, almost every animal tested by the National Wildlife Service had residues of rodenticides," said Fry. "The rat baits are also very lethal to scavengers, because the toxins remain in the rodent's body long after they initially die."



Although the EPA is receiving considerable praise for the initiative, this isn't the first time the agency has worked to combat the threat of rat poison.



In 1998, the EPA established two standards for rat poison. The agency required manufacturers to include an ingredient that made the poison taste bitter and use an indicator dye that would make the ingestion of pesticides more recognizable.



But regulations were revoked in 2001 after the agency came to a mutual agreement with manufacturers to rescind the requirements.



"We determined that the dye wasn't effective in keeping children from being accidentally exposed and the bittering agent actually resulted in a loss of efficiency in controlling rodents," said Steven Bradbury, director of the agency's Division of Special Review and Re-registration.



"In our decision Thursday, we felt that we needed an approach that would stop children coming in contact with the pesticides in the first place. That ultimately led to the implementation of bait stations," Bradbury said.



The decision to revoke the requirements led the West Harlem Environmental Action, Inc. and the Natural Resource Defense Council to file a lawsuit three years later.



Both organizations saw the retraction as a way to make it easy for consumers to purchase unsafe rodenticides over the counter. According to the West Harlem group, inner-city housing and park departments such as the New York City Housing Authority could continue laying rat baits in public areas that were easily accessible to children.



"Studies show that the number of poisonings in minority children is much higher than others," said Aaron Colangelo, a staff attorney at the Natural Resource Defense Council. "Not only do we have an environmental health issue, but an environmental justice issue as well."



New York State Health Department studies showed that 57 percent of children hospitalized for rat poisoning were black and 26 percent were Latino.



The EPA said it is working to reduce those numbers in upcoming years with regulations like the ones it introduced this

***

(CNN) -- Team Lotus reserve driver Karun Chandhok has told CNN it would be "magic" to be on the grid when Formula One makes its debut in his home country of India next month.





Chandhok, 27, joined the CNN-sponsored team at the start of the 2011 season, and is currently behind first-choice drivers Heikki Kovalainen and Jarno Trulli in the pecking order.





But Lotus team principal Tony Fernandes raised hopes of the former HRT driver taking part in the inaugural Delhi race when he said he would like to see Chandhok take to the track on October 30.





"I'd like him to. It's up to the team to see [whether he will]," AirAsia chief Fernandes told Reuters.





Veteran Trulli signs new deal at Lotus





On the issue of which racer would make way for Chandhok, Fernandes, who recently purchased English soccer team Queens Park Rangers, suggested Trulli would be the one to face the axe.





"Yes, I think Heikki [Kovalainen] is our number one driver, although Jarno's outqualified him [at the Italian Grand Prix]."





In response to Fernandes' admission, Chandhok said: "It's obviously very nice to hear. He's the man who can make it happen. I've just got to wait and see what he decides.





"As a racing driver, the most emotional race is certainly your home grand prix. If I do get the opportunity to do it, it'll be fantastic, but as this moment it's a question only Tony can answer.





"To be an Indian driver on the grid for the first Indian Grand Prix would be magic. I've been very involved in the circuit; I've been visiting the site every month. To have the opportunity to drive would sort of complete that circle."





Chandhok was given a drive ahead of the veteran Italian Trulli, who extended his contract with Lotus last weekend, for the German Grand Prix in July, where he finished in last place.





While Chandhok admitted dropping a driver can create a difficult situation for the team, he insisted his relationship with Trulli has been unaffected.





"It's not ideal, there's no doubt about that ... I experienced it last year [at HRT], my drive was given to Sakon Yamamoto in the second half of the season. It's tough.





"When they put me in the car in Germany ... it's a very difficult situation. It can be awkward. But I have to say Jarno was fantastic. He offered his advice and support all through the weekend. I have to say hats off to him, he was a model professional."





On his own future, Chandhok, who made his Formula One debut at the 2010 Bahrain Grand Prix, made no secret of his desire to earn a full-time seat with Lotus. But he said any decision on his future with the team would be made by Fernandes.





"I need to sit and figure things out with Tony and where we are and where we see the future. I'd like to stay with Tony, with Lotus, and in the future race for them full-time. That's my ambition.





"I'd love to race with these guys and Tony's got a fantastic vision of trying to build an Asian team and I'd love to be a part of that programme."

***

(CNN) -- A woman convicted in the 2002 kidnapping of Utah teenager Elizabeth Smart pleaded guilty in the attempted kidnapping of Smart's cousin a month later, court officials said Monday.





In exchange for Wanda Barzee's plea of guilty but mentally ill to one count of conspiracy to commit aggravated kidnapping, prosecutors dropped state charges against her in Smart's abduction, said Nancy Volmer, spokeswoman for Utah state courts.





Barzee, 64, pleaded guilty in November to federal charges of kidnapping and unlawful transportation of a minor in connection with Smart's abduction. As part of that plea agreement, she agreed to cooperate with the state and federal cases against her husband, Brian David Mitchell, federal prosecutors have said.





Barzee and Mitchell were accused of abducting Smart, then 14, at knifepoint from her bedroom in her family's Salt Lake City home in June 2002. Smart was found nine months later, walking down a street in the Salt Lake City suburb of Sandy, Utah, in the company of Barzee and Mitchell, a drifter and self-described prophet who calls himself Emmanuel and had done some handyman work at the Smarts' home.





The month after Smart was kidnapped, prosecutors alleged, Barzee and Mitchell attempted to break into the home of her cousin, but were unsuccessful. The girl was 15 years old at the time, according to CNN affiliate KSL. She is not named in court documents.





"Mr. Mitchell's attempt was thwarted when the minor child awakened, which caused Mr. Mitchell to flee," the court documents said.





Following her arrest in 2003, Barzee told authorities that she and Mitchell went to the home in order to abduct the girl, and planned to hold her, along with Smart, in the couple's camp in the mountains, according to court documents.





Sentencing is set for May 21 on the state charge, Volmer said. Barzee faces between one and 15 years in prison, but prosecutors have agreed to allow that sentence to run concurrently with her federal sentence, according to court documents.





Federal prosecutors have recommended a sentence of 15 years in prison for her in exchange for her cooperation against Mitchell. Federal sentencing was set for May 19, but a spokeswoman for federal prosecutors has said a sentence would not be imposed until Barzee's cooperation against Mitchell is complete.





At the hearing in federal court, Barzee apologized to Smart, according to a transcript.





"I'm greatly humbled as I realize how much Elizabeth Smart has been victimized and the role I played in it," she said. "I'm so sorry, Elizabeth, for all the pain and suffering I have caused you and your family. It is my hope that you will be able to find it in your heart to forgive me one day."





Barzee had been housed at the Utah State Hospital while courts determined her competency as well as Mitchell's. After years of being declared incompetent, she recently was declared competent to stand trial, according to the Salt Lake Tribune newspaper. A state court had ruled she could be forcibly medicated, and that ruling led federal prosecutors to proceed with bringing a case against the couple, the Tribune said.





At a competency hearing for Mitchell in October, Smart, now 21, testified that she had been held captive in Utah and California. Just after her abduction, Mitchell took her to a wooded area behind her home and performed a mock marriage ceremony with her, she said. During the nine months of her captivity, Smart testified, no 24-hour period passed without her being raped by Mitchell.





U.S. District Judge Dale Kimball has not yet ruled on Mitchell's competency. State court proceedings are on hold pending the outcome of the federal case.





CNN's Ashley Hayes and Eliott McLaughlin contributed to this report.

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- A 15-year-old girl with a 500-texts-a-day texting habit thumbed her way to the $50,000 grand prize at the L.G. National Texting Championship in New York on Tuesday.



Kate Moore, 15, of Des Moines, Iowa, out-texted more than 250,000 participants for the texting title in New York.



Over 250,000 participants of all ages entered the competition, whose championship rounds were held in New York on Monday and Tuesday and won by Kate Moore of Des Moines, Iowa.   Some challenges were straightforward tests of speed and accuracy, but others required a little extra texting savvy. In one round, texters had to send texts while blindfolded. Another round quizzed contestants' knowledge of texting acronyms.



The only acronym to stump every texter was PAW -- parents are watching.



The fourth-place finisher, 21-year-old Jordan Rowe, saw her dreams of texting glory vanish in the "pressure cooker" round, where actors dressed as emoticons attempted to distract contestants tasked with texting tongue-twisters. Rowe failed to accurately text "Which wicked witch wished which more wicked witch in the well?" while a human emoticon talked trash about her sister.



Riffing off texters' sometimes dangerous tendency to text while performing other tasks, another round required contestants to complete an obstacle course while firing off difficult-to-type texts.



"I felt like I was gonna die," the eventual champion said of the texting gauntlet, getting a big LOL from the audience.



The finals on Tuesday afternoon pitted Dynda Morgan, 14, of Savannah, Georgia, against Moore. The two went head to head in a best-of-three showdown to see who could most quickly pound out lengthy texts predetermined by the judges -- with no errors.



Morgan, whose stepsister also made it to the championships, took the first round.



Faced with a do-or-die situation in the second round, Moore seemed to bet on accuracy over speed, finishing well behind her opponent but winning the round.



In the tiebreaker, the two girls furiously raced to thumb the final text: "Zippity Dooo Dahh Zippity Ayy...MY oh MY, what a wonderful day! Plenty of sunshine Comin' my way....Zippitty Do Dah Zippity Aay! WondeRful Feeling Wonderful day!"



The pregnant pause before the winner was announced stretched into a seeming eternity because Moore apparently forgot to hit send after finishing her text.



But then Moore's phone began to vibrate, signaling that she was the grand champion.



Kate's beaming mother, Claire, acknowledged that she has confiscated her daughter's phone on occasion, but said she appreciates that her daughter's texting habit means she's in constant touch. "I can get ahold of [her] at all times," she said.



Nor does Moore's mother have to foot an appallingly large phone bill each month, because her daughter is on an unlimited texting plan. She did concede that the texting portion of one of Moore's recent phone bills stretched to 294 pages.



Moore's victory was all the more awe-inspiring because she got a phone with text capability less than a year ago.



Moments after her victory, Moore agreed to an exclusive text message interview with CNN.



CNN: OMG U r ltrlly the wrld's bst txter. How does it feel?



Moore: It feels the best! Im so prd of myself & it feels aswm that ive gottn so far! :)



CNN: How mny txts do u snd a day? A month?



Moore: Uhhh about lyk 400-500 in a day, an avrg of 12014 thousand a month?



CNN: Wht r u going to do w the 50 k?



Moore: Idk yet! Prlly spend a good amount of the $$$......but ya gotta save some 2 b smart of course!



CNN: Do u ever get in trubl in skwl 4 txting 2 much?



Moore: haah just once or 2ce, teachers hv seen it and taken it away...lol that sux when that

***

(CNN) -- When Saddam Hussein's elite Republican Guard invaded Kuwait in 1990, they brought back some unusual war booty to Baghdad: tapes of the region's "Sesame Street" show. Troops also took a Muppet camel.



Haneen and Karim are two of the Muppet stars in "Shara'a Simsim," the Palestinian version of "Sesame Street."



The camel, Cookie Monster and the other Sesame friends immediately became permanent POWs in Iraq.



"To this day, they've never been recovered," Sesame Workshop President and CEO Gary Knell said. "That's how much the show is loved there."



That "kidnapping" is just one example of Sesame Street's devoted global following. And Sesame is trying to use that following to foster a culture of understanding worldwide, beginning with children.



In the Palestinian territories, Muppets teach nonviolence on a local version of Sesame Street called "Shara'a Simsim." Sesame Workshop calls this effort "Muppet diplomacy."



"This means using our characters -- characters children love and parents trust -- to bridge some of the world's most intractable divides," Knell said. "Muppets give children, and the parents who watch the show with them, a chance to explore other cultures from the safety of their living room, where no one will criticize them for being curious."



Daoud Kuttab, executive producer of "Shara'a Simsim," knows that the Muppets are highly effective communicators. "Anything the Muppets do, anything they say, any idea they transmit, the children accept."  Watch a clip from the Palestinian version of "Sesame Street" »



An internationally respected Palestinian journalist, Kuttab began working with the show more than a decade ago. After covering the war-torn region for years, he realized that Sesame was a great way to reach Palestinian children who desperately needed an alternative to the harsh lessons they were absorbing.



"I would say 3-, 4-, 5-year olds -- if we don't catch them at that early age, we do risk losing them to all kinds of propaganda, whether it's conservative, religious or fundamentalist," Kuttab said.



Hamas television runs a weekly program for kids, that sometimes preaches violent resistance.



"They have to be willing, prepared for the future. And that's why the Palestinians are showing seriousness," said Ahmed Yousef, a political leader in Hamas, the party in power in Gaza. "To keep our dignity and our independence, we have to sacrifice our life. We are either victorious, or we die for the good cause."



With some funding from the U.S. State Department and guidance from the U.S. producers, Kuttab's team developed the Sesame program into something uniquely Palestinian, complete with live-action segments filmed in the West Bank and Gaza, a set that looks like a typical Palestinian street and Muppets named Haneen and Karim.  Watch Palestinian Americans trying to instill peace in society's youngest members »



"We are interested in teaching tolerance, respect, pride in their own country and their own nation, and also in understanding that there are people who are different, and that's OK," Kuttab said.



Worldwide influence



Sesame's influential roots go back decades. The creators of "Sesame Street" launched the show in the 1960s to fill a gap in American education. Studies had presented compelling evidence that solid early education was vital for a child's later learning; still, public pre-kindergartens were scarce, and early education was rarely available to underprivileged children.



Although it was designed to address an American need, Sesame Street had immediate global appeal. In the 1970s, German producers put their version of the show on air. Today, children in 120 countries watch some version of "Sesame Street."



"When I saw [Sinn Fein leader] Gerry Adams wearing a Cookie Monster watch," Sesame Workshop's Knell said, "I knew we had made it in Northern Ireland."



The program has always found fun and funny ways to teach reading and counting. But interspersed with those ABCs and 123s are lessons in cooperation,

***

(CNN) -- Sens. Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama each accused the other of borrowing portions of their presidential campaign speeches Monday.



Massachusetts Gov. Deval Patrick, left,  on the stump with Sen. Barack Obama.



The Clinton campaign accused Obama of borrowing from a close supporter, and the Illinois senator responded by saying his own words have been used by Clinton.



On a conference call with reporters, Clinton spokesman Howard Wolfson said it was clear Obama had "lifted rhetoric" from Massachusetts Gov. Deval Patrick.



Late Monday, Clinton followed up with a swipe of her own.



"If your whole candidacy is about words, then they should be your own words," Clinton said in Madison, Wisconsin. "That's what I think."



Obama downplayed the significance of the accusation.



"I've written two books, wrote most of my speeches. So I think putting aside the question ... in terms of whether my words are my own, I think that would be carrying it too far," Obama said.



"Deval and I do trade ideas all the time, and you know he's occasionally used lines of mine," Obama said.



Obama said he also used some of Deval's words at a Jefferson-Jackson dinner in Wisconsin.



"I would add I've noticed on occasion Sen. Clinton has used words of mine as well," said Obama. "As I said before, I really don't think this is too big of a deal."



Obama campaign officials said Clinton had a pattern of borrowing from some of her rival's signature phrases, including "Yes, We Can" and "Fired Up, Ready to Go." They circulated a YouTube video and list of these alleged instances to reporters.



The Clinton campaign earlier pointed to similarities between the words of Obama and Patrick that have raised eyebrows and attracted traffic on YouTube.



A central passage in a speech Obama gave Saturday -- aimed at convincing voters that his campaign is not just about lofty rhetoric -- is adapted from one that Patrick used in his 2006 campaign, the Obama campaign said when asked about it.



The controversy is lost on the Massachusetts governor, who endorsed Obama.



Obama's campaign had Patrick call the New York Times over the weekend and issue a statement.



"Senator Obama and I are long-time friends and allies. We often share ideas about politics, policy and language," Patrick said in the statement. "The argument in question, on the value of words in the public square, is one about which he and I have spoken frequently before. Given the recent attacks from Senator Clinton, I applaud him responding in just the way he did."  Watch a comparison of Obama's and Patrick's speeches »



The Obama campaign also confirmed comments chief strategist David Axelrod -- an adviser on Obama's Senate campaign and Patrick's gubernatorial run -- made to the New York Times about the speeches.



"They often riff off one another. They share a world view," Axelrod told the Times about Obama and Patrick. "Both of them are effective speakers whose words tend to get requoted and arguments tend to be embraced widely."



Responding to attacks from Clinton that he offers words while she offers action, Obama has been arguing that words matter.



Saturday night at a gala for the Wisconsin Democratic Party, Obama said to frequent applause, "Don't tell me words don't matter! 'I have a dream.' Just words. 'We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal.' Just words. 'We have nothing to fear but fear itself.' Just words, just speeches!"



In 2006, Patrick, fending off attacks from his rival Kerry Healey, told a crowd, "Her dismissive point, and I hear it a lot from her staff, is all I have to offer is words. Just words. 'We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal' -- just words. Just words. 'We have nothing to fear

***

(WIRED) -- Barnes & Noble's Kindle competitor may have been the worst-kept secret since balloon boy's disastrous appearance on CNN last week.





Barnes & Noble has unveiled an e-reader called "Nook," which will sell for $260 in November.





But the advance hype doesn't seem to have hurt the launch of the Nook, an impressive-looking $260 device that will go head-to-head with Amazon.com's Kindle, currently the most successful product in a small but growing market for e-book readers.





Basic details of the Nook were published by the Wall Street Journal on Tuesday following leaked images that appeared on Gizmodo last week. And Barnes & Noble leaked product details hours before reporters filed into Pier 60 in Manhattan for the announcement on Tuesday afternoon.





"Simply following the leader is not in our DNA," said Barnes & Noble president William Lynch.





Indeed, Barnes & Noble's $260 Nook device differs from the Kindle in a number of ways. Most notably, it shares: A feature called LendMe lets users borrow certain books (depending on the publisher's wishes), the same way readers have traditionally traded paper books. The Nook's color touchscreen allows you to navigate titles and enter search terms using a virtual keyboard that goes dark once you're reading.





The Nook will be available for pre-order starting Tuesday night for $260 at Nook.com, and will ship in November. It has a 6-inch, "paper-like," 16-level grayscale display that supports up to five fonts and various font sizes. It can read a user's PDFs, as well as the 1 million-plus books, magazines and newspapers available in Barnes & Noble's eBook store.





The device connects to the Barnes & Noble eBook store using a free 3G AT&T connection, but lacks a web browser "because those are clumsy" on eReaders, Lynch says. It includes support for the ePub eBook format, FictionWise and PDF, as well as RSS feeds from the internet. However, you can't subscribe to any old RSS feed. Instead, Barnes & Noble selects certain feeds to convert to ePub, then sends them out each morning for a fee that varies by publisher.





Like Amazon's Kindle, Barnes & Noble's Nook lets you highlight and annotate content. But Nook's battery life is 10 days, while the Kindle keeps you reading for 14 -- even though at 11.2 ounces the Nook weighs an ounce more.





Unlike the Kindle, the Nook has a Wi-Fi radio that customers will be able to use at Barnes & Noble's more than 700 physical locations and 600 college stores in 50 states. The current version does not allow connection to Wi-Fi networks outside the stores, but will allow Nook owners to digitally flip through books while they're in a Barnes & Noble store and read free content.





The Nook runs Android OS, which Lynch said "works really well for navigating on this small device." However, at this point, third-party developers cannot develop apps for the device, and no version of the reader for generic Android devices is available.





The device packs enough memory to hold up to 1,500 books (2 GB), with a microSD slot that lets you add up to 16 GB more. In addition to e-books in the three formats mentioned above, the device supports a user's pictures and MP3s (it includes a speaker and headphone jack, but there's no text-to-speech engine). Another nice touch: The virtual bookmark feature called Reading Now lets you pick up where you left off on the Nook or on more than 100 other devices with support for Barnes & Noble's eBook store.





Perhaps the biggest difference between the Nook and the Kindle is cosmetic. The Nook, with color icons, a wide selection of designer cases and color-customizable back panel, looks like a fashionista compared to the more bookish Kindle.





Subscribe to WIRED magazine for less than $1 an issue and get a FREE GIFT! Click here!

***

(CNN)  -- The mother of an 8-year-old boy suspected in the shooting deaths of his father and another man said Monday that the youngster "loved his dad" and had a strong relationship with him.



"He's a very good little boy," Eryn Bloomfield said on ABC's "Good Morning America." "What happened to being innocent until proven guilty?"



For legal reasons, Bloomfield -- who is identified in court papers as Eryn Thomas -- could not discuss details of the case. She said she is not even allowed to discuss the case with her son.



Prosecutors in Apache County, Arizona, filed a motion Friday to dismiss one of the two murder charges against the boy -- the charge involving the death of his father. The filing gave no explanation, saying only, "The state believes the interest of justice will be served by such a dismissal."



Authorities last week released a videotape of the boy's police interview in which he initially denied any involvement in the shootings, but later said he had shot his already-wounded father "because he was suffering."  Watch the boy talk to police »



Legal questions surround the interview. One of the boy's defense attorneys said he was not read his rights and had no attorney or parent present. Police have not responded publicly to those complaints.



Asked what she heard on the interview tape, Bloomfield responded, "A scared little boy, that's what I hear -- someone who's very afraid of what's going on."



"He had a very good relationship with his father. He did a lot with him," she said. "They did everything together. He loved his dad."



She described her son as "very outgoing. He loves animals. He likes to ride his dirt bike, skateboarding, you know, outdoor things."



Asked if he's ever been in trouble at school, she replied, "No. Not at all. I mean, acting out as far as not raising your hand when he needs to speak -- you know, just normal stuff like that."



The boy lived with his father, Vincent Romero, 29, in St. Johns, Arizona. Bloomfield lives in Mississippi.



The Apache County Superior Court clerk's office said the latest legal agreement between the boy's parents was from April 2006. The mother had weekly visitation rights and had the boy on some weekends and holidays, according to court documents.



Romero and Tim Romans, who rented a room in Romero's home, were found dead inside the house November 5. Police said the next day that the boy had confessed to shooting the men with a .22-caliber weapon.  Watch why observers find the interrogation troubling »



The killings shook the town of about 4,000 residents near the New Mexico border.



Trying to hold back tears, Bloomfield told ABC that her son is scared and living alone at a juvenile detention center. The other children were removed so that older juveniles could not influence him "in the wrong way," she said.



"So he's in there by himself, in his cell by himself," she said.



Authorities have said the boy is attending school at the detention facility. Apache County Court Administrator Betty Smith said earlier this month, "Every effort is being made to see that he's comfortable."



Bloomfield described heart-wrenching visits -- 30 minutes each day -- when she can speak to her son through a glass partition.



"I get two visits with him that are physical visits -- to where we sit in a room and he will come and sit in my lap pretty much the whole time and hold onto me," she added.



She will be allowed 48 hours with him at home over the Thanksgiving holiday, she said.



"We're going to watch movies, play games, try to keep things normal as possible," she said, adding that the boy had picked out the movie "Kung Fu Panda."



Officials from the juvenile detention center and a court-appointed guardian will be

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN) -- Michael Jackson's family and about 200 of their closest friends gathered on a hill Thursday evening for their final farewell to the pop singer, who died 10 weeks ago.



Thursday's service for singer Michael Jackson began 90 minutes past the announced start time.



Jackson's burial may lay to rest some of the mystery and controversy that erupted with his sudden death on June 25.



His large family was divided over where the superstar's final resting place should be, but matriarch Katherine Jackson settled on a crypt inside the well-guarded and ornate Great Mausoleum at Forest Lawn cemetery in Glendale, California.



Thursday's service began 90 minutes past the announced start time, leaving dozens of celebrities -- including Elizabeth Taylor -- waiting in their seats for the 26 cars carrying the Jackson clan to arrive.  Gallery: Invitation for Jackson's service »



It began with Jackson's five brothers -- each wearing a single sequined glove -- carrying his flower-covered bronze casket onto the outdoor stage among six large bouquets of white lilies and white roses, along with green topiaries.



His three children, led by daughter, Paris, 11, placed a crown atop their father's coffin, which a family spokesman said it was "to signify the final resting place of the King of Pop."



Jackson's children, parents and siblings took their seats in the front row, while his nieces and nephews filled several rows of white chairs behind them.



After an opening prayer by Pastor Lucius Smith, soul music legend Gladys Knight sang the gospel hymn "His Eye Is on the Sparrow."



Clifton Davis sang "Never Can Say Goodbye," a hit he wrote for The Jackson 5 -- the group that featured a young Michael and his brothers.



What was said by Jackson's father, Joe Jackson, and others who took the lectern is not publicly known, because the family barred news cameras from the ceremony. A family statement issued afterward said close friends and family, including the Rev. Al Sharpton, spoke "spontaneously to celebrate Michael's life."



News helicopters hovering above captured video from a distance, but without sound.  Watch media cover Jackson funeral »



Lisa Marie Presley, one of Jackson's former wives and the daughter of Elvis, attended the service, according to the family statement. It did not mention Debbie Rowe, Jackson's second wife and the mother of his two oldest children.



Macaulay Culkin, the "Home Alone" actor who spent time with Jackson during his Neverland Ranch days, was there with his girlfriend, actress Mila Kunis.



Actors Corey Feldman and Chris Tucker were also seen arriving for the service.



Motown founder Berry Gordy, who gave Jackson and his brothers their first big record deal, and Quincy Jones, who produced Jackson's "Thriller" album, were there. Music producer Teddy Riley, who helped with Jackson's 1991 "Dangerous" album, attended.



The guest list included TV executive Suzanne de Passe, who produced a miniseries about Jackson's family, and Kenny Ortega,  who was producing Jackson's comeback show.



Thomas Mesereau, the lawyer who successfully defended Jackson in a child molestation trial, sat just behind the Jackson family.



When the hour-long service ended, his brothers lifted Jackson's casket for a final time to carry him inside the Great Mausoleum, where he was placed in his crypt at 9:43 p.m. PT (12:43 a.m. ET Friday).



The family statement said it was "his final resting place."



The family and friends then drove to an Italian restaurant eight miles away, in Pasadena, California, for "a time of celebration."



The massive mausoleum, the final resting place for Clark Gable, Carole Lombard and dozens of other celebrities, is normally open to tourists, though the public is denied close access to crypts. Security guards, aided by cameras, keep constant vigil over the graves and crypts, which are surrounded by a world-class collection of art and architecture.



The Forest Lawn Web site boasts that the mausoleum, which draws its architectural inspiration from the

***

BAGHDAD, Iraq (CNN) -- Iraq's main political parties Sunday reached a deal designed to allow non-U.S. foreign troops to stay in the country past the end of the year, when a United Nations resolution authorizing their presence expires.



Iraqi and British soldiers during an Iraqi army training session in Basra last week.



The deal would set a deadline of July 31, 2009, for all non-U.S. foreign troops to withdraw, according to Abdul Hadi al-Hassani, a lawmaker with the main Shiite parliamentary bloc, who spoke to Iraqi state television on Sunday.



The agreement awaits approval by Iraq's Parliament, which is expected to vote on the measure on Monday, several Iraqi lawmakers said.



The emergency negotiations came after lawmakers Saturday rejected a similar proposal that would have been law. Sunday's proposal, by contrast, was drafted as a resolution that would empower the Cabinet to authorize international troop presence without requiring Parliament to pass a law.



Washington and Baghdad have already worked out a separate agreement that will keep U.S. troops in Iraq but tighten restrictions on them.



Countries other than the United States that have troops in Iraq could be left with no legal cover for their presence there if Baghdad does not act swiftly.



Iraq's Cabinet had approved a draft law authorizing non-U.S. foreign troops Tuesday, the first step in passing legislation, but it fell at the next hurdle -- Parliament. That left lawmakers scrambling Sunday for a way to give foreign troops legal cover quickly.



Lawmakers expect Sunday's agreement to cut through the problem, because a resolution can be passed in a single day, while it takes at least a week to pass a law.



British government lawyers, meanwhile, are studying "all possible options" to legally extend the presence of British troops in Iraq beyond New Year's Day in case Iraq's Parliament rejects the new compromise.



Britain has the second-largest contingent of foreign troops in Iraq -- about 4,100 -- after the United States, which has about 142,500. All other countries combined have only several hundred troops in the country.



Britain and Iraq announced last week that British troops would begin leaving Iraq in May 2009, while a "handful" of British military personnel would remain after that date to continue naval training for Iraqi sailors, primarily to protect oil platforms.



The United States reached a security agreement with Iraq in November. That deal, which was ratified by the Iraqi Parliament, calls for American troops to leave Iraqi cities by June 2009, and to be out of Iraq by the end of 2011.



Beginning New Year's Day, U.S. commanders will have to get prior Iraqi government approval for any operations. American military personnel who commit crimes while not on duty or who commit grave crimes while on duty would be subject to Iraqi legal jurisdiction under the new agreement.



The U.S. security agreement does not govern the presence of troops from other coalition countries.



The Parliament's rejection of the Cabinet's proposed law allowing foreign forces to remain in Iraq after January 1 came after heated arguments that lasted for days. The session became so contentious that Parliament's speaker threatened to resign, lawmakers said.



Some political blocs, notably the Sadrists, oppose any extension of the presence of foreign troops in Iraq. That group, headed by Shiite leader Muqtada al-Sadr -- an anti-Western cleric -- is demanding an immediate withdrawal of foreign forces.



CNN's Jill Dougherty and Jomana Karadsheh contributed to this report.

***

ISLAMABAD, Pakistan (CNN) -- Rawalpindi's police chief stopped doctors at the hospital where Benazir Bhutto died from conducting an autopsy, according to a lawyer on the hospital's board.



In a video released Sunday, Benazir Bhutto, far right, appears through the sunroof before shots ring out.



It was a violation of Pakistani criminal law and prevented a medical conclusion about what killed the former prime minister, said Athar Minallah, who serves on the board that manages Rawalpindi General Hospital.



However, the police chief involved, Aziz Saud, told CNN that he suggested an autopsy be done, but that Bhutto's husband objected.



The revelation came on Monday after new videotape of Bhutto's assassination emerged, showing her slumping just after gunshots rang out.



The tape provided the clearest view yet of the attack and appeared to show that Bhutto was shot. That would contradict the Pakistan government's account. Read Bhutto's full medical report



A previously released videotape showed a man at the right of her vehicle raising a gun, pointing it toward Bhutto, who was standing in her car with her upper body through the sunroof. He fired three shots, then there was an explosion.



In the video that emerged on Sunday, Bhutto was standing, and her hair and scarf appeared to move, perhaps from the bullet. Bhutto fell into the car, then came the blast.  Watch new tape showing apparent gunman »



These images seem to support the theory that Bhutto died at the hands of a shooter before a bomb was detonated, killing another 23 people.



Doctors at Rawalpindi General Hospital declared the 54-year-old dead hours after Thursday's attack, but the cause of her death has been widely debated.



Pakistan's Interior Ministry announced on Friday that Bhutto died from a skull fracture suffered when she fell or ducked into the car as a result of the shots or the explosion and crashed her head onto a sunroof latch.  See the likely sequence of events »



Bhutto's family and political party maintain that the government is lying, and insist she died from gunshot wounds.



Bhutto's husband, in an interview with CNN's Wolf Blitzer on Monday, called for an international investigation into his wife's death, saying the new video proves the Pakistani government "has been trying to muddy the water from the first day."



"Everything is now very clear that she was shot," Asif Ali Zardari said.



Zardari also called on the U.S. government to push for an international probe.



"I want them to help me find out who killed my wife, the mother of my children," he said of the Bush administration.



Javed Iqbal Cheema, spokesman for Pakistan's Interior Ministry, said the government's conclusion on Bhutto's death was based on "absolute facts, nothing but the facts" and "it was corroborated by the doctor's report."



But Minallah issued an open letter on Monday and released the doctors' clinical notes to distance them from the government statement, and he also talked to CNN.



In the letter, Minallah said the doctors "suggested to the officials to perform an autopsy," but that Saud "did not agree." He noted that under the law, police investigators have "exclusive responsibility" in deciding to have an autopsy.



Minallah told CNN that he was speaking out because the doctors at the hospital were "threatened."



"They are government servants who cannot speak; I am not," he said. He did not elaborate on the threats against the doctors.



He said the lack of an autopsy has created "a perception that there is some kind of cover-up, though I might not believe in that theory."



"There is a state within the state, and that state within the state does not want itself to be held accountable," Minallah said.



Cheema said the government had no objection to Bhutto's body being exhumed for an autopsy if the family requested it.



Her widower has said the family was against exhumation because it did not trust the government.



Minallah said the family could

***

(CNN) -- Sen. Hillary Clinton on Thursday sharpened her attacks on Democratic rival Sen. Barack Obama as she faces what even her supporters admit are must-win situations in Texas and Ohio in the weeks ahead.



At a campaign stop at a General Motors Corp. plant in Youngstown, Ohio, the senator from New York accused Obama of caving in to special interests.



"My opponent says that he'll take on the special interests," she said. "Well, he told people he stood up to the nuclear industry and passed a bill against them. But he actually let the nuclear industry water down his bill -- the bill never actually passed."



Clinton was referring to a 2006 bill that Obama drafted after an Illinois nuclear power plant was found to have released radiation into surrounding groundwater.



Obama's original bill would have required power plants to notify the public and government officials when any radiation was released, but subsequent versions had less stringent reporting requirements, The New York Times reported. The bill was never voted on by the full Senate.



Clinton also accused Obama of supporting "billions of dollars of breaks for the oil industry" by voting for an energy bill she opposed and said he did not support the workers of a Maytag Corp. plant that closed in his home state of Illinois.  Watch Clinton attack Obama »



Reacting to Clinton's charges, Obama spokesman Bill Burton said his candidate "doesn't need any lectures on special interests from the candidate who's taken more money from Washington lobbyists than any Republican running for president."



"Sen. Clinton may have said that attacks and distortions are the 'fun' and 'exciting' part of the campaign, but they're exactly what everyone else in America is tired of," Burton said.



In recent days, Clinton has challenged Obama's ability to deliver on his rhetoric.



"There's a big difference between us -- speeches versus solutions, talk versus action," she said.



"Speeches don't put food on the table. Speeches don't fill up your tank or fill your prescription or do anything about that stack of bills that keeps you up at night."



Her remarks in Ohio echo statements she made a day earlier in McAllen, Texas, when she said, "I am in the solutions business. My opponent is in the promises business."



Clinton was set later Thursday to hold events in Dayton and Columbus, Ohio. Obama was to be in his hometown of Chicago, Illinois, and had no public events scheduled.



CNN contributor and Clinton supporter James Carville said the senator must do well in the March 4 Ohio and Texas primaries if she is to stop Obama's momentum.



Carville said he thought Clinton could still win the nomination.



"You know, this thing is close. Not all the Democrats have been heard from. ... If anybody can do this, I think she can," said Carville, a major force behind President Clinton's successful 1992 campaign.



Clinton's aggressive stance may be in reaction to Obama's momentum after he won eight contests in a row -- including victories by wide margins in Tuesday's primaries in Maryland, Virginia and the District of Columbia.  Watch how the so-called Potomac primaries put Obama on a roll »



In those contests, Obama also outpolled Clinton among demographic groups she had carried earlier -- women, lower-income voters and Latinos. Clinton is banking on those groups to carry her to victory in Texas and Ohio.



The wins in the Potomac primaries gave Obama a lead over Clinton in the delegate count for the first time -- 1,253 to 1,211, according to CNN calculations.



"In my neighborhood, you know, you had to win games if you wanted to brag," said Jamal Simmons, a Democratic strategist and Obama supporter. "And I think right now, Barack Obama is ahead in delegates. He's ahead in states. He's ahead in the popular vote. He's winning.



"Sen. Clinton has got to win some of these contests, you know, to get to the finals."



Neither Clinton nor

***

(CNN) -- Skywatchers are gathering from parking lots in western India to music festivals on remote Japanese islands to witness what NASA describes as an "exceptionally long" total solar eclipse that will cross half the planet on Wednesday.



People try out "solar view goggles" ahead of the eclipse on the outskirts of Ahmedabad, India.



"This eclipse has the potential to be observed by more people than any eclipse in all of history," said MIT astronomer Richard Binzel, who will be in Shanghai leading an expedition of observers and a group of eclipse chasers.   "Essentially, every inhabitant of all of India and China will be able to see at least part of the sun covered throughout the day," he said.



The path of the total eclipse will stretch across the heart of Asia -- from India's Bay of Cambay, over the Himalayas and across China and the southern islands of Japan.



The eclipse is expected to reach its peak over India at around 12:40 a.m. GMT Wednesday (8:40 p.m. ET Tuesday).



Though the duration of greatest eclipse will occur over the Pacific Ocean at six minutes, 39 seconds, people in some areas of China and Japan will experience up to more than six minutes of darkness, according to predictions by Fred Espenak of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center and J. Anderson of the Royal Astronomical Society of Canada.  Watch as eclipse-watchers head to China »



The 15,150-kilometer (9,415-mile) journey of the moon's shadow across the Earth will last nearly three-and-a-half hours and be "one of the longest eclipses, if not the longest eclipse, in this century," Binzel said.



Forecasters predict stormy weather for Wednesday morning in Shanghai, but this prognosis has not deterred astronomers and tourists from flooding the city. Send us your photos of the eclipse



Professor Zhao Junliang of the Shanghai Astronomical Observatory said the weather could be unpredictable but staying away from such an historic event would be a mistake.



"In 1987, I chased a total solar eclipse in (the western region of) Xinjiang. At the time, the sun was entirely blocked by stormy clouds. Two minutes before the eclipse began, the clouds suddenly cleared," Zhao said. "You just never know, so you have to go." Read blog on how eclipse-chasers are gambling on weather



Rick Gille and his wife flew in from Atlanta, Georgia, to catch the eclipse in Shanghai. They were heading to what is known as the "centerline" -- where the eclipse will last nearly six minutes.



They are armed with high resolution digital cameras and telescopes. "You'll know us when you see us," said Gille, who travels the world chasing solar eclipses. "We're all wearing beige t-shirts which read 'Eclipse 2009.'"



Total eclipses happen about once a year or a little less often somewhere on the Earth's surface and are visible in a narrow band, Benzil said.



"This band starts at sunrise in India and ends at sunset over the Pacific, just east of Hawaii about four hours later. The shadow path of the moon is sweeping across the surface of the Earth at about 3,000 kilometers per hour," he said. "The partial eclipse is also visible throughout Thailand and Vietnam, as far south at the top tip of Australia and as far north as Siberia."



In some cultures, legends and folklore surrounds eclipses.



In India, an eclipse is considered inauspicious. Women forbid pregnant daughters-in-law from going outside out of the belief that their children could be born with marks. Some temples won't offer any prayers on the day of an eclipse -- such as the one next to the planetarium in Mumbai, which said it won't even light a stick of incense.



In Chinese tradition, there is a story about a heavenly dog eating the sun. As the story goes, people would make noise to scare off the dog and rescue the sun, said Bill Yeung, president of the Hong Kong Astronomical Society.



"In ancient China, we shared the same impression with

***

YANGON, Myanmar (CNN) -- Residents in this sprawling river delta city hacked their way through downed trees and trudged through knee-deep swirling brown waters Monday as they tried to pick up the pieces of their lives after a deadly cyclone ravaged the southeast Asian country over the weekend.



The powerful storm toppled this tree in Yangon, Myanmar, on Saturday.



The International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies said it has released 200,000 Swiss Francs (about $190,000) to help with the aftermath.



"I think one of the biggest needs right now is to stave off disease," said spokesman Eric Porterfield. "We will be helping with the distribution of clean drinking water and setting up shelters."



Working with the Myanmar Red Cross agency, the International Red Cross is distributing drinking water, plastic tarps to cover roofs and blankets, among other items.



The tropical cyclone, packing winds of up to 150 miles (241 km) per hour, slammed into Myanmar over the weekend, killing as many as 350 people.



"We believe hundreds of people are dead," said Khin Maung Win with the Democratic Voice of Burma -- a broadcast media group run by opposition expatriates. "The entire lower Burma is affected. In some areas, entire villages disappeared."



The activist group opposed the military rule in Myanmar, formerly known as Burma.



The ruling junta declared a state of emergency in five regions: the city of Yangon, Irrawaddy, Pegu and the states of Karen and Mon. All flights to Yangon, the former capital, were canceled.  Learn more about Myanmar »



Cyclone Nargis tore off roofs, uprooted trees and downed power lines.



The storm ripped through the sprawling river delta city of Yangon for more than 10 hours -- from Friday night until Saturday noon, said Burma Democratic Concern.  Watch the cyclone hammer Yangon »



By Sunday, many parts of the city were without electricity. Phone connections were also down in most areas, making it difficult to assess the extent of the damage.



"Most Burmese with whom we've been in touch report they lost their roofs, although so far everyone we have been able to contact reports that they and their families are safe," said a Yangon-based diplomat who requested anonymity because he was not authorized to speak to the media.



Earlier Monday, an editor for an independent Myanmar newspaper based in Thailand told CNN that people in the Southeast Asian nation were angry over the response to the disaster by the ruling military junta.



"People are very angry with the slow response coming from the military government," said Aung Zaw of Irrawaddy news magazine.



Zaw said communication was down across large areas of the country. He also said the casualty figures could rise.



"Very few people have access to these areas to estimate damage and how many people have been killed."  Listen to Irrawaddy journalist discuss the situation in Myanmar »



Pictures from inside the country showed a cyclone-ravaged region with tin huts crushed under trees. Bicyclists navigated around large branches that littered the deserted roads.



A man with his pant legs rolled up waded through knee-deep water and strained to clear massive limbs that were blocking the entrance to a house.



"The cleanup is beginning, but this will take a long time," the diplomat said. "The damage around town is intense."  See photos of the destruction »



"Fuel is not easily available. International emergency assistance would be needed within seven days. There is no food for eating," Win said.



Food prices -- already on a dramatic rise -- climbed further. Long lines could be seen at gas stations in Yangon. Many of the stations were operating on generators. At one gas station more than 100 buses lined up to refill.



"International emergency assistance would be needed within seven days," the diplomat said.



The junta has scheduled a May 10 referendum on a new constitution for the country, which came under sharp criticism from many nations for using force to suppress pro-democracy protests last year. E-mail to

***

ATLANTA, Georgia (CNN)  -- Any woman who's ever watched "Sex and the City" has at some point tried to guess which of the characters she's most like. The overly confident Samantha? The slightly prudish Charlotte? The pessimistic Miranda? The overanalytical Carrie?



Candace Bushnell attends a fashion show during the Mercedes-Benz Fashion Week in September.



But an honest viewer probably would have to admit that she's similar to all of the characters in some way. As a writer, that is Candace Bushnell's gift.



In her books, including "Sex and the City," "4 Blondes" and "Lipstick Jungle," Bushnell has given the pop culture world feminine role models with which it can identify. And the best-selling author's newest book, "One Fifth Avenue," provides a few more -- including attorney Annalisa Rice, gossip columnist Enid Merle and gold digger Lola Fabrikant.



Although all of her characters are fictional, Bushnell said each one is based on a common type of person.



"I've always been interested in people. It's part of being a novelist, really, part of the job," she said. "As a writer you can never know a real person as well as you know your characters."  Watch Bushnell talk about her new book »



Bushnell said a minor character or two often will appear in several of her books. Other characters she develops in her head for years before releasing them on the literary scene.



For instance, she kept one fictional character, Schiffer Diamond, under wraps for 20 years, never seeing a place where she fit in -- until "One Fifth Avenue."



The story of a vicious scramble for a penthouse apartment once owned by a high-society queen shows the life of New York City women through the lens of where they live. One Fifth Avenue -- an actual building near Washington Square Park -- is an address that each character thinks will be her ticket to fortune. Bushnell contrasts old and new money -- and old and new media -- in the course of her tale.



A New York lover herself, Bushnell looks like she belongs on a fashion walkway. Arriving at CNN in a blue dress, bright green jacket and what look like 6-inch heels, it's obvious the author isn't just a bystander of the fashion capital. But those expecting a who's who of the designer world should take another look at Bushnell's subject matter.



"My books are social satire. They have a sense of the absurd," Bushnell said. "They have to say something about contemporary life."



"One Fifth Avenue" touches on art and antiquities theft, crosses back into the world of blogging and zips over to the stock market in less than 400 pages.



Though the book is just out in stores, it was written months ago. So how did the author -- who's been celebrated in the past for her ahead-of-the-curve approach to trends -- know the economy would be such a central focus of her readers' current lives?



"I keep my eyes open," she said with a smile.

***

(CNN) -- Manchester City may have announced losses of more than $300 million for last season, but the English club's massive investment in players is paying off on the pitch.





Roberto Mancini's men remained five points clear at the top of the Premier League on Saturday after ending the unbeaten run of third-placed Newcastle with a 3-1 home victory.





That briefly put City eight points clear, but second-placed defending champions Manchester United stayed in touch with a 1-0 win at Swansea in the late kickoff, halting the Welsh side's unbeaten home record.





While City's record deficit casts doubt over the club's ability to adhere to UEFA's financial fairplay rules, Saturday's win -- the 11th in 12 rounds -- was a timely tune-up for the midweek trip to Italy.





Mario Balotelli coolly sidefooted in a 41st-minute penalty after Ryan Taylor handled the ball, then the Newcastle fullback's error allowed City defender Micah Richards to double the lead before halftime.





Sergio Aguero came off the bench to net a 72nd-minute penalty after Richards was fouled by Hatem Ben Arfa, having also scored for Argentina in Tuesday's World Cup qualifying win against Colombia.





Dan Gosling scored a late consolation for the Magpies, who will lose third place on goal difference if Chelsea win at home to seventh-placed Liverpool on Sunday.





Tottenham, in fifth with two games in hand, can also move onto 25 points with victory against visiting Aston Villa on Monday.





City's focus is now Tuesday's Champions League trip to Napoli, which will have a big bearing on the club's hopes of progressing to the knockout stage of Europe's top competition.





"The feeling is good for Napoli. The team has improved a lot in the Champions League," Mancini said. "But I know what we will find in Naples, they are playing very well at home.





"If we want to win there, then we will have to play better than this afternoon."





Manchester United will also need to improve at home to Portuguese side Benfica on Tuesday after battling to beat promoted Swansea, with striker Javier Hernandez scoring a close-range winner in the 11th minute after a low cross by veteran Ryan Giggs.





"They have a great home record so we had to make sure we defended well, and I think we did that," manager Alex Ferguson said.





"We maybe should have done better with the chances we did get on the counter-attack and near the end we could have had a couple of chances, but it was a good result."





Arsenal moved up to sixth, also on 22 points but having played two more matches than London rivals Spurs, after winning 2-1 at promoted Norwich, who dropped to 11th.





Dutch striker Robin Van Persie continued his hot scoring run with a double that took him to a league-leading 13 this season after Steve Morison gave Norwich a 16th-minute advantage following poor defending by Germany international Per Mertesacker.





Queens Park Rangers moved up to ninth with a 3-2 win at Stoke, as striker Heidar Helguson scored twice before the home side were denied a late penalty chance to equalize when Joey Barton brought down Robert Huth but no foul was given.





West Brom claimed 10th place with a 2-1 win that left Bolton in the bottom three, while Everton moved up to 12th after beating visiting Wolverhampton by the same score.





Sunderland and Fulham joined Wolves on 11 points after a 0-0 draw, with all three clubs hovering hovering above the relegation zone.





The bottom two teams Wigan and Blackburn Rovers drew 3-3 in a fiery derby that ended with Yakubu leveling with a penalty nine minutes into time added on.





It was the Nigerian striker's second goal of the day for 10-man Blackburn, having netted the opener after only 68 seconds -- his 100th in the English league.





Rovers had David Dunn sent off for a second yellow card three minutes after the break, but Junior Hoilett made it 2-2 on the hour despite teammate Morten Gamst Pedersen appearing to pass

***

(CNN)  -- In a Nairobi slum, more than one in four children under 5 will die, but in a wealthier part of the Kenyan capital, the mortality rate is one in almost 67, according to a World Health Organization report released Tuesday.



A woman lies next to her sick child at a medical center in Sheshemene, Ethiopia, in July.



The World Health Report 2008 aims to spotlight disparities in health care across the globe, and as the Nairobi example illustrates, the differences exist not only between the First and Third Worlds -- they can occur just across town.



WHO roundly criticizes the organization, finance and delivery of health care and calls advances in the field "deeply and unacceptably unequal, with many disadvantaged populations increasingly lagging behind or even losing ground."



The report says that a citizen of a wealthy nation can live up to 40 years longer than someone in a poor country, and of the 136 million women who will give birth this year, about 58 million (43 percent) will receive no medical assistance during childbirth or the postpartum period.



UNICEF Executive Director Ann Veneman said the sharp inequities in the cost and access to health care often speak to larger societal ills.



"High maternal, infant and under-five mortality often indicates lack of access to basic services such as clean water and sanitation, immunizations and proper nutrition," she said in a statement.



WHO Director-General Margaret Chan insists the dilemma is not just a matter of haves versus have-nots.



"A world that is greatly out of balance in matters of health is neither stable nor secure," she said in a statement from Almaty, Kazakhstan, where the report was released.



The difference in annual government expenditures on health care is more canyon than gap, according to the report. While the wealthiest nations dole out as much as $6,000 per person each year, some countries are unable or unwilling to spend more than $20 per person.



However, while calling for wide-ranging reforms in the delivery of primary health care, the report notes that it isn't always a matter of government expenditures.



Tajikistan and Sierra Leone both spend less than $100 per person on health care. But while the health-adjusted life expectancy in Sierra Leone is under 30 years of age, Tajikistan's is almost 70 -- a figure comparable to the United States, which spends more than $2,500 a person on health care.



"When countries at the same level of economic development are compared, those where health care is organized around the tenets of primary health care produce a higher level of health for the same investment," the report says.



WHO defines primary health care as being "universally accessible to individuals and families in the community by means acceptable to them, through their full participation and at a cost that the community and country can afford."



The organization's report -- titled "Primary Health Care -- Now More Than Ever" -- calls for a move toward universal coverage to reverse a trend over the last 30 years in which disparities in the levels of health care have actually widened.



Universal coverage, the report says, would lower the risks of disease outbreaks for everyone, not just the impoverished.



Currently, the most common means of paying for health care is out of pocket, which WHO says is the "most inequitable method for financing health care services." The report says more than 100 million people fall into poverty in a given year because of health care bills.



Another problem, the report says, is that doctors tend not to focus on prevention.



"Rather than improving their response capacity and anticipating new challenges, health systems seem to be drifting from one short-term priority to another, increasingly fragmented and without a clear sense of direction," according to the report.



But the report also handed out accolades, most notably to Iran and Cuba.



WHO applauded the Islamic Republic's 17,000 "health houses," which serve about 1,500 people each. The report credited the centers with boosting Iranians' life expectancy from 63 to 71 years between 1990

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- The agency that owns the space where the World Trade Center towers stood is freeing itself of the term "freedom" to describe the signature skyscraper replacing the buildings destroyed on September 11, 2001.



The One World Trade Center skyscraper is expected to be completed in late 2013.



The change from Freedom Tower was revealed Thursday at a news conference where the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey announced the signing of the first commercial lease in the building to a Chinese company. The building is expected to be completed in late 2013.



"We've referred to the primary building planned for the site as One World Trade Center -- its legal name and street address -- for almost two years now, as well as using the name the Freedom Tower," said Stephen Sigmund, a spokesman for the Port Authority, in a statement released to CNN. "Many will always refer to it as the Freedom Tower, but as the building moves out of the planning stage and into full construction and leasing, we believe that going forward it is most practical to market the building as One World Trade Center."



Ten of the building's planned 108 above-ground floors have been built.



"The fact is, more than $3 billion of public money is invested in that building, and, as a public agency, we have the responsibility to make sure it is completed and that we utilize the best strategy to make certain it is fully occupied," Sigmund added.



He noted that the agency lost 84 colleagues in the September 11 attacks.



Mary Fetchet, founding director of Voices of September 11th, a group that commemorates the lives of those killed in the attack, said she was not familiar with the decision made by the Port Authority and was not willing to make a statement.



New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg, on the John Gambling radio show taped Friday morning, said he was not upset by the Port Authority's decision.



"It's up to the Port Authority," he said. "I have no idea what the commercial aspects are, and we can say, 'Oh, we shouldn't worry about that,' but of course you have to, particularly now.



"I would like to see it stay the Freedom Tower, but it's their building, and they don't need me dumping on it. If they could rent the whole thing by changing the name, I guess they're going to do that, and they probably, from a responsible point of view, should. From a patriotic point of view, is it going to make any difference?"



He added, "one of the things is, we call things what we want to call them. So, Avenue of the Americas is a good example, for it's Sixth Avenue to most people. Very few people use Avenue of the Americas. If they name this One World Trade Center, people will still call it the Freedom Tower."



The building was named the Freedom Tower in the first "ground zero" master plan. Officials said at the time that the tallest, most symbolic of five planned towers at the site would demonstrate the country's triumph over terrorism.



Representatives of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey and Vantone Industrial Co. announced Thursday the signing of a lease that will create the China Center, a 190,810-square-foot business and cultural facility, to be on portions of the 64th floor and the entire 65th through 69th floors of One World Trade Center.



Hailing it as a great day for the Port Authority and its partners in the China center, Port Authority Executive Director Chris Ward added, "this is the first step in a long journey as downtown is finally rebuilt."



The lease is for 20 years and nine months, beginning when the building is completed, with rents starting at $80 per square foot and escalating afterward. The China Center also will have the right to lease up to two additional contiguous floors under the same terms, an option that expires at the end of 2009.



The Port Authority also has commitments for

***

ALGIERS, Algeria (CNN) -- Rescuers are sifting through the rubble of the United Nations headquarters in Algiers hoping to find survivors after a powerful bomb ripped off the building's facade and leveled nearby U.N. offices.



Rescuers and bomb experts search for survivors in the rubble of a destroyed building.



It was one of two suspected car bombs that struck Algiers within 10 minutes of each other.



The death toll is unclear: the official government count is at least 26, but hospital sources in Algiers told CNN affiliate BFM-TV that 76 people were killed in the two blasts. A statement from the United Nations said 45 people were reported killed.



Algerian Interior Minister Noureddine Yazid Zerhouni blamed a militant Islamic group with ties to al Qaeda for the attacks, which also targeted a building housing Algeria's Constitutional Council and Supreme Court.



In a posting on an Islamist Web site, the group al Qaeda Islamic Maghreb claimed responsibility.



CNN could not immediately corroborate that claim, but the Web site is known to carry messages, claims and videos from al Qaeda and other militant groups.



In the posting, the bombers were identified as Sheikh Ibrahim Abu Othman and Abdel Rahman Abu Abdel Nasser al-Asimi. It said two trucks were filled with "no less than 800 kg (1,763 pounds) of explosives."



The group called the operation "another successful conquest and a second epic that the knights of faith have dictated with their blood, defending the wounded Islamic nation and in defiance to the Crusaders and their agents, the slaves of America and the sons of France."



At least 10 U.N. staffers were among those killed, according to U.N. spokeswoman Marie Okabe.



The offices of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees -- located across the street from the U.N. headquarters -- were leveled by a blast that struck about 9:30 a.m. (3:30 a.m. ET) Tuesday.



"Our offices are basically destroyed now, nothing works," UNHCR spokesman Ron Redmond said from its Geneva headquarters. Watch his full interview



He said rescuers are working into the night trying to get to the trapped U.N. workers. "It's a very serious situation still with the U.N. in Algiers," he said.



In a strongly worded statement, U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon condemned what he called "an abjectly cowardly strike against civilian officials serving humanity's highest ideals under the U.N. banner."



"The perpetrators of these crimes will not escape the strongest possible condemnation -- and ultimate punishment -- by Algerian authorities and the international community," Ban said in the written statement.



He said he has sent senior advisers and other top U.N. officials to head to Algiers to assist in the investigation and rescue effort.



Most of those killed in the coordinated attacks were victims of the first suspected car bombing near the Constitutional Council -- which oversees elections -- and Supreme Court in the Algiers neighborhood of Ben Aknoun, according to the state-run Algeria Press Agency.



That blast struck a bus outside the targeted building, killing many of those on board, the news agency reported.



One man said he heard the first blast then the second exploded in front of him. "I saw the trees falling and the glass shattering in front of me. I had to run away from the car," he said.



Zerhouni said the attack was the work of the Salafist Group for Preaching and Combat (GSPC), the same group that took responsibility for an attack in April in downtown Algiers that killed 33 people.



That group also uses the name al Qaeda Islamic Maghreb after merging with al Qaeda earlier this year. It abandoned small-scale attacks in favor of headline-grabbing blasts after it joined with al Qaeda.



CNN International Security Correspondent Paula Newton said the merger combined the expertise of Algerian guerrillas with the operational ability of al Qaeda in North Africa, enabling the group to penetrate the usually extensive security in high-profile areas of Algiers.



She said the group's goal is to destabilize countries like Algeria, Morocco and Tunisia, which it sees as enemies of the Islamic state.



Zerhouni said police interrogations of GSPC members arrested in the

***

JERUSALEM (CNN)  -- A rocket fired by Palestinian militants fell on a Gaza home and killed two children, Palestinian sources said Friday, the same day Israel opened three Gaza border crossings for the first time in 10 days.





A truck carrying grain enters Gaza from Israel on Friday at the Karni crossing point, one of three Israel reopened.





A third child was in critical condition. The children, all girls, were cousins -- the two who died were 7 and 12, and the injured child is 5, Hamas security and Palestinian medical sources said.





The rocket struck a house north of Gaza City.





In a separate development, the Israeli military said it allowed a Palestinian who was badly wounded by rocket fire Wednesday to enter Israel for treatment. The Palestinian entered Israel through the Erez Crossing between northern Gaza and Israel.





Israel closed the crossing for all but humanitarian reasons because of rocket attacks from Gaza into Israel by Palestinian militants. But it opened three other crossings Friday, allowing fuel and commodities into the Palestinian territory for the first time in more than a week.





About 80 trucks filled with commodities were expected to cross into Gaza. Among the goods were 400,000 liters of fuel and 120 tons of cooking gas.





The decision to open the crossings at Kerem Shalom, Karni and Nahal Oz came after requests from international aid groups and Egypt, said Peter Lerner, a spokesman for the Coordinator of Government Activities in the Territories. In addition, he said, Israel has no desire to hurt the civilian population in Gaza.





Lerner said whether to keep the crossings open would be a daily decision.





United Nations assistance programs in Gaza have run out of flour and several essential pharmaceuticals, the U.N. Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs said.





A tenuous six-month truce between the Hamas government in Gaza and Israel expired a week ago. Under the Egyptian-brokered deal, Hamas agreed to end militant attacks on Israel from Gaza, and Israel agreed to halt raids inside the territory and ease its blockade on humanitarian goods.





In reality, the truce started breaking down two months ago. Rocket attacks by militants became more frequent, and Israel resumed airstrikes inside Gaza.





Since then, dozens of rockets have been fired by Palestinian militants into Israel. Israel Defense Forces said about nine rockets have been launched from Gaza since midnight, pushing the three-day total to more than 110. There are no reports of casualties in Israel.





The crossings opened a day after Israeli Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni and Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak met in Cairo and Egypt expressed concern about the deteriorating humanitarian situation in Gaza.





Livni criticized Hamas after her meeting with Mubarak.





"Hamas needs to understand that Israel's basic desire to live in a tranquil region doesn't mean that Israel is willing to accept ongoing shooting at its population," she said, according to the Israeli Foreign Ministry.





"Enough is enough. We cannot accept this situation, and the situation will change."





Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert has threatened to respond to the escalating violence. He warned Hamas again Thursday in an interview on the Al Arabiya television network and seemed to suggest that time was running out.





"We do not want to fight the Palestinian people, but we will not allow Hamas to strike our children," Olmert said.





"I did not come here to declare war," he continued. "But Hamas must be stopped -- and so it will be.





"I will not hesitate to use Israel's strength to strike at Hamas and Islamic Jihad. How? I do not wish to go into details here."

***

(CNN) -- Just west of Seville in Spain, a sea of giant mirrors is reflecting the sun's energy to provide "concentrated solar power" (CSP) while illuminating the path to a new wave of green energy projects.

Shining beacon: The concentrated solar power plant in Sanlucar, Spain is the first of its kind.

The 624 carefully positioned mirrors reflect the sun's heat towards a 50 meter-tall central tower where it is concentrated and used to boil water into steam.

The superheated steam is then used to turn a turbine that can produce up to 11 megawatts of electricity -- enough power for 6,000 homes -- according Solucar, the Spanish company that has built the power plant.

While traditional solar panels, photovoltaic cells, convert the sun's power directly into electricity, CSP focuses power from a wide area and uses the vast heat generated to make electricity in a similar way to that produced from coal or oil.

The Spanish tower, known as PS10, is the first phase of an ambitious development. By 2013 it is hoped that additional towers will create a "solar farm" with an output of 300 megawatts, which would be enough power for 180,000 homes, or equivalent to the entire population of nearby Seville.

This $1.5 billion project is the largest commercial CSP station in the world -- so far.

But many believe the technology will soon take off in areas of continuous hot sun and clear skies, offering a cheaper and more efficient alternative to photovoltaic cells, and bringing jobs and money to arid, often depressed areas.

CSP also produces no greenhouses gasses and the only pollution is visual. The European Union has invested over $31 million in CSP research over the last ten years.

At least 50 CSP projects have been given permission to begin construction across Spain. By 2015 the country may be producing two gigawatts of electricity from CSP, and employing thousands in the industry.

One of the strengths of CSP is that it allows the construction of power stations on a scale that can match many fossil fuel based plants, and for an investment far less than that required to install the equivalent wattage of photovoltaic cells.

There is also the possibility that production can keep going around the clock -- even when the sun has gone down.

Solucar is currently testing technology at a plant near Granada that will pump 50 percent of the electricity generated in the day into the Spanish national grid, and use the other 50 percent to melt salt, which will then act as a kind of battery, storing the sun's power. When dusk falls, the heat stored in the molten salt can be used to generate power through the night.

"These technologies excite me," says Dr Jeff Hardy, Network Manager at the UK Energy Research Council.

"One of the real advantages is that you can get a decent sized power plant.

"The main challenge with the technology is working with extreme heat, but then a lot of the back-end is very similar to a traditional fossil-fuel generation; you are after all just dealing with water heated to make steam and drive a turbine."

Concentrating on promoting CSP worldwide

As America looks to increase the contribution of renewables to its overall energy mix -- a key part of the Obama plan before the recession turbocharged Government funding for such "green" infrastructure projects -- the potential of CSP technology is obvious.

The Spanish company responsible for the Sanlucar la Mayor plant has seen the potential and created Solucar Power, Inc., a subsidiary aiming to develop the market in the USA.

There is already a huge Solar Energy Generating Systems' CSP station in the Mojave Desert, California; Spanish firm Acciona has built a plant near Las Vegas. Many more are surely on their way.

One bold projection estimates that a single plant 100 miles by 100 miles located in the American South West could generate enough electricity for the whole country.

It would obviously be a huge undertaking -- politically, financially and scientifically -- but it's not hard to imagine such a scheme finding a home in the nation's vast, empty quarter.

Other