(CNN) -- Authorities are asking residents in some some parts of south Australia to evacuate their homes as an impending heat wave prompted the nation to issue its first "catastrophic" brush fire warning.



The warning system was put in place to better alert residents after a devastating brush fire ravaged the southeastern state of Victoria in February, killing more than 170 people and destroying 2,000 homes.



During that fire, many residents stayed to defend their property.



Though authorities still cannot mandate that people leave, the new warning system urges people to flee.



The Code Red "Catastrophic" warning was issued for the Eastern Eyre Peninsula and West Coast districts in the state of South Australia. Are you there? Send your pictures, video



Such a rating means that even well-constructed and defended homes might not be safe from the blaze, the South Australian Fire Service said.



In addition, three other districts -- Flinders, North West Pastoral and Lower Eyre Peninsula -- were placed under an "Extreme" watch. Such a rating means that only well-constructed homes can withstand the flames.



An intense heat wave -- with temperatures climbing to 104 F (40 C) -- is expected to hit the areas until the weekend. The region is already in the midst of a severe drought. Coupled with low humidity and strong winds, the soaring temperatures will make it ripe for fires to ignite.



Any fire that breaks out will be uncontrollable, the fire service said. People in their path will likely die, it added.

***

(CNN) -- China has suspended exports of the Aqua Dots toys contaminated with a chemical that can convert to a powerful "date rape" drug, the state-run Xinhua news agency reported Saturday. The toys have caused some children who swallowed the craft toys to vomit and lose consciousness.

China suspended exports of the Aqua Dots toys that contain a chemical that converts into a "date rape" drug.

The agency said that the General Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection, and Quarantine (AQSIQ) has ordered an investigation by quality control agencies and will release results as soon as they are available.

The AQSIQ did not reveal the name of the toys' producer, Xinhua said.

U.S. safety officials voluntarily recalled about 4.2 million of the Chinese-made toys Wednesday.

Scientists have found the highly popular holiday toy contains a chemical that, once metabolized, converts into the toxic "date rape" drug GHB (gamma-hydroxy butyrate), Scott Wolfson, a spokesman with the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), told CNN.

"Children who swallow the beads can become comatose, develop respiratory depression or have seizures," a CPSC statement warned.

The arts-and-craft beads, which have been selling since April at major U.S. retail stores under the name "Aqua Dots," have also been distributed in Australia under the name "Bindeez Beads."

The Bindeez toys were recalled Tuesday by Melbourne-based Moose Enterprise Pty. Ltd. after three children in Australia swallowed large quantities of the beads and were hospitalized.

"I was so frightened because I thought she wasn't going to make it," Heather Lehane told CNN affiliate Network 7 of her 10-year-old daughter, Charlotte, who was hospitalized in Australia after ingesting some of the beads.

In the United States, the Washington-based safety commission said it has in recent days received two reports detailing the severe effects of the digested beads, which are part of a craft kit aimed at kids 4 years and older.

The CPSC said a boy nearly 2 years old "swallowed several dozen beads. He became dizzy and vomited several times before slipping into a comatose state for a period of time."

The commission said the toddler was hospitalized and has since "fully recovered."

The second incident involved a child who vomited, fell into a coma and was hospitalized for five days. It was not immediately clear whether the child had made a full recovery.

Toronto-based toy distributor Spin Master Ltd. stopped shipping the Aqua Dots toys and asked retailers to pull them off their shelves, where they were previously sold for $17 to $30.

Anyone with Aqua Dots at home should return the product to the company, CPSC spokeswoman Julie Vallese said.

The toy had been named toy of the year in Australia and recently crested Wal-Mart's list of top 12 Christmas toys.

Wal-Mart on Thursday listed the toys on its Web site as "out of stock online" and had removed them from their top toy list as well.

This latest recall is part of a larger batch of recalls of Chinese-made toys that have swept across the country.

Last month alone, U.S. government safety officials and retailers voluntarily recalled at least 69,000 Chinese-made toys over concerns of excessive amounts of lead paint, which can cause hazardous lead poisoning. E-mail to a friend

CNN's Janine Brady, Jason Carroll, Laura Dolan, Julie O'Neill and Leslie Wiggins contributed to this report.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Democratic presidential candidates on Wednesday criticized President Bush's plan to withdraw roughly 30,000 troops from Iraq by next summer, with Sen. Hillary Clinton labeling it "too little, too late."

Sen. Hillary Clinton listens as Gen. David Petraeus testifies before the Senate Armed Services Committee.

In an open letter to Bush, Clinton said the troop withdrawal "is simply too little, too late, and unacceptable to this Congress, and to the American people who have made clear their strong desire to bring our troops home, and end this war."

Bush on Thursday is expected to endorse the recommendations of Gen. David Petraeus that the troop levels in Iraq be lowered to 130,000 by July, down from the "surge" level of 160,000.

"As commander in chief, you have the authority and ability to greatly accelerate the redeployment of U.S. forces from Iraq, and to bring so many more troops home so much faster," the New York Democrat said. "I strongly urge you to choose this course of action."

In an interview Wednesday with CNN, one of Clinton's chief rivals for the 2008 nomination, Sen. Barack Obama of Illinois, said the president is returning to an earlier, failed policy.

"We now are still in the same position as we essentially were in June 2006," he said. "We are in the same levels of violence; we are at the same levels of dysfunctional when it comes to the government in Iraq, and the American people at some point have a right to ask from their leadership in Washington and from the president: When is enough enough?" Watch '08 Dems weigh in on war in Iraq »

Obama presented a new plan for Iraq on Wednesday afternoon in Clinton, Iowa. It calls for an immediate drawdown of combat operations at a pace of one or two brigades every month, to be completed by the end of next year, according to excerpts released before his speech. A brigade comprises between 3,000 and 5,000 soldiers. Obama recommended a new constitutional convention for Iraq, a new regional diplomatic effort and steps to confront the country's humanitarian crisis.

"Let me be clear: There is no military solution in Iraq, and there never was. The best way to protect our security and to pressure Iraq's leaders to resolve their civil war is to immediately begin to remove our combat troops," Obama said in his speech.

Presidential candidate John Edwards, who has been pressing congressional Democrats to take a more confrontational stance against President Bush, called for an immediate withdrawal of 40,000 to 50,000 troops.

In a prepared statement, Edwards, a Democrat from North Carolina, said Obama, Clinton and Republican Sen. John Warner of Virginia, who recently called for a withdrawal to begin by Christmas, have "a moral responsibility to use every tool available to them, including a filibuster, to force the president to change course."

Edwards also called Obama's plan for troop withdrawal a copy of the president's plan

"Sen. Obama would withdraw only one to two combat brigades a month between now and the end of next year," said Edwards, "which for the next several months could essentially mimic the president's own plans to withdraw 30,000 troops by next summer."

In a statement, Sen. Christopher Dodd, D-Connecticut, said Wednesday that it was useless to debate tactics when "the underlying policy is a complete failure."

"I call on my colleagues to do what needs to be done to end our involvement in this civil war and help restore our national security by clearly and directly declaring that they will not support any Iraq measure without a firm, enforceable deadline tied to funding for the completion of redeployment of troops from Iraq," Dodd said.

Democrats lack the votes in Congress to force the president to bring the troops home and are seeking a compromise position.

Congressional Democratic leaders are meeting with Republican lawmakers, who want a change in war policy but are unwilling to cut funding or set a timeline for withdrawal.

Privately, congressional Democrats concede that the next president probably will inherit at least a deployment

***

Richmond, California (CNN) -- Four teenagers were arraigned Thursday on charges connected to the alleged gang rape of a 15-year-old girl on a high school campus after a homecoming dance.





Cody Ray Smith, described by the court as over 14 years old, pleaded not guilty to charges of rape with a foreign object and rape by force.





Two other juveniles, Ari Abdallah Morales and Marcelles James Peter, appeared with Smith at the Contra Costa County Superior Court, but did not enter a plea. The court described Morales as under 16, and did not give an age for Peter.





All three juveniles, who wore bulletproof vests at the hearing, were charged as adults.





A fourth individual, Manuel Ortega, 19, appeared separately without an attorney and did not enter a plea. He did not wear a protective vest.





The four are accused of taking part in what police said was a 2½-hour assault on the Richmond High School campus, in the Richmond community north of Oakland on San Francisco Bay.





All of those arraigned are due back in court on November 5. Another adult was arrested in connection with the October 24 attack, but has a different court date than the others.





Police said as many as 10 people were involved in the assault in a dimly lit back alley at the school, while another 10 people watched without calling 911.





The victim was taken to the hospital in critical condition but was released Wednesday.

***

(CNN) -- Energetic, infectious and combative, the music of Nigerian musician Femi Kuti has moved audiences around the world. But the man is just as passionate about getting people to change their world as much as move their feet.



Son of Afrobeat pioneer and political activist Fela Kuti, Femi inherited his father's zeal for both music and activism.



Kuti was signed to Motown Records in 1994 and his music blends Afrobeat with more current soul, R&B and jazz. He's worked with rappers Mos Def and Common and continues to explore his music and collaborations.



While the music matters, the man himself remains just as politically motivated as his father. Kuti's nightclub in Lagos, the New Afrika Shrine, had become a Mecca for West African music and creative expression, until it was closed by the authorities earlier in the summer.



It was also homage to his father and continued his legacy of using music to inspire, change and motivate.



Kuti recently told a reporter for All Africa Global Media that the Shrine was a place of worship where people can honor "great black people, who fought for the emancipation of Africa through music."



Freeing the "Shrine" from being under lock and key is just one of his crusading missions, as with his band, The Positive Force, Kuti remains outspoken about Nigeria, corruption and the positive changes that Africa can achieve.



Watch Femi Kuti on African Voices on Saturday, October 31, 12.30 and 18.30 GMT; Sunday, November 1, 18.00 GMT.

***

Washington (CNN) -- In the largest alleged BP oil spill-related scam uncovered to date, federal authorities on Thursday charged two Floridians with taking $340,000 in funds intended for victims of last year's environmental disaster in the Gulf of Mexico.





Justice Department officials said Joseph Harvey, 51, and Anja Kannell, 41, of Delray Beach, Florida, appeared in federal court in Miami on Thursday to face indictments for mail fraud, wire fraud and aggressive identity theft. Prosecutors said the defendants claimed the money from a $20 billion fund set up to help legitimate victims of the spill recover lost income.





Justice officials said they have brought charges in at least 30 cases in which individuals tried to recover funds to which they were not entitled. This was the biggest case yet, according to the Justice Department.





Harvey and Kannell are accused of filing phony claims using 34 assumed identities of actual Florida residents.





These claims were complete with names and Social Security numbers, though they had fictitious addresses in Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama and the Florida Panhandle. Officials say the defendants instructed that all the funds be sent to an account they controlled in Texas.





A magistrate judge on Thursday ordered Harvey and Kannell to remain in custody, pending further court proceedings next week.





The charges carry 10-, 15- and 20-year prison sentences upon conviction.

***

PATUAKHALI, Bangladesh (CNN)  -- Survivors of a storm that killed more than 3,000 people in the impoverished nation of Bangladesh grieved and buried their loved ones Monday as they waited for aid to arrive.

Villagers grieve in Patargata, around 125 miles south of Dhaka, capital of Bangladesh, Monday.

The number of dead killed from Cyclone Sidr -- now at 3,114 -- is expected to rise yet further as the South Asian nation continues to assess the damage.

The Bangladesh Red Crescent fears the death toll could be 5,000 -- perhaps even reaching as high as 10,000.

In the fishing village of Galachipa, in Patuakhali district, Dhalan Mridha was grieving for family members who died in the cyclone after ignoring an alert issued by authorities.

"Nothing is going to happen. That was our first thought and we went to bed. Just before midnight the winds came like hundreds of demons. Our small hut was swept away like a piece of paper, and we all ran for shelter," Mridha, a 45-year-old farm worker, told The Associated Press.

On the way to a shelter, Mridha lost contact with his wife, mother and two children. The next morning he found their bodies.

The Category 4 cyclone raked Bangladesh's southwest coast on Thursday with maximum sustained winds of 241 km/h (150 mph), destroying fishermen's hamlets and villages.

Thousands are still missing, while an estimated 280,000 others are unable to return to their homes which were wiped out by the storm. Many grieving families are now burying loved ones in single graves as no male members are available to dig them.

Most houses in the region are made of flimsy materials such as bamboo and corrugated iron, and had no chance of withstanding the storm's powerful winds.

In addition, the storm-struck area is criss-crossed by a huge river delta which surged as Sidr pushed through, wiping out many villages and littering the river's shores with debris.  Watch as people are left to fend for themselves »

Low-lying Bangladesh is already prone to flooding which has wiped out the country's rice production -- a major food staple for the impoverished country.

Improved warning systems and shelters have kept the number of deaths far lower than the disastrous cyclones in the region of 1970 and 1991, when the tolls were in the hundreds of thousands.

Bangladesh President Iajuddin Ahmed visited the devastated region Sunday, handing out some aid to the crowds of people before members of the international media. It was seen largely a token effort as hundreds were left empty-handed and furious. Security officials struggled to hold back the crowd.  See dramatic photos of storm survivors »

Sidr has already ruined Bangladesh's rice harvest, but the international community is rallying to make sure the country does not suffer as acutely as it has in the past. Nearly a million people died after massive floods wiped out the country's rice production in 1974.

International aid organizations promised initial packages of $25 million during a meeting with Bangladesh agencies Monday, the U.N.'s World Food Program said. The United States has offered more than $2 million as an initial contribution for emergency relief, and sent two U.S. Navy carriers to help in recovery operations.

In addition, the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) is airlifting in relief supplies and an 18-person Department of Defense medical team is in Bangladesh helping the estimated 15,000 injured by the storm.

Bangladesh's government held an emergency Cabinet meeting Saturday to assess the disaster and discuss recovery issues, Bangladeshi government spokesman Fahim Munaim told CNN.

Officials fear the scope of the destruction may be much more extensive since there are remote areas where conditions cannot yet be determined.

Munaim said nearly a third of Bangladesh's 64 districts were affected by the cyclone, most of those along the southern coast. The Bangladeshi military is working to provide shelter for the many people who have been displaced.

International aid groups -- including Save the Children, World Vision, and the Red Crescent, which already have offices in Bangladesh -- are deploying resources to the cyclone-stricken region but -- like the government --

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Banksy is Britain's most wanted artist -- his art sells for hundreds of thousands of dollars, but he continues to use public spaces as his main canvas, while all the time keeping his identity a secret.

Banksy's latest piece in East London where a passer-by claims to have taken a photo of the artist.

The guerilla artist has been spray painting his stencils around Britain and further afield for over ten years. Last week ten of his original pieces were sold at Bonham's auction house in London for over $1 million, while on the other side of the city Tower Hamlets council authority pledged to remove his graffiti from its streets.

From his beginnings as a graffiti artist in Bristol, England, Banksy has become the darling of the art world for his subversive and satirical public art. Depicting things such as riot police with smiley acid-house faces and camera-wielding rats, his work is now sold now by major art galleries.

Lazarides Gallery in London is one of the main dealers of his work and describes him as "a media star...but popular long before any of this high-profile activity -- simply because the people love his stuff."

While he set out to lampoon the establishment, he has now been wholeheartedly embraced by it. Fans include Hollywood A-listers, including Brad Pitt and Angelina Jolie and Christina Aguilera who bought three of his prints in 2006, including one of Queen Victoria sitting on a woman's face. The recent sales of his work put him on a par with Jean-Michel Basquiat as the best-selling street artist.

He is feted by art dealers and artists, including Damien Hirst, but he regularly mocks the art world that is so enthralled by him with ingenious stunts such as hanging his own work in the Tate gallery in London and the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York. It took the British Museum eight days to discover the "prehistoric" rock painting of a man with a shopping trolley in the British Museum Banksy has hung on a wall.

There is often a political message with this work, too. He left an inflatable doll dressed as a Guantanamo prisoner in Disneyland and painted a hole with blue sky on the Palestinian side of the West Bank wall.

Despite the huge popularity and exposure of his work, Banksy's identity remains a mystery. As he operates on the fringes of the law with his guerilla art it makes sense, but also adds to his mystique. Some things are know: he's originally from Bristol, is around 30 years old and called Robert or Robin Banks, but it's been reported that even his parents are thought to believe that he makes his living as a painter and decorator.

He continues to divide opinion as to whether his work is vandalism or public art. Veteran British art critic Brian Sewell called Banksy, "a complete clown, and what he does has absolutely nothing to do with art."

Bristol city council has recognized the popularity and artistic merit of his work by protecting a number of pieces around the city. Other local authorities don't feel the same way. Tower Hamlets and Hackney councils in London have pledged to remove his graffiti from their streets.

His latest work painted on a wall in East London -- a man in overalls resting next to a giant flower drawn as a continuation from the double yellow lines on the road -- is thought to be the artist's response.

But this latest piece may also have revealed what the artist actually looks like. A passer-by took a photo of what is thought to be the artist at work. A spokesperson for Banksy refused to confirm it was him, but did say it was definitely his work.  E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- A Sudanese journalist could receive 40 lashings after she was caught wearing trousers.



Lubna al-Hussein was arrested with 18 other women this month for wearing indecent clothes.



A Sudanese court began hearing Lubna al-Hussein's case Wednesday. It will continue the hearing August 4.



At the time of her arrest, she was wearing pants, a blouse and a hijab, she said. Police accused her of wearing trousers that were too tight and alleged that her blouse was too transparent, al-Hussein said.



Al-Hussein, who works for a newspaper and the media department of the United Nations mission in Sudan, said she did nothing wrong. She has been released to her home in Khartoum.



The crime of wearing indecent attire has only one punishment under Sudanese law, a 40-stroke public flogging, according to the Arabic Network for Human Rights Information.



"This case is the official retaliation against the reporter for her writings criticizing the Sudanese regime and extremists," the organization said in a statement.



Al-Hussein was arrested along with 18 others July 3 after Sudan's "discipline police" accused the women of wearing indecent clothes, al-Hussein said. Six were released, and 10 received the 40 lashes, she said.



Al-Hussein and two others fought the charges and hired attorneys, she said.



U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon spoke out against the decision Wednesday, saying he was "deeply concerned" and would take every effort to protect his staff member.



"The flogging is against the international human rights standards," he said. "I call on all parties to live up to their obligations under all relevant international instruments."



CNN's Umaro Djau, Talia Kayali and Tracy Doueiry contributed to this report.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN)  -- An Army staff sergeant will posthumously receive the Medal of Honor after he sacrificed his own life in an effort to save another soldier in Afghanistan, the White House said Friday.



By acts of "immeasurable courage," Staff Sgt. Jared Monti earned the Medal of Honor, the White House said.



Staff Sgt. Jared Monti will receive the medal, the nation's highest military honor, on September 17 for his actions in combat, the White House said in a statement. His parents, Paul and Janet Monti, "will join the president at the White House to commemorate their son's example of selfless service and sacrifice."



Monti, of Raynham, Massachusetts, died June 21, 2006, while deployed with the 10th Mountain Division, according to a Web site set up by family and friends to announce a scholarship in his honor. He was 31 when he died.



Monti's reconnaissance team occupied a surveillance position when they were attacked near Gowardesh, Afghanistan, and he was killed by enemy fire, the Web site says.



The White House statement said Monti "displayed immeasurable courage and uncommon valor -- eventually sacrificing his own life in an effort to save his comrade," but did not provide details of his actions.



Monti's military decorations already included the Bronze Star, Purple Heart, five Army Commendation Medals, four Army Achievement Medals, three Good Conduct Medals and three National Defense Service Medals, the White House statement said. He is survived by his parents, his sister and brother and a niece.



Monti was posthumously promoted to sergeant first class.



The Medal of Honor is awarded to U.S. soldiers who distinguish themselves with "gallantry above and beyond the call of duty," the White House said. "The meritorious conduct must involve great personal bravery or self-sacrifice so conspicuous as to clearly distinguish the individual above his or her comrades and must have involved risk of life."

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- The United States on Thursday imposed economic sanctions on a North Korean company that the United Nations said is linked to the country's nuclear weapons program.



News comes on day U.S. State Department Envoy Philip Goldberg met with U.N. sanctions committee.



A U.S. Treasury Department statement said Korea Hyoksin Trading Corporation is owned or controlled by Korea Ryonbong General Corporation, which has been designated by the United Nations as a proliferator of weapons of mass destruction.



The order freezes any U.S. assets of Hyoksin and prohibits any Americans from dealing with it, the statement said.



It notes that a sanctions committee set up by the U.N. Security Council recently cited Hyoksin for involvement in development of weapons of mass destruction.



The announcement came as the U.S. coordinator for implementation of U.N. sanctions against North Korea met Thursday with the Security Council sanctions committee.



The envoy, Philip Goldberg, said the talks showed "strong commitment" by all nations to enforcing Security Council Resolution 1874, which authorized sanctions against North Korea's weapons program.



"What I found in that room and in my dealings with other governments ... is unity of view," Goldberg said, specifically mentioning China, which is North Korea's longtime supporter.



"Commitment to implementation is strong and unified," he said.

***

(CNN) -- A major nor'easter is expected to bring blizzard conditions to interior New England and heavy rain and near-hurricane-force wind gusts to Northeastern coastal areas Wednesday through Friday.





Little, if any, snow will fall in Boston, Massachusetts, while Washington, New York and Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, could see as much as 5 inches of snow with locally higher amounts, CNN meteorologist Sean Morris said.





Record snowfall totals of 30 inches or more will be possible across upstate New York, Vermont, New Hampshire and Maine, Morris said. Very strong winds will combine with the heavy snow to produce dangerous white-out conditions and widespread power outages.





Share your winter weather videos and pics





Hurricane-force wind gusts combined with heavy rain are likely to cause significant flight delays and cancellations at all major airports along the Eastern Seaboard on Thursday and Friday, Morris said.





Another storm was bringing heavy, wet snow Wednesday morning from Connecticut to Massachusetts. The National Weather Service predicted the weight of the snow would bring down tree limbs and power lines, causing scattered power outages.





Scattered outages already were being reported in parts of New Hampshire and Massachusetts, where snowfall totals in the Berkshire Mountains could reach 24 inches by Wednesday night, the weather service said.





Meanwhile, central Texas was digging out from up to 4 inches of snow after setting records with more than a foot less than two weeks ago.





Sunshine was predicted for Wednesday, but CNN iReport contributor Robert Huntington of Austin, Texas, said the snow was falling hard in his neighborhood Tuesday.





"[They're] really big flakes, I mean, unusually large flakes," he said. "It's Texas. Everything's bigger in Texas."





CNN's Jim Kavanagh, Sean Morris and Mallory Simon contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- A fast-moving brush fire burning just south of Reno, Nevada, on Thursday prompted evacuations, closed a major highway and led the governor of Nevada to declare a state of emergency.





The more than 3,000-acre fire began burning around 1 p.m. Thursday in North Washoe Valley, according to a press release from county officials. At least 10,000 people have been evacuated. There was no containment on the blaze, said Nancy Leuenhagen, Washoe County press Iinformation officer.





Video from CNN Reno affiliate KOLO showed dark smoke plumes, fueled by heavy wind and dry vegetation, pushing toward U.S. Highway 395. A 12-mile stretch of the highway remained closed late Thursday, according to Dan Lopez of the Nevada Highway Patrol.





Several flights at the Reno airport have been canceled or diverted, CNN affiliate KTVN reported.





"Our thoughts and prayers are with those who have been and are being affected by this fire," Nevada Gov. Brian Sandoval said in a statement. "Declaring a state of emergency ensures that every resource from the local, state and federal level is available to assist."





The Nevada Division of Forestry and the Department of Public Safety were aiding local firefighters and emergency personnel, Sandoval said. The National Guard was on standby and the state of California was also providing assistance, according to the governor's website.





About 12 families displaced by the fire were receiving assistance at an evacuation shelter at a local high school, said Karli Epstien, Red Cross press information officer.





CNN's Nigel Walwyn and Leslie Tripp contributed to this report.

***

BEIRUT, Lebanon (CNN) -- Lebanon's prime minister condemned the firing of rockets into northern Israel after an attack wounded two Israelis on Thursday.  He said his government is trying to determine who was responsible.

U.N. soldiers on Thursday inspect the site in Lebanon thought to be the source of rockets fired into Israel.

Israel's military warned Israeli civilians to stick close to shelters after police said at least four rockets hit near the city of Nahariya, about 6 miles (10 kilometers) south of the Lebanese border. The Israeli military said it returned fire across the border with mortars.

Schools and kindergartens were closed in Nahariya and the nearby town of Shlomi, the Israel Defense Forces reported.

"What happened in the south [of Lebanon] is a violation of Resolution 1701 and is rejected by Lebanon," Lebanese Prime Minister Fouad Siniora said, referring to the U.N. resolution that ended the 2006 conflict between Israel and Lebanon's Hezbollah militia.

In a statement issued by his office, Siniora said he has asked Lebanese authorities to investigate the attack alongside troops from the U.N. peacekeeping force deployed along the border. He also condemned the Israeli retaliatory strikes, which the Lebanese military said inflicted no casualties.  Watch CNN's Christiane Amanpour discuss rocket attack Â»

There was no immediate claim of responsibility for the attacks, which came as Israeli airstrikes on Gaza, to the south, entered a 13th day.

The Israeli campaign in Gaza is aimed at halting rocket fire from the Hamas-ruled Palestinian territory. Israel fought a similar battle against the Lebanese Shiite Muslim militia Hezbollah in 2006, during which Hezbollah rained rockets on cities in Israeli's north for a month before a cease-fire was reached.

But Hezbollah has kept a tight rein on its forces in southern Lebanon since the cease-fire, and a number of Palestinian factions operate in southern Lebanon as well.

Andrea Tenenti, a spokesman for UNIFIL, the U.N. peacekeeping mission in Lebanon, said the rockets appear to have been fired from a point about 4.5 miles east of Naqoura, where the peacekeepers are headquartered.

"We've been intensifying our patrols on the ground in order to prevent any further incident," Tenenti said.

He said UNIFIL's commander, Maj. Gen. Claudio Graziano, is in "constant and close contact" with both sides "and has urged maximum restraint in order to prevent any escalation of the situation."

CNN's Michal Zippori in Jerusalem and Cal Perry and Nada Husseini in Beirut contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- A 12-year-old boy should get a say in whether he gets circumcised, the Oregon Supreme Court has ruled.



The court sent the parental custody dispute back to the trial court "to resolve the factual issue whether M agrees or objects to the circumcision."



"M" is the child at the center of a long-running custody dispute between James and Lia Boldt, who divorced in 1999. Soon after, the father began studying Judaism and later converted. He also started teaching his son about the faith. By then, James had parental custody and told his ex-wife the boy would convert as well, and that to do so, he would have to have the circumcision procedure.



The mother objected, saying the child had been raised in the Russian Orthodox faith while the couple was married. Because the two sides disagreed, and were living in neighboring states, the conflict dissolved into ongoing personal and constitutional dispute.



James Boldt said that as a Jew and the primary caregiver, he has a First Amendment right to practice his faith as he sees fit for his child.



Lia Boldt countered her son does not want to go through with the circumcision, and that it is an invasive, irreversible, and potentially dangerous medical procedure.



The state high court seemed especially reluctant to address the issue, saying normally such disputes "are considered private family matters." But the justices noted "these parties cannot or will not resolve this matter without resort to the courts."



So rather than offer a definitive ruling, the justices ordered both sides to go to the actual source of the conflict.



"In our view, at age 12, M's attitude regarding circumcision, though not conclusive of the custody issue presented here, is a fact necessary to the determination" of whether the mother can press her objections to the procedure, wrote Chief Justice Paul De Muniz for the six-member panel. "Forcing M at age 12 to undergo circumcision against his will could seriously affect the relationship between M and his father, and could have a pronounced effect on father's capability to properly care for M."



There was no initial reaction to the decision from the parents or their attorneys.



The case is James Boldt v. Lia Boldt (S054714). E-mail to a friend

***

LAGOS, Nigeria (CNN)  -- Royal Dutch Shell said Tuesday that it may not be able to meet its oil supply obligations in Nigeria after an attack on its major pipeline.



Heavily armed Nigerian rebels pose a constant threat to oil pipelines in the country.



The Movement for the Emancipation of the Niger Delta (MEND), a rebel group, said "detonation engineers backed by heavily armed fighters" sabotaged two of Shell's pipelines early Monday.



After a helicopter flyover of the area, Shell confirmed that parts of its large Nembe Creek "trunk line" were damaged, company spokeswoman Caroline Wittgen said. The company shut down some production "to limit the amount of crude that will spill into the environment," she said.



Hours later, it declared "force majeure," a legal term meaning it could not meet its supply obligations in the region because of the attack.



"[Shell] is working hard to repair the line and restore production," Wittgen said.



Nigeria is the fourth-largest supplier of oil to the United States, and attacks by rebels have helped fuel the year-long spike in crude oil prices. It's one of many factors pushing up the price of gas in the U.S., where one in every 10 barrels of oil comes from Nigeria.



MEND -- the largest rebel group -- has targeted foreign oil companies since 2006. It has bombed pipelines and kidnapped hundreds of foreign oil workers, typically releasing them unharmed, sometimes after receiving a ransom payment.



MEND hopes to secure a greater share of oil wealth for people in the delta, where more than 70 percent of the population lives on less than a dollar a day.



Its attacks on oil facilities have taken a toll.



"Anytime a pipeline is affected, anytime any production gets shut down, you see oil prices jump up one or two dollars a barrel just because there is no slack in the system," said Jim LeCamp, a senior vice president with RBC Wealth Management, which manages assets for wealthy clients worldwide.



Exxon and Shell are two of several companies that have been extracting 2 million barrels of oil a day in Nigeria. Recent rebel attacks on oil pipelines in the Niger Delta have cut overall production by roughly 10 percent -- meaning 200,000 fewer barrels of oil on some days.



That decrease in production comes at a time of increased demand from oil-hungry regions such as China, Russia and Latin America.



"Anytime there's a disruption there, it really affects the system," LeCamp said in a recent interview with CNN.

***

(CNN) -- Griffin Bell, who served as attorney general in the Carter administration, has died, according to the Carter Center in Atlanta, Georgia. He was 90.



Griffin Bell is sworn in as attorney general in January 1977.



Former President Jimmy Carter issued a statement saying that he and former first lady Rosalynn Carter were deeply saddened by Bell's death.



"A trusted and enduring public figure, Griffin's integrity, professionalism, and charm were greatly valued across party lines and presidential administrations," Carter said.



"As a World War II veteran, federal appeals court judge, civil rights advocate, and U.S. attorney general in my administration, Griffin made many lasting contributions to his native Georgia and country. Our thoughts and prayers are with his family."



The son of a south Georgia cotton farmer, Bell passed the Georgia bar exam while still a student in law school, according to the New Georgia Encyclopedia. He went on to help build the prominent Atlanta law firm King and Spalding, and then to serve as the nation's top legal officer.



He was a chairman of John F. Kennedy's 1960 presidential campaign, and Kennedy appointed him to the 5th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in 1961. As a federal judge, Bell was involved in desegregation rulings in the 1960s, and he became known as a moderate legal voice in the South.



Fellow Georgian Jimmy Carter nominated Bell as attorney general in 1976. He was confirmed shortly after Carter's inauguration but only after sometimes difficult Senate hearings.



Bell's memberships in private segregated clubs and some of his decisions as a federal judge became issues. He was confirmed in January 1977 by a Senate vote of 75 to 21.



Bell's tenure as attorney general followed the Watergate era, and he was credited with helping restore public confidence in the Justice Department during the late 1970s.



Bell resigned as attorney general in 1979 to return to private law practice in Atlanta with King and Spalding.



He resurfaced in the public eye periodically, including in 2004 when he was listed among Georgia Democrats who endorsed President George W. Bush for re-election.



Also in 2004, he co-authored an independent study ordered by FBI Director Robert Mueller of the FBI's internal disciplinary procedures.



The report sharply criticized the FBI and called its methods for determining punishments for its agents "seriously flawed."

***

(CNN) -- "Jughead, do you want to be my best man?" comic book character Archie asks on his blog.





The marriage issue is due to arrive at comic stores in August and on newsstands in September.





Archie Andrews -- who spent decades in high school, flirting with girl-next-door Betty Cooper and heiress-next-door Veronica Lodge -- is getting married.





"I am so excited, I am getting Married to Archie. There is so much to do, so many plans to make. I wonder if Betty wants to be my Maid of Honor? I bet she is so happy for me!" Veronica writes on her blog.





Yup, Archie is marrying Veronica, breaking Betty's heart.





"I am so sad, I don't even know what to say," Betty writes on her blog.





Betty has months to dry her tears. The marriage issue is due to arrive at comic stores in August and on newsstands in September, according to publisher Archie Comic Publications (archiecomics.com).





"It's the milestone 600th issue and we're serving up the Archie story of the century as Archie marries Veronica!!!" the publisher says on its Web site.





"The 32-page issue takes a look at Archie and his friends after they graduate college! What careers will they seek? Will the friends stay in Riverdale or disperse? What would lead Archie to have marriage on his mind? And who would he choose Veronica or Betty? How will Betty react? How will Veronica react? Can Archie shake off his klutzy past and hold down a steady job... for more than a month? One thing is certain: this will be the biggest Archie Comics story ever!"





Archie might be in over his head. According to Veronica's online profile, "She is very conceited, usually fickle, and extremely flirtatious."





He went for the bad girl instead of Betty. Her online profile says, "Through every crazy, loving scheme to win Archie's love, Betty always remains completely unaffected, loyal and sweet."





Maybe Archie will come to his senses. His online profile says, "He does things on the spur of the moment, which almost always gives him a very keen cause for regret."

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN) -- The first official indication that a family service for Michael Jackson will be held at Forest Lawn Cemetery came from a Los Angeles police official Sunday.



A memorial poster for Michael Jackson is displayed outside Staples Center in Los Angeles on Sunday.



Forest Lawn officials were working with the Jackson family on their plans, which were part of "a package" of events Tuesday, said Jim McDonnell, assistant chief of staff of the Los Angeles Police Department.



His comments, however, did not answer questions about where or when Jackson would be buried.



While there are five Forest Lawn cemeteries in the Los Angeles area, a long line of media trucks and crews have been parked at the gate of the Hollywood Hills facility for several days in anticipation of Jackson's possible interment there.



The family of the singer, who died June 25, has given no public statement on the planning. However, brother Jermaine Jackson told CNN on Thursday that a private service would be held Tuesday morning.



A public memorial for Michael Jackson at the Staples Center in Los Angeles is set to start at 10 a.m. PT Tuesday. McDonnell said police do not expect a Jackson motorcade to take place on Tuesday.



An official with AEG Live, the concert promoter handling the public memorial plans, said there would be no funeral processional.



About 1.6 million fans registered for a chance at fewer than 9,000 pairs of tickets to the memorial service, organizers said.



Registration ended at 6 p.m. Saturday. The 8,750 registrants picked in a random drawing were to receive an e-mail Sunday after 11 a.m. PT, AEG Live said.



Tickets will be handed to the winning registrants Monday outside the Staples Center, said Tim Leiweke, president of AEG Live.



Ticketholders will also have wristbands to match their tickets, a precaution against people "trying to take advantage" of the system, he said.

***

(CNN) -- Portugal will face Bosnia and Herzegovina for a place in Euro 2012 after the pair were drawn together in the playoffs to reach the finals in Poland and Ukraine next year.





Portugal, coached by former international midfielder Paulo Bento, qualifed for the 2010 World Cup finals courtesy of a playoff success against Safet Susic's Bosnia Herzegovina, and the Euro 2004 hosts and finalists will have to repeat the feat over two legs.





Portugal will have home advantage for the second leg on November 15, with the first leg set to take place on November 11 or 12.





Three other ties were drawn at the ceremony in the Ukrainian capital of Kiev, with Croatia set to face Turkey in a repeat of the Euro 2008 quarterfinal.





Denmark seal Euro 2012 spot after beating Portugal





Turkey, now coached by Dutchman Guus Hiddink, claimed a penalty shootout victory when the two sides met in Vienna four years ago before losing to Germany in the semifinals.





Estonia will have to overcome Giovanni Trapattoni's Republic of Ireland if they are to qualify for their first major soccer championship.





Ireland will be making their sixth appearance in a major tournament playoff, having missed out on last year's World Cup when a controversial William Gallas goal, after an apparent handball from Thierry Henry, condemned them to defeat against France.





The final playoff pits Euro 1996 runners-up Czech Republic against Montenegro, who are bidding to reach their first tournament since gaining independence in 2006.





There are 12 teams already assured of their place in the competition, with co-hosts Poland and Ukraine being joined by reigning world and European champions Spain and 1988 winners Netherlands.





The other eight teams who have already qualified are Germany, England, Italy, Russia, France, Greece, Denmark and Sweden.





The draw for the group stage of the four-yearly tournament will be made on December 2, ahead of the competition's first match on June 8 2012.

***

Editor's note: We asked readers to weigh in on CNN.com Live producer Jarrett Bellini's vacation destination, and you chose South Africa. Check back for updates on his trip.



CNN.com's Jarrett Bellini tours vineyards outside Cape Town, South Africa.



CAPE TOWN, South Africa (CNN) -- I'm not a wine drinker.



Before today's excursion, in fact, I could only tell you that on the face of the planet there existed three types of wine: red, white and Carlo Rossi.  The reds are good with meat.  The whites go with fish.  And, according to what I learned from my dad, Carlo Rossi goes with a glass of ice.



So, exploring South Africa's wine country, just a short drive from Cape Town, seemed like a perfect educational way for me to spend my day.  I mean, it was that or go to a museum.



Our guide, Jack, was amazingly knowledgeable about the subject, but without being a pretentious jerk.  Really, as far as he is concerned, the best wine in the world is whatever wine you enjoy.  I didn't ask, but was curious if that applied to Boone's Farm?



Throughout the day, we hit four wineries, tasting 23 bottles in all.  I know because I kept hash marks on my hand.  I'm pretty classy.



Now, despite the outstanding info we received from our guide as we sipped and swirled and spat, I can't say that I'm any better at understanding the finer points of wine than I was this morning when I woke up.  However, I did manage to get a solid buzz.  And that should be worth something.



Even without the wine, a visit to South Africa's vineyards is a great addition to a traveler's to-do list. It's not far from the city and the scenery is beautiful. If you need an added incentive, there are even a few cheese farms in the area where you can really crank the whole experience up to 11.



I personally thanked one of the goats for his contribution. He didn't seem to care. He also didn't seem physically capable of producing anything that might actually turn into cheese. But I thanked him anyway.



What can I say? I'm not a wine drinker.

***

(CNN) -- Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir landed in Qatar on Sunday for an Arab League summit, a move that could put him at risk of arrest on war crimes charges leveled by a U.N. tribunal.



Omar al-Bashir is the subject of an ICC arrest warrant over allaged war crimes in Darfur.



Al-Bashir met with Qatar's emir, Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa al-Thani, after arriving in Doha, Qatar's capital.



Earlier this weekend, al-Thani criticized the timing of the arrest warrant issued in early March by the International Criminal Court, arguing it has undercut his government's efforts to resolve the long-running conflict in Sudan's Darfur region.



"We believe that peace and justice should go hand in hand to settle the conflict in Darfur, or for that matter, any other conflict," al-Thani told Arab League foreign ministers Saturday in remarks carried by the Qatar News Agency. "But we also believe that justice cannot be reached in the absence of peace."



The March 4 arrest warrant is the first issued for a sitting head of state by the world's only permanent war crimes tribunal, based at The Hague in the Netherlands. But the ICC has no arrest powers of its own, and depends on its 106 member states to take suspects into custody. Qatar is not a member of the tribunal.



Sudan refuses to recognize the legitimacy of the ICC, and has made no efforts to hand over two other officials indicted by the court. Al-Bashir has called the charges an attempt by Western powers to recolonize Sudan.



The court accuses al-Bashir of complicity in war crimes and crimes against humanity in his government's campaign against rebels in Darfur, in western Sudan.



The United Nations estimates that 300,000 people have been killed and 2.5 million have been forced to flee their homes because of the conflict.



Qatar had been mediating talks between Sudanese officials and representatives of one of the rebel factions, who signed a confidence-building agreement in February.



CNN's Mohammed Jamjoom contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- "A gruesome scene" is how one investigator described the aftermath of five killings in Tennessee. A sixth body was found in Alabama.



Police gather outside one of the scenes of mutliple slayings in Fayetteville, Tennessee, on Saturday.



Kristin Helm of the Tennessee Bureau of Investigation told CNN on Saturday that authorities have Jacob Shafer in custody in connection with the deaths. She added that authorities are not looking for additional suspects.



Huntsville, Alabama, Police Sgt. Mickey Allen said Tennessee authorities told him a man confessed to a slaying in Huntsville, Alabama, and to five other killings in Fayetteville, Tennessee. Allen didn't identify the man.



Shafer has been questioned by the TBI and is expected to face murder charges, Helm said.



Sheriff Murray Blackwelder, who held an afternoon news conference, called the slayings "one of the worst crimes Lincoln County has ever seen." He didn't describe how the Lincoln County, Tennessee, victims died.



Dr. Bruce Levy, medical examiner for Tennessee, was working to identify the bodies found in that state, Helm said.



Fayetteville police responded to a call to South Lincoln Road about 10 a.m. (11 a.m. ET), Blackwelder said. Police found three crime scenes and five bodies on that street, he said.



The five victims, some of whom were related, were found in two homes, Helm said. Investigators think the killings occurred either Friday night or early Saturday, she said.



The sixth body was found at a business in Huntsville, Sheriff Allen said. He said he is unsure of the connection between the crime scenes in Tennessee and Alabama. Huntsville is about 30 miles from Fayetteville.



"We have no clue yet as to what unfolded there and how it relates to here," Allen said.



CNN's Mayra Cuevas-Nazario contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Nine Hutu tribal fighters and several Rwandan and Congolese troops were killed in fighting in eastern Congo, a United Nations spokesman said, as the two governments continued an unprecedented partnership to combat ethnic violence.





Laurent Nkunda, seen here in November 2008, was reportedly arrested last week in Rwanda.





The fighting against the Hutus in the Lubero region came a day after Congolese rebel leader Laurent Nkunda, of the rival Tutsi ethnic group, was arrested by Rwandan authorities.





U.N. spokesman Jean Paul Deitrich told CNN on Saturday that no further details about the fighting were immediately available.





Lubero is about 200 kilometers (124 miles) northeast of Goma, the regional capital.





Nkunda's arrest early Friday raised hopes for peace in the war-ravaged region. International observers hope it will lead the roughly 1,500 fighters that follow him to join with government forces.  Hear how Nkunda tried to flee capture »





Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of Congo have traditionally been on different sides of the conflict in eastern Congo -- which pits ethnic Tutsis, supported by Rwanda, against Congo-backed Hutus.





The fighting is effectively an extension of the Rwandan genocide of the early 1990s, when hundreds of thousands of Rwandans were killed in ethnic battles between minority Tutsi and majority Hutu.





A United Nations report last month accused Rwanda and Congo of fighting a proxy war in the region, using the ethnic groups. It said both sides had used child soldiers, and committed executions and rape, in the conflict.





CNN's Katy Byron contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Hours after Libya's former interior minister said he resigned to support anti-government protesters, the Libyan government said he had been kidnapped.





Abdul Fattah Younis al Abidi told CNN Wednesday that he resigned Monday after hearing that 300 unarmed civilians had been killed in Benghazi, Libya's second-largest city. He accused Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi of planning to attack civilians on a wide scale.





But the same day, Libyan state media reported that "gangs" in Benghazi had kidnapped him. Witnesses have reported that Benghazi has essentially been taken over by the opposition. Witnesses also told CNN they saw Younis on Sunday and Monday in Benghazi, where he was siding with the protesters.





CNN could not immediately confirm reports for areas beyond Benghazi. The Libyan government maintains tight control on communications and has not responded to repeated requests from CNN for access to the country. CNN has interviewed numerous witnesses by phone.





Libyan state television added that Libyan forces have warned those responsible for the kidnapping that they "will be chased in their hiding places."





Earlier Wednesday, al Abidi said he had quit the government and is supporting the protesters, who he predicted will achieve victory in "days or hours."





"Gadhafi told me he was planning on using airplanes against the people in Benghazi, and I told him that he will have thousands of people killed if he does that," al Abidi said in an Arabic-language telephone interview Wednesday.





He called Gadhafi "a stubborn man" who will not give up. "He will either commit suicide or he will get killed," said al Abidi, who said he has known him since 1964.





Al Abidi called on Libyan security forces "to join the people in the intifada." Already, he said, "many members" of the security forces had defected, including those in the capital, Tripoli.





Since the recent protests in Libya started February 15, a growing number of Libyan officials have reportedly resigned.





Libya's ambassador to Bangladesh, A.H. Elimam, resigned to side with pro-democracy protesters, said BSS, the official news agency of Bangladesh, citing a Foreign Ministry official Tuesday.





iReport: Are you there? share photos, video





Justice Minister Mustafa Abdul Jalil also resigned, saying he was protesting the "bloody situation" and "use of excessive force" against unarmed protesters, according to the Libyan newspaper Quryna.





CNN's Waffa Munayyer contributed to this report.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN)  -- Going to the prom is a highlight in many teenagers' lives. But attending a prom isn't always an option for some young people, including those with special needs.



Alex Gonzales passes under the Marines' sword arch Saturday in Washington as he arrives at the prom.



That's where Helen McCormick comes in.



"We are dreaming for children who are excluded from their proms, and ... you're going to see people walk through the doors who are going to be just absolutely mesmerized," said McCormick, president of a Virginia-based nonprofit called The House, Inc.



For the past four years, McCormick has organized a prom specifically for children with special needs.



This year's prom, dubbed "The Cinderella Ball," was held Saturday night at the Willard InterContinental Hotel in Washington. More than 150 teens attended the gala, where they were greeted by 41 Marines. Each one of the teens went down a red carpet, under a Marine Corps sword arch, before being seated for dinner.  Watch scenes from the spectacular prom »



"The children that will be coming are various disabled children with kidney (ailments), children that are literally terminally ill, children with cerebral palsy, Down syndrome and autism," McCormick said before the event.



Norman Gonzales brought his 13-year-old son, Alex.



"Their social life is very limited at school and outside school as well, so something like this is very good because they come to a place where they find themselves with people that they can relate to," Gonzales said.



This was Alex Gonzales' first prom and he said he had a great time. "Coming to an event like this -- I think it's a great experience," he said.



The entertainment for the evening was 2007 "American Idol" winner Jordin Sparks.



"I think it's so amazing with all the kids that they get to have their prom. They get to dress up and feel really beautiful and have this night dedicated to them," Sparks said.



Most of the teens attending the prom were accompanied by a parent or friend. Some of them brought dates. It was a night many of them said they wouldn't forget anytime soon.



Victor Padgett attended the festivities with his daughter, Dede. He said events like these prove that the human spirit is alive and well.



"There is hope. There is love, and there is compassion for everyone," he said.

***

Taquaritinga, Brazil (CNN) -- Brazil's orange harvest is nearing its end as workers in the state of Sao Paulo pluck late-blooming fruit from the trees.





The yellow-green oranges will be shipped off to nearby juice factories and then shipped around the globe.





Those exports rake in $2 billion for Brazil, the biggest orange juice exporter in the world, accounting for 85 percent of global exports.





But now, it is not clear if Brazilian orange juice will be allowed into one of its key markets: the United States.





Last week, the Food and Drug Administration temporarily halted all orange juice imports after low levels of the unapproved fungicide carbendazim were found in some juice shipments from Brazil. More recently, the FDA said the juice is safe for consumption.





Growers in Sao Paulo say they have been using carbendazim for some 20 years and point out that it is allowed -- in low levels -- across Europe and Latin America. It is also allowed in trace amounts in other food products, like nuts, in the United States.





"We didn't even know that it had been banned in orange juice in the United States in 2009," Marco Antonio dos Santos, a third generation orange grower, told CNN.





Dos Santos, also the president of the Citrus Department at the Agriculture Ministry, says there are alternatives, however.





In fact, he and other growers already rotate the use of carbendazim with other fungicides and techniques for preventing diseases like black spot, which make the oranges fall from the trees before they are ripe.





He says Brazilian growers don't want to lose the American market, which is their second biggest after Europe. The United States currently buys 15 percent of BrazilÂ¹s orange juice exports.





"If we have to, we'll eliminate this product completely," he said as he walked, showing off his 60-acre grove.





"We want to supply the American market, we don't in any way want to lose it. We can adapt to the American system with other products."





Growers here would take a hit if this latest crop were barred from America.





Global orange juice prices would rise, too.





But Dos Santos says producers can adapt quickly and could produce the next crop carbendazim-free if it were necessary.





While Brazilian farmers and industry leaders don't see a threat to consumers' health, they say the most important thing is that people aren't afraid to drink orange juice.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN)  -- A source close to House Speaker Nancy Pelosi now confirms that Pelosi was told in February 2003 by her intelligence aide, Michael Sheehy, that waterboarding was actually used on CIA detainee Abu Zubaydah.



Source says Nancy Pelosi didn't object about waterboard usage because she wasn't personally briefed about it.



This appears to contradict Pelosi's account that she was never told waterboarding actually happened, only that the administration was considering using it.



Sheehy attended a briefing in which waterboarding was discussed in February 2003, with Rep. Jane Harman, D-California, who took over Pelosi's spot as the ranking Democrat on the House Intelligence Committee.



This source says Pelosi didn't object when she learned that waterboarding was being used because she had not been personally briefed about it -- only her aide had been told.



The source said Pelosi supported a letter that Harman sent to the administration at the time raising concerns. The source asked not to be identified because of the sensitive nature of matters discussed in classified intelligence briefings.



Pelosi admits attending one briefing in September 2002, but at a news conference last month, she was adamant that she did not know waterboarding was used.



"At that or any other briefing, and that was the only briefing that I was briefed on in that regard, we were not -- I repeat, we were not -- told that waterboarding or any of these other enhanced interrogation methods were used, " Pelosi said on April 23.



Some Republicans have called for Pelosi to testify at congressional hearings.



The number two House Democrat -- Majority Leader Steny Hoyer, D-Maryland -- said Tuesday, "I think the facts need to get out" regarding what members of Congress had been told about harsh interrogations.



But when asked whether Pelosi testifying would be appropriate, Hoyer did not directly answer the question, saying, "The issue is what was done. If you don't have the facts pounded on the table, they (Republicans) are pounding on the table, or they are pounding on Speaker Pelosi. Take your pick. But they are doing so as a distraction, as a distraction from what was done in this case."

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- A $15.5 million payout made by oil giant Shell to settle a lawsuit brought against it by relations of executed Nigerian writer Ken Saro-Wiwa and other activists will allow the families of the victims to move on with their lives, Saro-Wiwa's son has told CNN.



Saro-Wiwa said the settlement would allow the families of the victims to draw a line under the past.



The New York lawsuit -- brought to court by the Center for Constitutional Rights on behalf of Saro-Wiwa's family and others in 1996 -- accused Shell's Nigerian subsidiary of complicity in the writer's 1995 hanging and the killings or persecution of other environmental activists in the Niger Delta.



Nigeria's Ogoni people have complained for years that Shell was allowed to pollute its land without consequences.



Saro-Wiwa's death sparked a worldwide outcry, and his movement ultimately forced Shell out of the oil- and gas-rich Ogoniland region.



"It enables us to draw a line under the past and actually face the future with something tangible, some hope that this is the beginning of a better engagement between all the stakeholders in this issue," Ken Saro-Wiwa Jr. told CNN.



Shell said it "had no part in the violence that took place" but called the settlement "a humanitarian gesture to set up a trust fund to benefit the Ogoni people."



Shell fought the lawsuit until last week, when a federal appellate court ruled that the plaintiffs could sue the company's Nigerian subsidiary in American courts, overturning a March decision in the company's favor.



Saro-Wiwa said the case set a precedent for oil companies operating in regions such as West Africa by demonstrating that they could "be brought to trial in America for human rights violations in Africa."  Watch Saro-Wiwa discuss how he hopes the case will set a precedent »



"Justice is always hard won... It took 13 years to go through the legal process but clearly before we started this corporations throught they could almost operate with impunity but now the legal landscape has changed," he said.



Roughly half of the settlement will go into a trust fund to help the people of Nigeria's Ogoni region, according to court papers.

***

Cristiano Ronaldo is in the running to win the FIFA World Player of the Year for a second successive year after being named on a 23-man shortlist for this year's award.



The Portuguese winger, who joined Real Madrid this summer from Manchester United for a world record transfer fee,  heads a familiar cast of football's biggest names ahead of the annual gala in Zurich, Switzerland, on December 21.



Champions League holders Barcelona boast six nominees -- defender Carlos Puyol, midfielders Andres Iniesta and Xavi, and strikers Lionel Messi, Thierry Henry and Zlatan Ibrahimovic.



Former Barca star Samuel Eto'o, now playing for Inter Milan, also joins the nominations list.



Spain's La Liga boasts 11 nominees altogether, in addition to the Barcelona contingent there is Valencia's David Villa, Sevilla's Luis Fabiano and Real Madrid's Kaka and Iker Casillas.



The English Premier League follows with eight nominees; England internationals Wayne Rooney, John Terry, Frank Lampard and Steven Gerrard are among those up for the award.



Nominees list:



Michael Ballack (Germany), Gianluigi Buffon (Italy), Iker Casillas (Spain),Cristiano Ronaldo (Portugal), Diego (Brazil), Didier Drogba (Ivory Coast), Michael Essien (Ghana), Samuel Eto'o (Cameroon), Steven Gerrard (England), Thierry Henry (France), Zlatan Ibrahimovic (Sweden), Andres Iniesta (Spain), Kaka (Brazil), Frank Lampard (England), Luis Fabiano (Brazil), Lionel Messi (Argentina), Carles Puyol (Spain), Franck Ribery (France), Wayne Rooney (England), John Terry (England), Fernando Torres (Spain), David Villa (Spain), Xavi (Spain).

***

(CNN)  -- Paolo Maldini and Luis Figo brought down the curtain on their remarkable careers as their Milan clubs both scored victories on the final day of the Serie A season.



Maldini was given a special presentation as he made his 902nd and final appearance for Milan.



The 40-year-old Maldini was playing his 902nd game for Milan who won 2-0 at Fiorentina while Portuguese international Figo helped champions Inter to a 4-3 home win over Atalanta.



Milan's victory helped them secure the third Champions League place in Italy and automatic qualification to the group stages.



Juventus, who beat Lazio 2-0 with Vincenzo Iaquinta scoring twice, finished level on points with Milan, while Fiorentina will go into the Champions League final qualifying round after finishing fourth.



Inter had clinched the title two weeks ago, with a Zlatan Ibrahimovic double making sure that they would round off their season in style, the Swede finishing Serie A's top scorer with 25 goals.



Figo has been with Inter since 2005 and has helped the club to four straight league titles to become a firm favorite with the fans who gave him a rousing farewell.



Former Italian international defender Maldini was completing an incredible 24 seasons at Milan.



Inter finished top with 84 points with Milan and Juventus on 74, with Fiorentina fourth with 68.



In the relegation dogfight, Torino joined Reggina and Lecce in making the drop from Serie A as they lost 3-2 at AS Roma.



Bologna beat Catania 3-1 to finish in the 17th place with 37 points, while Torino ended on 34.



Bari, Parma and the winner of the promotion playoff will be the newcomers in Serie A next season.

***

(CNN) -- Yemen told outside powers Wednesday to stay out of its battle with a Shiite rebel group in its northwest amid concerns that Iran and Saudi Arabia are being drawn into the conflict.



The statement, carried by the state news agency Saba and attributed to a Foreign Ministry source, followed a statement of concern for Yemen's "national unity and territorial integrity" by Iranian Foreign Minister Manouchehr Mottaki on Tuesday.



"We welcome what Mottaki affirmed about Iran's position towards Yemen's unity and stability, and Yemen reaffirms that it definitely rejects the interference in its internal affairs by any party," the statement said. It said Yemen's battle with the Houthi, a Shiite Muslim rebel movement, is "an internal Yemeni affair, and Yemen can solve its issues without any interference from others."



Battles between Yemeni government forces and rebels have raged intermittently for five years, and government troops launched a new offensive in late summer. Saudi Arabia, Yemen's northern neighbor, turned its air force against suspected Houthi rebels last week after it said the rebels had crossed into Saudi territory.



The Houthi claimed that the airstrikes occurred within Yemeni territory, a claim both the Saudi and Yemeni governments denied.



The persistent fighting has raised concerns that Yemen -- where U.S. officials say al Qaeda is attempting to establish a new foothold in the region -- could be the stage for a proxy struggle between Shiite-dominated Iran and the Sunni-led Saudi monarchy. Yemen says the conflict is about reasserting government authority and is not a sectarian war.



Yemen has accused Iran of supporting the rebels. A Yemeni government official told CNN on Tuesday that Yemen's navy was "on the highest state of alert" after an Iranian boat was captured near Yemeni and Saudi territorial waters last week.



In Washington, however, a senior State Department official told CNN that although the U.S. government is concerned about the Yemeni conflict it does not see any sign of an Iranian hand in the Houthi revolt.



The State Department has been in touch with the Yemenis and Saudis about the need to reduce tensions but is yet to be convinced that Iran is involved in Yemen, the official said.



The United Nations has expressed alarm over the fighting and said there has been a "significant increase" in the number of people displaced in recent weeks. The U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees estimates as many as 175,000 people have been affected by the conflict since 2004, U.N. spokesman Farhan Haq said Tuesday.



CNN's Mohammed Jamjoom and Elise Labott contributed to this report.

***

WASHINGTON (Reuters) -- The Democratic-led Congress yielded to President Bush on Saturday and approved legislation to temporarily expand government's power to conduct electronic surveillance without a court order in tracking foreign suspects.



President Bush demanded Congress expand his surveillance authority before leaving for vacation.



Civil liberties groups charged the measure would create a broad net that would sweep up law-abiding U.S. citizens.



But the House of Representatives gave its concurrence to the bill, 227-183, a day after it won Senate approval, 60-28.



The action came amid warnings of possible attacks on the United States.



"After months of prodding by House Republicans, Congress has finally closed the terrorist loophole in our surveillance law -- and America will be the safer for it," declared House Minority Leader John Boehner, an Ohio Republican.



"We think it is not the bill that ought to pass," said House Majority Leader Steny Hoyer. But he conceded he and fellow Democrats were unable to stop the measure in this national security showdown with the White House.



"Protecting America is our most solemn obligation," Bush said earlier in the day in urging Congress to send him the bill so he could sign it into law.  Watch Kelli Arena's report on what some call an intelligence gap »



The measure would authorize the National Security Agency to intercept without a court order communications between people in the United States and foreign targets overseas. E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- A massive iceberg -- more than twice the size of New York's Manhattan island -- is drifting slowly toward Australia, scientists said Wednesday.





The iceberg, measuring 140 square km (54 square miles), cleaved off an ice shelf nearly 10 years ago and had been floating near Antarctica before commencing on its unusual journey north.





Named B17B, it was about 1,700 km (1,056 miles) off the coast of West Australia, according to the country's Antarctic Division.





"B17B is a very significant one in that it has drifted so far north while still largely intact," said Australian Antarctic Division glaciologist Neal Young, who spotted the slab using satellite images taken by NASA and the European Space Agency.





"It's one of the biggest sighted at those latitudes."





It is unlikely to drift too close to the coast in its current form, Young said. The warmer waters will cause it to melt.





"As the water warms up, the iceberg is slowly breaking up, resulting in hundreds more smaller icebergs in the area," Young said on the Australian Antarctic Division Web site.





In November, an iceberg estimated to be 500 meters wide and 50 meters high was spotted close to Macquarie Island in the southern Pacific drifting towards New Zealand.





Scientists working on the island were astounded by its size.





"We pulled out the binoculars that we use for work on the seals and, sure enough, it was a huge floating island of ice basically and, yeah, it was an incredible sight," Australian researcher Dean Miller told CNN affiliate TVNZ.





The Australian Antarctic Division said the iceberg was part of a flotilla that would have broken off from a larger ice flow that possibly came from the Ross Ice Shelf, Antarctica's largest.





Although shipping lanes in this region are not particularly busy in November, the icebergs prompted Maritime New Zealand to issue navigation warnings.





Three years earlier, another family of icebergs led to a small tourist boom when they drifted along the east coast of New Zealand's South Island.





Oceanographer Mike Williams told Radio New Zealand the icebergs had "pretty much the same origin" but that some had probably been trapped in the icy seas of Antarctica for longer, before being carried north by the currents.





However he was reluctant to cite global warming as the reason for the large-scale movement of ice. "We do have to a change our position a little because in 2006 we thought this was a 'once in a lifetime' event.





"But large ice shelf carvings, where the ice comes from, are still only carving on a 30 to 50-year period."

***

(CNN) -- Thierry Henry scored twice as Barcelona booked their place in the quarterfinals of the Champions League with a 5-2 second leg victory against Lyon at the Nou Camp.



Lionel Messi, left, and Thierry Henry celebrate as Barcelona reach the last eight of the Champions League.



Former winners Porto joined them at the next stage after their return leg against Atletico finished goalless in Lisbon -- the 2-2 draw in the first leg in Madrid sending them through on the away goals.



Spain's Primera Liga leaders Barcelona strolled into a 4-0 first half lead on their way to a 6-3 aggregate success with Lionel Messi and Samuel Eto'o building on Henry's double.



Jean Makoun pulled one back just before half-time and Juninho struck three minutes after the restart, but the French champions never looked like disturbing Barca's path to the March 20 draw.



Lyon's hopes suffered another blow when Juninho was given his marching orders after picking up a second yellow card in time added on and Seydou Keita took full advantage by snatching another in the final seconds.



Having conceded an away goal in a 1-1 draw in the first leg at the Stade Gerland, Lyon had to score to stand any chance of progressing.



After a fairly even opening, a quickfire double from Henry dictated the outcome of the tie.



After 25 minutes he latched onto a ball from Rafael Marquez, beating the offside trap to slide the ball under Hugo Lloris. Two minutes later Henry doubled the lead when he slid the ball in at the near post past the advancing Lloris.



Messi showed his class in the 40th minute. The Argentina star collected the ball on the right touchline, before embarking on a mazy run past three Lyon defenders. He then exchanged a one-two with Eto'o, before firing a low shot home.



Eto'o was desperate to get on the scoresheet himself as he stormed into the box from the left, only to see his shot saved by Lloris from point-blank range. Within a minute, though, he had made amends as he popped up in the box, side-stepped his marker and smashed the ball home.



A minute from the break, Makoun made it 4-1 as he headed home Juninho's corner. And the former Brazil midfielder got on the scoresheet himself three minutes after the break following a cross from Cesar Delgado.



Any thoughts of a comeback failed to materialise as Barca continued to create a raft of chances.



As the game moved, into stoppage time, Juninho picked up a second booking for dissent and moments later Mali midfielder Keita made it five for Barca.

***

(CNN) -- A woman who has been in a vegetative state for nearly 17 years was transferred to a private clinic Tuesday where she is expected to die -- ending what has been a lengthy and controversial legal fight.



A portrait of Eluana Englaro taken in July 2008 in Italy. Englaro has been in a vegetative state for nearly 17 years.



Eluana Englaro suffered irreversible brain damage in a car crash in 1992, when she was 20 years old. For years, her father has fought to have her feeding tube removed, saying it would be a dignified end to his daughter's life.



Beppino Englaro says that before the crash, his daughter visited a friend who was in a coma and told him she didn't want the same thing to happen to her should she ever be in the same state.



Euthanasia is illegal in Italy, but patients have the right to refuse treatment. It is on that basis that Englaro argued his daughter should be allowed to die, because she had expressed the wish not to be kept alive while in a coma -- indirectly refusing treatment, he said.



"We knew Eluana well, and we always thought of her as a champion of freedom," her father said in October. "She had clear ideas about her life and for her, life was about freedom -- not an obligation to live."



A series of legal battles finally ended in November, when Italy's highest court, the Court of Cassation, upheld a lower court ruling allowing Englaro to suspend his daughter's treatment.



But although Englaro had cleared the last legal hurdle, the court's decision sparked a new fight to find a hospital or clinic that would take out Eluana's feeding tube.



Several clinics initially came forward to say they could do it, but the Italian health minister then issued a decree to remind them of their duty of care. Under pressure to adhere to his decree, the clinics backed off.



Finally, a private clinic in the northeastern Italian city of Udine agreed to assist in Eluana's case.



Monday night, Eluana was transferred from the church-run hospital in Lecco, north of Milan, where she had been kept alive to the Udine clinic.



A handful of protesters tried to block the ambulance carrying Eluana from leaving the clinic, one of them holding a banner reading, "Only thieves and assassins act at night."



The case has been a controversial one in Italy, a heavily Catholic country where the Vatican has great influence.



Last Sunday, Pope Benedict XVI told pilgrims that "euthanasia is a false solution to suffering." Tuesday morning, a top Vatican official was quoted in the Italian media saying, "Stop the killer hands."



The Udine clinic says the removal of Eluana's tube will begin in about three days, and the process of allowing her to die will take about 20 days.



Clinic officials gave police an outline of the specific steps they are going to take with Eluana during that time. The outline adheres to the Cassation Court's ruling, which required certain steps and conditions once Eluana's feeding tube is removed.



Among the steps and conditions was a rule that no video or photography may be taken and that only certain people may enter the patient's room.

***

(CNN) -- Microsoft may be a relative newcomer to in-store retailing, but it's getting the hang of this Black Friday thing.





The computing giant, with 14 retail stores across the U.S., is diving into the post-Thanksgiving shopping madness with a slew of substantial new discounts on laptops, phones, software, games and its Kinect gaming system for the Xbox 360 console.





The sale begins online Friday at 12:01 a.m. PT, when most Microsoft stores will open, and lasts through Monday. Some of the deals are just available in stores, while others are offered only at Microsoft's online store.





Among them:





-- Sony S137GX notebook: $599, normally $999 (online only)


-- Samsung RC512 laptop running Windows 7: $499, normally $799


-- Acer Iconia Dual-Screen Touchbook: $599, normally $999


-- Xbox Ultimate Gaming Bundle, which includes accessories, a game and a 90-day Xbox Live membership: up to $200 off


-- Kinect Sensor Holiday Bundle, which includes three games: $100, normally $150 (not available online)


-- A free Windows Phone with a two-year service agreement (the site doesn't specify the carrier)


-- Office Home and Student suite of software: $120, normally $150





Microsoft also is cutting prices -- in many cases by half -- on such recent popular Xbox games as "Assassin's Creed Revelations," "Battlefield 3" and "Madden 2012." See its Facebook page for an entire list.





These discounts are much deeper than those announced Wednesday by rival Apple, which is trimming prices on iPads, iPods and Macs by less than 10%.

***

(CNN) -- From Captain Kirk on "Star Trek" to Denny Crane on "Boston Legal," William Shatner has been a fixture on television for decades.



William Shatner has a new talk show and has written an autobiography.



Even as his latest series comes to an end, the actor is busier than ever.



He has written an autobiography, "Up Till Now," and he has a new talk show -- "Shatner's Raw Nerve" on the Biography channel --billed as an "edgy and off-beat celebrity interview series."



Shatner talked with CNN's Kyra Phillips about his career, past and present.



CNN: "Boston Legal," what a finale: a wedding between Denny and fellow lawyer and best friend Alan. Don't they know that Proposition 8 [passed]?



Shatner: It was all a financial guise, as you learned to your dismay. There was nothing sexual about our marriage. It was all designed to bequeath my fortune to him as [my character] got ready to die.



CNN: "Boston Legal" was a brilliant show: the writing, your famous wit. You must have had a blast doing the show.



Shatner: We laughed our way through five years of great joy, great entertainment, and we got some wonderful awards during the years and the beauty of it all was that when we came in this season, we knew we were going to do 13 shows and be out. So the writing reflected the fact that we knew we were ending and it wrapped the whole show up.



CNN: I cannot believe you have a porn queen [Jenna Jameson] on your talk show.



Shatner: We like to call her an adult film star. She turns out to be highly sensitive, vulnerable. ... This is a remarkable interview of a woman who is terribly vulnerable and expresses it. It was so good, we're doing a two-parter.



CNN: Who has been your favorite leading lady?



Shatner: They go down in the hoary mists of history. The effects of age -- they all meld into one and it looks like my wife.



CNN: You reveal a lot in your book. Who would you say your ultimate mentor has been through your life?



Shatner: I've thought about that over the years and it comes up that I don't have anybody who ever mentored me, ever was particularly interested in furthering my career. I had to do it stumbling around, trying to do it as most people do themselves.

***

(CNN) -- A suspected arms dealer accused of conspiring to sell weapons to Colombian guerrillas was extradited Friday from Spain to the United States, the U.S. Justice Department said.



Kassar is accused of conspiring to sell weapons to FARC rebels.



Monzer al Kassar had been wanted for decades before he was arrested in an undercover operation in Spain last year.



Justice Department officials say he has been a source of weapons and military equipment for armed combatants since the 1970s.



He left Spain aboard a private plane accompanied by U.S. Drug Enforcement Agents and arrived in New York at 11:30 a.m. local time Friday (1530 GMT), a DEA spokesman said.



He is expected to appear before a federal magistrate in Manhattan before the end of the day.



Kasser was arrested in Madrid a year ago by Spanish police working with undercover DEA officers posing as members of the FARC.



The U.S. accuses Kassar and two other men of conspiring to sell millions of dollars' worth of weapons to FARC, which the United States has designated a terrorist organization.



The weapons included surface-to-air missile systems, rocket-propelled grenade launchers, thousands of machine guns, and millions of rounds of ammunition, according to a federal indictment.



A Spanish court last week approved his extradition on four counts, including conspiracy to kill U.S. nationals.



The two co-defendants, Tareq Mousa Al Ghazi and Luis Felipe Moreno Godoy, were both previously extradited to New York from Romania to face the same terrorism charges.



All three could face life in prison.



Kassar had told journalists before he was arrested that he had retired from arms dealing, but the U.S. says he had been involved since the 1970s, providing weapons and military equipment to armed factions in Nicaragua, Cyprus, Bosnia, Croatia, Iran, Iraq, Somalia, and elsewhere.



CNN Justice Producer Terry Frieden contributed to this report

***

(CNN) -- A California lettuce grower has recalled 2,498 cartons of chopped or shredded romaine lettuce shipped to wholesale food service distributors in 19 states and Canada over concerns the produce may be contaminated with the same bacteria that caused 13 deaths in an outbreak traced to tainted cantaloupes.





The U.S. Food and Drug Administration and True Leaf Farms initially reported the recall of 90 cartons of chopped and shredded romaine lettuce on Thursday, saying a random sample detected listeria monocytogenes in one bag pulled from a lot shopped on September 12 and September 13. Later Thursday, True Leaf issued a statement saying the FDA asked the company to expand the recall.





No illnesses have been reported, the FDA said.





The affected lettuce was available for direct purchase at Cash & Carry Smart Foodservice warehouses in Oregon, Washington and Idaho, It also shipped to food service distributors in Alaska, Alabama, Arizona, California, Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, Illinois, Kentucky, Maryland, Minnesota, Missouri, Nevada, New York, Ohio, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Tennessee and Vermont. It also was sent to a distributor in Alberta and British Columbia.





The recalled lettuce carries a use by date of "9/29/11" and the bag and box code B256-46438-8. The FDA said anyone who has the lettuce should destroy it or contact the company to come pick it up.





Listeria can cause fever, muscle aches and gastrointestinal problems. It usually causes only mild illness for healthy people, but it can be extremely dangerous for older adults, people with weakened immune systems, newborns and pregnant women, in whom listeriosis can cause miscarriages and stillbirths, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.





The listeria bacteria recently was blamed in a multi-state outbreak associated with tainted cantaloupes. At last count, 13 people had died and 72 had been made ill in 18 states after consuming cantaloupes grown by a Colorado farm.

***

BAGHDAD, Iraq (CNN) -- Twelve-year-old Mohammed Rasoul, his right leg severed below the knee, maneuvers on crutches over the dirt and loose stones through the Falluja graveyard.

Mohammed Rasoul sitting with his mother, Jinan Khalifa, eagerly awaits his trip to the United States.

Row after row of headstones stand as the deadly reminder of the tragedy the city went through as insurgents battled for control of the city.

Mohammed stops at his cousin's grave. "I feel an ache when I think of her. Every time I remember her, I cry," he told CNN at a visit to the grave a few months ago. As he spoke, he poured water on a tree he planted next to it.

The headstone reads: "Martyr 643, the child Hajer Ismael Khalil, 13 October 2006."

Clutching her photograph, Mohammed says, "My cousin died on the scene. I still remember her screams."

The same explosion cost him his leg and his childhood. "A car came out of nowhere. My cousin was playing with her friend," he says. "I remember [the car] was green. It detonated."  Watch Mohammed tell his story »

His mother, Jinan Khalifa, remembers that day all too well. She was in the kitchen when she heard a deafening explosion.

"There was shattered glass from the windows falling all over us. I went outside and saw my son covered in blood from head to toe," she says.

Her son endured 11 operations before doctors amputated his leg below the knee. Khalifa says her son put forward a tough face, but when he finally went back home the shock hit him.

"That's where his personality started to change. He stopped laughing," she says.

"It was tearing me up," Mohammed says "It was hard for me to watch others play. And I couldn't, I couldn't walk, it agitated me."

CNN first broadcast his story in May where it caught the attention of an American charity, the Global Medical Relief Fund, which offered to help.

"I cannot put my feelings into words," Khalifa says. "An entire book would not be enough. They gave my son his hope back. The America we knew was one that came, bombed, harmed. But when this organization came forward, we saw another face of America."

The Global Medical Relief Fund, a small charity based in New York that helps children of war and natural disasters, has arranged for surgery and treatment at the Shriners Children Hospital in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

Elissa Montanti, the founder and director of the organization, says she was inspired to act when she first heard of Mohammed's tragic story. "I said, 'Oh, please, let me help this boy.' "

Mohammed will arrive in the United States on Thursday afternoon. He will be fitted for a prosthetic leg in coming weeks and examined to see if he needs additional surgery. Montanti said her organization has a list of other young Iraqi children in need of help. "The word needs to get out."

Asked how it makes her feel to help Mohammed, she says, "It makes me cry with joy."

Mohammed, too, is ecstatic. "I didn't think this act of human kindness would be presented to me," he says. "I didn't have hope in Iraq -- hope that I would ever get my hope back. I didn't have a future."

He adds, "I want to go to America and meet this person that gave me my future back."

When he comes back home, he wants to help rebuild Falluja, starting with his school, which was bombed during the 2004 Falluja offensive.

"I will never leave school and, God willing, I will continue my education and become an architect and build all the schools," he says, standing on his crutches.

But first, he says, he wants to walk

***

(CNN)  -- England international footballer Steven Gerrard was found not guilty of affray by a court in his home city on Friday.



England international Steven Gerrard was cleared by a court in Liverpool of affray.



The jury at Liverpool Crown Court took a little over an hour to clear Gerrard of charges relating to a fracas in a nightclub bar in the north-western of England city on December 29 of last year.



They accepted the Liverpool captain's version that he acted in self defense in punching businessman Marcus McGhee.



The 29-year-old was the only one of the seven defendants in the case to be cleared after an incident which was described by judge Henry Globe as an "explosion of violence."



Gerrard spoke of his relief outside the court.



"Can I just say how pleased I am with today's verdict," he said.



"I'm glad to put this case behind me and I am really looking forward to the season ahead and concentrating on my football now.



"I would just like to say a big thank you to my legal team and to my friends and family and everyone at Liverpool football club for supporting me."



His comments were met with a round of applause from a large group of fans of the Premier League club who had gathered outside the court, before he was ushered away.



Gerrard was celebrating in the Lounge Inn in Southport, a suburb of Liverpool, after scoring twice his team's 5-1 win at Newcastle which took them to the top of the Premier League.



Video footage, which was available to the court, showed the moment around 2.am in the morning when trouble flared.



Gerrard apparently wanted to change the music on the CD player and the 34-year-old McGee said the football star had acted aggressively in trying to grab the device.



In the fracas which followed, Gerrard admitted throwing three punches but said only one connected.



He claimed, and his version was accepted by the jury, that he believed he was about to be attacked himself.



"You did not start the violence, it was started by the violent elbowing of Marcus McGee in the face by one of your friends, John Doran," Globe said.



"The victim's consequential actions of reeling backwards and then forwards and your actions in response to that movement forward has to be seen against that background," he added.



Five other men have already pleaded guilty to affray and another admitted a lesser charge of threatening behavior. They will be sentenced at a later date.

***

TEHRAN, Iran (CNN) -- Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, whose re-election last month led to massive protests, on Tuesday called the balloting "the most free election anywhere in the world."



Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad was re-elected last month, setting off days of protests.



"It was a great event," he said in a nationally televised address.



The election, which opponents charge was rigged, was followed by street demonstrations and civil unrest that led to the deaths of at least 20 protesters and the arrest of more than 1,000, according to Iranian state-run media.



The numbers of casualties and arrests could not be independently verified by CNN because the Iranian government banned coverage by international journalists.



The president, who said voter turnout was 85 percent, said opponents "did not provide even one piece of document regarding irregularities or vote fraud."



Without specifically mentioning the post-election violence, Ahmadinejad said criticism of government "is the key to the success of a nation."



Everyone has criticisms, he said. "I have my own."



But he accused the "arrogant powers" and "enemies" of Iran of interfering in his country's affairs, including the post-election situation. Some Iranians collaborated with enemies, the president said.



Ahmadinejad also said Tuesday he believes the government should be "substantially" reorganized. Although he didn't elaborate, he said the areas of employment, housing, development and civil rights were high on the agenda.



"[We] need to create newer capacities and prepare ourselves for this new period," he said, apparently referring to his upcoming second term in office.



"With this election, we have entered a new era ... in domestic spheres and on an international level," he added. He called it "an era of solidarity."



"The government is at the service of the entire people," Ahmadinejad said. "Things will be done in a better way, more effective way, so we can reach higher aspirations."



He said experts have been invited to help the government achieve progress.

***

(CNN) -- Attacks in January and February by Sudanese forces on Darfur villagers are described in a U.N. report as "violations of international humanitarian and human rights law."



Between January and February, Sudanese forces killed 115 people -- including women, children and elderly -- in air and ground attacks on four Darfur villages, according to the report.  Prepared by the United Nations-African Union Mission in Darfur, the report says attacks in January and February point to a deliberate plan to destroy civilian infrastructure.



Helicopter gunships and fixed-wing aircraft targeted the villages while armed militias rode in on horses and camels to force about 30,000 people from their homes, according to the report.



The attacks were "carried out during a major military push by the Sudanese government to regain control of West Darfur's northern corridor, and drive out an insurgent group," it said.



The village of Saraf Jidad, Sudan, was attacked three times in January, while the villages of Sirbal, Silea and Abu Suruj were attacked within hours of each other on February 8, UNAMID said in the report.



The militias and the Sudanese armed forces looted, vandalized and burned homes, schools, shops, community centers and other buildings in the villages, the report said.



Sometimes, buildings were burned with people inside, it said.



The attacks "amount to violations of international humanitarian and human rights law," they said.



"The scale of destruction of civilian property, including objects indispensable for the survival of the civilian population, suggests that the damage was a deliberate and integral part of a military strategy."



The Sudanese government had no immediate response. However, last week, Sudanese President Omar el-Bashir accused the international media of "exaggerating" the situation in Darfur to detract from atrocities in Iraq, the Palestinian territories and Somalia.



He said the crisis in Darfur is a "media fabrication" and that in most of the region there is little or no conflict and people are living normal lives, he said.



Citing Sudanese government statistics, el-Bashir said fewer than 10,000 people have died in the conflict and fewer than 500,000 have been displaced.



International figures, including U.N. data, put the death toll in Darfur at 200,000, with another 2.5 million people displaced.



The conflict began five years ago when ethnic African tribesmen took up arms, complaining of decades of neglect and discrimination by the Sudanese government.



Sudan's Arab-dominated government is accused of responding by unleashing tribal militias known as Janjaweed, which have allegedly committed the worst atrocities against Darfur's local communities.



Rebels fighting the government-backed militias have also been accused by the United Nations of widespread human rights abuses. El-Bashir rejects claims that the Darfur conflict is being fought along ethnic lines.



At the start of this year, more than 9,000 UNAMID peacekeeping troops were deployed to the region to address the fighting and humanitarian suffering. Plans are for the force to eventually number 26,000. E-mail to a friend

***

Mexico City, Mexico (CNN) -- The death toll from heavy floods and mudslides in Mexico increased Tuesday to 41, a government agency announced.





Most of the deaths -- 30 -- have occurred in eastern Michoacan state, on the central Pacific coast. The state attorney general's office released a list of the deceased Tuesday.





Another 12 people are missing after mudslides from two large hills, Michoacan Gov. Leonel Godoy said Tuesday.





The remaining 11 deaths resulted from a mudslide Saturday near the small town of Temascaltepec in neighboring Mexico state.





Interior Secretary Fernando Francisco Gomez Mont has declared a state of natural disaster for the Michoacan cities of Angangueo, Ocampo, Tiquicheo de Nicolas Romero, Tuxpan and Tuzantla. The declaration makes those cities eligible for money from the federal natural disaster fund.





The death toll in Michoacan had been 27 until three additional bodies were discovered Tuesday.





Godoy said officials are focusing on three tasks: searching for anyone who is alive, recovering bodies and removing boulders and downed trees. Officials are under pressure to act quickly, he said, because another cold front with more possible rain is expected within the next few days.





More than 3,500 Michoacan residents are homeless, the state government said on its Web site.





In addition to Michoacan and Mexico states, unusually heavy rain in the past week also flooded parts of Mexico City, the nation's capital.





Up to 37,000 people nationwide have been affected, government officials said.





On Sunday, Mexican President Felipe Calderon toured Valle de Chalco, another city in Mexico state on the eastern outskirts of the Mexico City metro area.





National Water Commission Director Jose Luis Luege said Tuesday that contaminated water from a sewage network there that overflowed Friday will continue to flood the town for at least another 48 hours. The break in the sewage pipe had been fixed, but it burst again.





Officials also built two dikes to contain the sewage but were unable to use them out of concern that they would burst under the intense pressure from the floodwaters, Luege said.





"It's a very complicated operation," he said.





More than 3,000 homes in Valle de Chalco were flooded.





Mexico state is bordered on the west by Michoacan and adjoins Mexico City on three sides -- north, east and west.

***

ATLANTA, Georgia (CNN) -- It is an irony of contemporary art-museum management: Sometimes the museum that creates an exhibition doesn't get to premiere it.

In a treatment of a Bridgeman Art Library photo, the High shows visitors Jules Arnout's "View of the Grand Gallery."

This is the case this week, as Atlanta's High Museum of Art couples its public opening of a second year of Louvre-fueled shows from Paris, France, with an exhibition about influences on the Impressionists.

"Inspiring Impressionism" is organized by the Denver Art Museum. It opened Tuesday at the High, to run there through January  2008.

With the backing of Northern Trust, the show will then travel to Denver February 23 to May 25, 2008, and then on to the Seattle Art Museum from June 19 to September 21, 2008.

Why not start in Denver? That museum this fall is host to pieces seen in the first year of the three-year Louvre Atlanta series of exhibitions. Like priceless dominos falling, these shows roll around the country and the world, globalization dictating galas, super-sensitive custom shipping companies probably among the biggest winners.  See a gallery of images from 'Inspiring Impressionism' at the High Museum of Art »

Another unintended effect may be shadowing of one important outing by another.

It should be interesting to learn whether showing "Inspiring Impressionism" at the High on the same time frame as the second year of Louvre Atlanta pays off. Do all the boats in Monet's "Autumn on the Seine, Argenteuil" float?

Smart museum-goers will see it all. "The Louvre and the Ancient World" and the companion show "The Eye of Josephine," after all, look at some of the oldest treasures in the Louvre's vast holdings.   See a gallery of some of the highlights of the Louvre Atlanta shows »

The fit is comfortable, in a way, the Impressionist movement of the turn of the last century finding its main proponents in French artists. The emphasis here, however, is on what older works may have moved and motivated such artists as Claude Monet, Pierre-Auguste Renoir and Paul Cézanne.

One very distinctive connection from the Louvre Atlanta opener of last year is a section of this new show that looks at the tradition of modern-era artists learning by studying the work of masters at the Louvre, Bartolomé Esteban Murillo's "The Beggar Boy" of around 1650 being one of the most-copied canvases in Western art's modern history.

From the outset, visitors to "Inspiring Impressionism" are reminded of the Louvre treasures all around them at the High: The Impressionism show's entry gallery is flanked by a handsome photographic treatment of Louis Jules Arnout's "View of the Grand Gallery at the Louvre" from between 1850 and 1870. In that original painting and color lithograph that followed, Arnout captured the bustle of artists working and visitors promenading in the Louvre's chief exhibition space that runs along the Seine in Paris.

In fact, even older-era echoes of this same concept are encountered on looking at Louvre Atlanta's "The Tiber" marble from the first century A.D., you're reminded that Michelangelo himself was aware of that piece, influenced by it, presumably inspired by it.

So a surprise symmetry takes shape at the High this fall, as visitors contemplate dialogues between museums (the Louvre, the High, Denver, Seattle), the viewers of art in Europe and the United States, and the artists themselves in France, in the U.S. and elsewhere.

High director Michael Shapiro calls these synchronicities "visual evidence of connections."

His colleagues Timothy Standring of Denver and Ann Dumas of London, England, have held up their end of this conversational eyeful with timely contributions, glimpses of Old World craft from Titian and Velasquez to Fragonard and Rubens -- and the "moderns" who saw beyond them to a new age of aesthetic debate.

Don't miss some of the comments and writings of various artists, used as part of the display of the show at the High. Degas

***

(CNN)  -- A tugboat on Saturday reached a disabled freighter carrying 22 people, hours after the ship rode out Hurricane Ike without power, Coast Guard spokesman Mike O'Berry said.



O'Berry said the tugboat Rotterdam arrived shortly before 2 p.m. (3 p.m. ET).



Repairs will be made aboard the Antalina, which has a broken fuel pump, while at sea, O'Berry said.



The tugboat will then tow the ship to Port Arthur, Texas, where it will undergo additional repairs and eventually offload more of its cargo -- petroleum coke, a petroleum byproduct -- O'Berry said.



The crew members aboard the Antalina, a Cypriot-flagged freighter, are all in good health, said Coast Guard Cmdr. Ron Labrec.



The freighter suffered no major damage from the storm, said Darrell Wilson, a spokesman for the company that manages the ship.



Aircraft from the Coast Guard and Air Force were sent Friday afternoon to try to rescue the crew of the freighter, which is loaded with petroleum coke, a petroleum byproduct.



But high winds forced the military to abort the rescue, O'Berry said.



The Coast Guard then instructed the freighter to contact it each hour. It also told told the crew to turn on the ship's emergency radio beacon so its position could be monitored, O'Berry said.  Watch the Coast Guard conduct a rescue operation »



Onshore as well, rescuers found it too dangerous to respond to calls for help.



In Liverpool, Texas, south of Houston, a family called for help around 1 a.m. Saturday when a tree crashed into their house, but authorities concluded that strong winds made it too dangerous to respond, said Doc Adams, Brazoria County's emergency management coordinator.



"You want to take care of people, and when you can't, it's tough," Adams said.



"Unfortunately, someone has to make the decision about whether the risk is worth the benefit. Are you willing to risk three or four lives to save one? It's not easy."



Adams said he didn't know if anyone in the house was hurt.



"As far as I know, they're still there in the house with a tree over it," he said at about 3:40 a.m.



The stranded freighter had been headed south through the Gulf of Mexico from Port Arthur, Texas, but "lost main propulsion 90 miles southeast of Galveston" and was unable to steer, the Coast Guard said.



The Coast Guard received a distress call from the vessel at 4 a.m. Friday. The Antalina was "basically adrift, at the mercy of the wind and sea currents," Coast Guard Petty Officer Tom Atkeson said at the time.



"We are in hell," one of the men aboard the freighter told CNN on Friday before the rescue was called off. The man said the winds around the ship were strong but that the freighter still had power.



On Friday before the storm hit, authorities picked up more than 120 people stranded by rising seas along the southeast Texas coast.



Most of the rescues occurred in Galveston County, where rising water and other effects of the storm began hours before landfall early Saturday.



Stranded residents were airlifted from Crystal Beach, Bolivar Peninsula and other communities in the Galveston area. Many of those rescued were motorists stranded on flooded roads.



In Surfside Beach, police waded through chest-high rushing water to rescue five people trapped in their homes. One man refused to leave, said Surfside Beach police Chief Randy Smith.



"Some of them took convincing, some of them didn't," Smith said.



Police also rescued five other people who waded out to meet the officers.



About half of those rescues were done by helicopters out of bases along the coast, said Coast Guard Petty Officer David Schulein.



Three HH-65C helicopters from Coast Guard Air Station Houston rescued more than 20 people and continued to fly rescue missions until weather grounded them Friday evening, said Petty Officer Renee Aiello, a station spokeswoman.



Some 37,000 people may need to be rescued in the aftermath of the hurricane, a U.S. military official

***

NEW YORK (CNN)  -- After spending nearly 28 years in an irreversible coma, heiress and socialite Martha "Sunny" von Bulow died Saturday in a New York nursing home, according to a family statement. She was 76.

Sunny von Bulow is pictured during her 1957 wedding to Prince Alfred von Auersperg.

Von Bulow was subject of one of the nation's most sensational criminal cases during the 1980s.

Her husband, Claus, was accused of trying to kill her with an overdose of insulin, which prosecutors alleged sent her into the coma.

He was convicted of making two attempts on her life, but the conviction was overturned on appeal. He was acquitted in a second trial.

His retrial in 1985 received national attention.

"We were blessed to have an extraordinarily loving and caring mother," said the statement from Von Bulow's three children -- Annie Laurie "Ala" Isham, Alexander von Auersperg and Cosima Pavoncelli -- released by a spokeswoman. "She was especially devoted to her many friends and family members."

Martha von Bulow was born Martha Sharp Crawford into a wealthy family. She inherited a fortune conservatively estimated at $75 million, according to an article on the von Bulow case posted on truTV.com's Crime Library Web site.

In her early years, she drew comparisons to actress Grace Kelly.

She became known as Princess von Auersperg with her first marriage, to Prince Alfred von Auersperg of Austria. That marriage produced two children: Alexander and Annie Laurie.

The von Bulows married in 1966 and had a daughter, Cosima.

On the morning of December 22, 1980, family members found Martha von Bulow unconscious in the bathroom of the family's posh Newport, Rhode Island, home. She never regained consciousness.

She had been hospitalized a year earlier after lapsing into a coma but recovered, according to the Crime Library site. Doctors had diagnosed her with hypoglycemia, or low blood sugar.

Prosecutors accused Claus von Bulow of twice attempting to kill his wife by injecting her with insulin.

The case also led to a major motion picture, "Reversal of Fortune." Actor Jeremy Irons won an Oscar for his portrayal of Claus von Bulow.

Famed defense attorney Alan Dershowitz, who won Claus von Bulow a new trial on appeal after his conviction, said in a statement Saturday that Martha von Bulow's death is "a sad ending to a sad tragedy that some members of her family tried to turn into a crime. We proved overwhelming[ly] that there was no crime and that the coma was self-induced. We saved his life, but could not save hers."

Claus von Bulow's defense team maintained that Martha von Bulow's alcohol use, among other factors, caused her coma.

Dershowitz said he had spoken with Claus von Bulow, who now lives in London, England. Claus von Bulow was saddened by his former wife's passing, Dershowitz said.

The family statement said Martha von Bulow is survived by her children, their spouses and nine grandchildren.

Alexander von Auersperg and Ala von Auersperg Isham, who had sided with prosecutors against Claus von Bulow, filed a civil suit against their stepfather after his acquittal. The case was settled out of court in 1987, according to a 2007 article in the Providence Journal newspaper in Rhode Island.

Claus von Bulow had agreed to waive his claim to his wife's money and to a divorce in exchange for the suit being dropped.

The von Bulows' daughter, Cosima, sided with her father.

Vanity Fair writer Dominick Dunne, who covered the von Bulow case, told the New York Daily News in 2007 that Sunny von Bulow was moved from Columbia Presbyterian hospital to a private nursing home in 1998.  Watch Dunne recall case Â»

Ala von Auersperg Isham served for a time as president of the Sunny von Bulow Coma and Head Trauma Research Foundation, according to the Providence Journal. An offshoot of that organization, the Brain Trauma Foundation, still operates in New York, the newspaper said.

The family statement notes that Martha von Bulow actively supported the Metropolitan Museum of Art,

***

London, England (CNN) -- British Defence Secretary Bob Ainsworth announced a public inquiry Wednesday into allegations that Iraqis were killed and abused after a firefight more than five years ago in the southern part of the country.



The allegations center around the aftermath of a fight in May 2004 at the so-called Danny Boy checkpoint in Maysan Province.



Former detainees and the family of a slain Iraqi contend at least 20 people were killed and others were abused at Camp Abu Naji after a fight between British soldiers and Iraqi insurgents.



That claim has been denied by the UK Ministry of Defence -- which says the 20 people died in battle and people detained were not mistreated.



The probe is called the Al Sweady inquiry -- named after the family of the dead Iraqi. Thayne Forbes -- who retired from the High Court Bench last year -- will chair the inquiry into allegations.



The inquiry will look into allegations of "unlawful killings" and the "ill-treatment of five Iraqi nationals detained at Camp Abu Naji." Even though the probe will focus on five detainees, attorneys claim nine people were detained and abused.



The defense ministry disputes those allegations.



"We have found no credible evidence that those detained, as a result of the attack on British troops and the prolonged firefight at Danny Boy checkpoint, were mistreated," the defense ministry said in a statement.



The release of a photo published in British media and obtained by CNN about the incident shows an armed soldier standing near four people face down on the ground with their hands bound behind their backs and their faces covered.



Attorneys for the men say they were beaten and evidence shows a breach of the Geneva Conventions prohibiting humiliating and degrading treatment of prisoners. But, the defence ministry disputes that.



"It is important to remember that our first priority at the end of such attacks is to protect our personnel from further threats," the ministry said.



CNN's Atika Shubert and Per Nyberg contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- An explosion that critically injured the chairman of the Arkansas Medical Board on Wednesday was caused by a bomb, police said.



Dr. Trent Pierce was injured outside his home Wednesday, authorities and local media say.



Dr. Trent Pierce was wounded when the car blew up in front of his West Memphis, Arkansas, home, authorities said.



Earlier, police told CNN affiliate WREG that they did not believe foul play was involved.



Pierce, a family practitioner who specializes in asthma, was flown to a Memphis, Tennessee, hospital in extremely critical condition, the station reported, citing police. The blast occurred at about 8 a.m. as Pierce got into the car, affiliate WMC-TV reported.



Aerial footage from the scene showed the white SUV with its hood blown up and its front end extensively damaged.



Medical board spokeswoman Peggy Cryer said the board heard Pierce was flown to the hospital but had no definite information beyond that.



"We do not know enough to give any kind of statement," she said.



Callers to Pierce's office received an answering machine message saying the office is closed, but the call repeatedly disconnected during the recording, preventing messages from being left.



Doris Davis, who works in an eye doctor's office next door, said Pierce's office staff is swamped trying to deal with patients who arrived for their appointments.



FBI spokesman Jason Pack said agents were en route to the scene, along with personnel from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives. The FBI is assisting local authorities in their investigation, he said.



West Memphis, Arkansas, and Memphis, Tennessee, are separated by the Mississippi River.



Pierce was described as a pillar of the community in West Memphis, a small town of about 30,000 people.



Davis said Pierce is well-liked, active in his church and is married with two adult children.



She said the FBI was at her office and interviewed her boss, Dr. Eddie Bryant. Bryant is a close friend of Pierce's and went to medical school with him, Davis said.



CNN's Kathleen Shahriari contributed to this report.

***

(ESSENCE) -- Two weeks ago, 3-year-old Jaquan Reed was fatally shot on Chicago, Illinois', West Side.



Men participate in the Million Father March to support children going to school.



While the case shook the city, such shootings involving children are no longer rare in the Windy City. Within the current academic year, 36 Chicago-area students were killed.



Essence.com spoke to Phillip Jackson, a well-known political activist in the city and also founder of Black Star Project, a Chicago-based community outreach group, about what is being done to end the senseless shootings involving children.



The following is an edited version of that interview:



ESSENCE: There have been so many shootings and deaths. Please tell us what's happening in Chicago? ESSENCE: Xerox names Ursula Burns CEO



Phillip Jackson: This is a national catastrophe that is happening while we as a country do nothing. We're asking for national attention. This is a pandemic. We will not be able to solve this problem in Chicago unless they can solve this same problem in Houston [Texas] and other cities.  Watch our panelists talk about the growing violence in Chicago »



ESSENCE: The nation's first black president is from Chicago. And you still do not feel like there is enough attention placed on this problem?



Jackson: Newspapers from all over the world have come to our offices this past week to say, "What is happening in President Barack Obama's backyard?"



And 75 percent of the children murdered here in Chicago happened within eight miles of President Obama's former house. So if he doesn't respond as president, and we are hoping he does, he needs to respond as a resident.



ESSENCE: What has been the police response?



Jackson: They've put together a 400-unit gang SWAT team. They're trying to match guns with the gangs. But with all of that they can't stop one murder because they're approaching it from the wrong way. ESSENCE: Obama's time in office



ESSENCE: What is the right way to approach it?



Jackson: Instill strong families and strong communities. Build strong parenting groups. Do you know what has been the best mentoring organization in the United States of America? Street gangs.



ESSENCE: In other cities, where there is a lot of gang violence, like Baltimore [Maryland], there are regular people in the community coming together and trying to fix it. What are regular people doing about this in Chicago?



Jackson: First of all, they're raising their voices. Number two, they're rallying, they're marching, and they're organizing. That's what this effort is going to take. Number three, they're engaging in recreational programs. ESSENCE: Toledo cops say teen provoked them



So there is more happening at the grassroots level than at the federal level. But those people cannot succeed without support. And that's why we're asking President Obama to bring his resources.



ESSENCE: What is the mind-set of Chicago youth with all of these horrendous acts of violence occurring?



Jackson: Hopelessness, desperation, anger. They live in America. They see how America takes care of the whole world but won't take care of them in the communities in which they live.

***

Tehran, Iran (CNN) -- As Tehran approaches the 30th anniversary of the Iranian hostage crisis, in which dozens of Americans where held against their will for 444 days, the Islamic republic is firmly warning against reformists taking to the streets to protest the government.



Still reeling from the massive demonstration that followed the country's disputed presidential election, Iran on Wednesday will commemorate November 4, 1979, when a group of Islamist students seized the U.S. Embassy in Tehran, taking 53 hostages and effectively ending diplomatic relations with the United States.



While the government will allow the "faithful" to celebrate the anniversary of the embassy seizure, those who "intend to gather illegally and spread lies among people who gather to peacefully participate ... will be held responsible for their actions," said Ahmad Reza Radan, head of Iran's security forces, according to the semi-official Iran Student Correspondent Association.



The government of Iran arrested more than 1,000 people in a massive crackdown after the June 12 election, in which incumbent President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad was declared the overwhelming winner.



In the aftermath of the fallout, the government accused several reformists, including opposition candidates Mehdi Karrubi and Mir Hossein Moussavi, of spreading anti-government propaganda and fueling the anger among the public.



Despite warnings from Iran's hardline leaders, the reformists have largely refused to back down. They released the names of 72 protesters they say were killed in the unrest that followed the election -- more than double the government's official number.



Karrubi, a former parliamentary speaker, has been especially vocal about the claims of detainee rape. He publishing a firsthand account of one alleged victim on his Web site last month. He has been scorned by government hard-liners, whose credibility and legitimacy have been publicly questioned since the elections.



On Wednesday, Islamic authorities tried to pre-emptively silence anti-government demonstrations and rhetoric.



According to the Islamic Republic News Agency, Hossein Sajedinia, deputy of operations for Iran's security forces, said, "The police will not allow a handful [of individuals] to disrupt the organization and safety of this day, by fooling people and the youth."

***

(CNN) -- Researchers have produced aerial photos of jungle dwellers who they say are among the few remaining peoples on Earth who have had no contact with the outside world.



Indigenous Brazilians are photographed during an overflight in May, reacting to the sights over their camp.



Taken from a small airplane, the photos show men outside thatched communal huts, necks craned upward, pointing bows toward the air in a remote corner of the Amazonian rainforest.



The National Indian Foundation, a government agency in Brazil, published the photos Thursday on its Web site. It tracks "uncontacted tribes" -- indigenous groups that are thought to have had no contact with outsiders -- and seeks to protect them from encroachment.



More than 100 uncontacted tribes remain worldwide, and about half live in the remote reaches of the Amazonian rainforest in Peru or Brazil, near the recently photographed tribe, according to Survival International, a nonprofit group that advocates for the rights of indigenous people.



"All are in grave danger of being forced off their land, killed or decimated by new diseases," the organization said Thursday.



Illegal logging in Peru is threatening several uncontacted groups, pushing them over the border with Brazil and toward potential conflicts with about 500 uncontacted Indians living on the Brazilian side, Survival International said.



Its director, Stephen Cory, said the new photographs highlight the need to protect uncontacted people from intrusion by the outside world.



"These pictures are further evidence that uncontacted tribes really do exist," Cory said in a statement. "The world needs to wake up to this, and ensure that their territory is protected in accordance with international law. Otherwise, they will soon be made extinct."



The photos released Thursday show men who look strong and healthy, the Brazilian government said. They and their relatives apparently live in six communal shelters known as malocas, according to the government, which has tracked at least four uncontacted groups in the region for the past 20 years.  Watch a report on the tribe »



The photos were taken during 20 hours of flights conducted between April 28 and May 2.

***

(CNN)  -- Houston, Texas, had a record high temperature Wednesday as a heat wave continues to grip the nation's midsection, the National Weather Service said Thursday.



A woman tries to beat Houston's record heat by lying on a bench in the shade.



The city sweltered with a high temperature of 104 degrees Wednesday, a record high for June 24, forecasters said. The previous record high for the date was 99 degrees, set in 1980.



The previous record high measured for the month of June in Houston was 103 degrees, set on June 30, 1980, and June 18, 1934.



Heat indices, a combination of temperature and humidity, are breaking the 110-degree mark in many cities.



Forecasters predicted a high near 100 for Houston on Thursday, but the temperature could rise into the triple digits in outlying areas, said CNN meteorologist Reynolds Wolf.



The weather service posted heat advisories for Houston; Dallas, Texas; and New Orleans, Louisiana, indicating that temperatures in those cities will feel like 100 to 105 degrees because of high humidity.



In the Houston community of Bayland Park, the elderly were taking advantage of the air-conditioned Community Center.



"I don't like hot weather. I never have and never will," Teet Charloton told CNN affiliate KPRC-TV in Houston. "But we have to have it. I go from the car to the house or come in here and go back the same way. I don't do much shopping, that's for sure."



Betty Dante added, "It is very hot outside. ... I think as you get older, you feel the heat more."



In southwest Houston, Leticia Alvarado is profiting from the heat.



The unemployed Houstonian has been running along the median on Hillcroft Street at Bellaire Boulevard for seven weeks. She is selling water for $1 a bottle.



"It's hot, too hot," she told the station.



Other cities also were sweltering.



New Iberia, Louisiana, had a temperature Wednesday of 102, which broke the record of 97 in 2005.



An excessive heat warning was issued for St. Louis, Missouri, on Thursday through 7 p.m. CT Saturday. Forecasters predicted a high near 96.



Cloud cover was expected to make temperatures there a little cooler Thursday, but the weather service warned, "A hot and humid air mass remains over the area which will continue to control weather over the region through Saturday."



Afternoon and early evening heat index readings of 100 to 110 were expected in the Missouri city every day through Saturday.



Young children, the elderly and people with chronic sicknesses were advised to stay inside if possible.



The heat wave that began last week was being fed by a high pressure system north of Texas



Air quality alerts were posted for several cities, indicating pollutants exceed accepted standards. A red alert was issued for Houston, the third most severe alert that indicates unhealthy air quality.

***

(CNN) -- Drug violence in the Mexican state of Chihuahua left 24 people dead in the span of 24 hours this weekend, the state attorney general's office said Sunday.





The killings were scattered over four locations throughout the state, with eight dead in Juarez, 10 killed in the capital of Chihuahua, five killed in Cuauhtemuc and one killed in Parral.





All the slayings occurred in public places, with the killings in Cuauhtemuc occurring in a bar, said Carlos Gonzalez, a spokesman for the Chihuahua state attorney general.





The killings took place between Saturday afternoon and Sunday morning, Gonzalez said.





The victims -- all male -- ranged in age between 18 and 25 years old.





No other details about the killings or the victims were immediately available.





"This is an indicator of the incrementally increasing war between the two cartels battling for Juarez Plaza, the state's drug trafficking corridor," Gonzalez said, referring to an ongoing battle between the Sinaloa and Juarez cartels for dominance in the area. Juarez Plaza is a major thoroughfare through the area.





"I can't give you a reason why the violence is picking up the last week of April going into this month," Gonzalez added.





Some Mexican news organizations have reported that the Sinaloa Cartel had defeated the rival Juarez organization but Gonzalez said, "There is no winner to this war."





The spate of weekend killings followed another bloody week in the Ciudad Juarez area.





On Wednesday, at least 15 people were killed in drug-related violence in Juarez, authorities said.





The slayings included four people whose bodies were found at one location, another three -- one of them a woman -- who were found slain at a second location, and another eight victims who were killed at a bar, police spokesman Jacinto Seguro said.





On Tuesday, 10 people were killed, Seguro said, including three who were shot outside a supermarket. Another victim was killed outside a shopping mall.





In all, 25 people were killed between Tuesday and Wednesday, Seguro said.





Ciudad Juarez is the most violent city in Mexico, with more than 2,600 drug-related deaths in 2009. No official numbers are available for this year, but more than 500 killings have been reported by local media. Some reports have the figures as high as 810 in Juarez this year.





According to a report released in April by the Mexican government, Chihuahua state is Mexico's hardest-hit state by drug violence, with 6,757 people killed since the start of the drug war at the end of 2006.

***

MIAMI, Florida (CNN) -- A grand jury Tuesday indicted four suspects on charges of first degree felony murder and armed burglary in the slaying of Washington Redskins star Sean Taylor.



A grand jury identified Eric Rivera Jr. as the shooter in the death of NFL star Sean Taylor.



Court documents say the youngest is alleged to have fired the fatal shot.



The three adult suspects -- Venjah K. Hunte, 20, Jason Scott Mitchell, 19, and Charles Kendrick Lee Wardlow, 18 -- appeared in court Tuesday via videoconference wearing thick green vests, which defense attorneys said were suicide safety smocks.



They were ordered held without bail at the Pre-Trial Detention Center in Miami, Florida, where Corrections Officer Janelle Hall said they are under suicide watch.



The fourth suspect -- Eric Rivera Jr., 17 -- remained in custody in Fort Myers, Florida.



His attorney, Wilbur Smith, told CNN he expected his client to be moved to a Miami-Dade juvenile detention facility Wednesday.  Watch CNN's Rick Sanchez speak to attorneys for two of the suspects »



Rivera was armed during the alleged burglary, and "during the course of the commission of the offense ... discharged a firearm and as a result of the discharge, death or great bodily harm was inflicted upon Sean Maurice Taylor, a human being," the indictment says.



The four men were arrested Friday, officials said.



Taylor, 24, died a day after he was shot during an apparent burglary at his home. Miami-Dade police investigators said they believe the burglars thought the house was empty.



Thousands of mourners attended Taylor's funeral Monday at Florida International University's arena.  See photos from the funeral »



Police said Taylor and his girlfriend, Jackie Garcia, were awakened by noise coming from the living room early November 26. Taylor got up and locked the bedroom door, but the door was kicked in and two shots were fired, police said. One struck Taylor in the leg.



Garcia and the couple's 18-month-old daughter were not hurt.



Authorities have said Garcia told police she was hiding under the bedding during the attack, did not see what happened and could not provide a suspect description.



A break-in had been reported at Taylor's residence eight days earlier. A police report from that incident said someone forced a window open and left a kitchen knife on a bed. Several drawers and a bedroom safe were searched during the break-in, according to the report.



Taylor spent four years with the Redskins, earning his first Pro Bowl selection in 2006. He suffered a sprained right knee in a November 11 loss to the Philadelphia Eagles and had not played since.



The 2004 first-round draft pick played at the University of Miami, where he was an All-American in 2003. He was regarded as one of the hardest-hitting players in the NFL. E-mail to a friend



CNN's Kim Segal and John Couwels contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- A Washington woman who hid a sedated monkey under her blouse on a flight from Thailand was convicted of violating wildlife laws for smuggling the monkey into the United States, prosecutors said Tuesday.

Authorities rescued the monkey from Gypsy Lawson's fake womb.

Gypsy Lawson, 28, and her mother, Fran Ogren, 56, were convicted of smuggling and conspiracy to smuggle the monkey in violation of the Endangered Species Act and other federal laws.

Lawson hid the young rhesus macaque monkey under a loose-fitting blouse on a flight from Bangkok, Thailand, to Los Angeles, California, International Airport, pretending she was pregnant, the U.S. Attorneys Office for the Eastern District of Washington said.

Permits are required to possess rhesus monkeys and many other species of animals. Such permits are granted for research, enhancement and conservation purposes. Additionally, transporting such species into the United States requires a customs declaration. Lawson and Ogren had neither.

"These defendants purposely undertook a course of action which could well have endangered many citizens, as well as the life of the animal in question," said U.S. Attorney James McDevitt.

Rhesus monkeys are known to carry viruses and parasites that can be transmitted to humans, said Paul Chang, a U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service agent.

"This particular animal tested negative," he said.

Chang said the monkey has been placed with a rescue center for abandoned primates, "but it could have been living out its life with its family in its native habitat."

Authorities found journals and handwritten notes describing the mother and daughter's attempts to find a monkey small enough to smuggle back to the United States. The journal also described the pair's "acquisition of a small monkey and their experimenting with different medicines to sedate the monkey for their journey home," McDevitt's office said.

Authorities also found photographs of Lawson at two airports and on an airplane in which she is wearing loose-fitting clothing and appears to be pregnant.

"The journal confirms that she and her mother smuggled the monkey into the United States by hiding it under her shirt, pretending she was pregnant in order to get past authorities," the statement from McDevitt's office said.

Co-defendant James Edward Pratt, 34, already has pleaded guilty to misdemeanor charges of possession and transportation of prohibited wildlife. He will be sentenced in January.

Sentencing for Lawson and Ogren is scheduled for March 3, 2009. The smuggling conviction carries a maximum sentence of 20 years in prison, a $250,000 fine and up to three years of court supervision after release. The conspiracy charge carries a maximum of five years in prison, a $250,000 fine and up to three years of court supervision after release.

Flight itineraries show the pair flew from Spokane, Washington, to Bangkok on November 4-5, 2007, with stops in Seattle, Washington, and Inchon, South Korea. They returned on a direct flight from Bangkok to Los Angeles, California, on November 28, 2007.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN)  -- With moments of silence punctuated by somber music, readings of names, and tears, Americans held solemn memorial services Thursday to honor the victims of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.



President Bush comforts a mourner Thursday at the dedication of the Pentagon's 9/11 memorial.



Former Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld returned to the Pentagon to help dedicate a memorial to victims of the attack there.



"Today we renew our vows to never forget how this long struggle began and to never forget those who fell first," said Rumsfeld, who despite his high office helped carry the wounded from the burning building seven years ago.



"We will never forget the way this huge building shook. We will not forget our colleagues and friends who were taken from us and their families.



"And we will not forget what that deadly attack has meant for our nation."  Watch Rumsfeld speak »



Rumsfeld donated hundreds of thousands of dollars of his own money to help build the Pentagon memorial.



President Bush followed Rumsfeld at the lectern.



"On a day when buildings fell, heroes rose," Bush said. "... One of the worst days in America's history saw some of the bravest acts in America's history."  Watch Bush speak »



After the ceremony, participants moved through the memorial, finding and touching the benches honoring loved ones, colleagues and fellow citizens.



Earlier, a bagpiper walked alone across the Pentagon memorial playing "Amazing Grace."  Watch the bagpiper's moving solo »



Seven years ago, al Qaeda terrorists used hijacked airplanes to attack the World Trade Center and the Pentagon -- the twin symbols of America's financial and military might. Another hijacked plane crashed in Pennsylvania. iReport.com: 'I just sat in my car and cried'



At the Pentagon, the ceremony dedicated a memorial to the 184 victims killed when American Airlines Flight 77 struck the building's west wall.



An American flag was raised smartly to the top of a flagpole, then slowly lowered to half-staff, and a band played the national anthem.  Watch and listen to Thursday's ceremonies »



At the White House, President Bush and first lady Laura Bush, along with Vice President Dick Cheney and his wife, Lynne, observed a moment of silence on the South Lawn at 8:46 a.m., the moment when American Airlines Flight 11 struck the north tower of the World Trade Center.



In New York, Mayor Michael Bloomberg introduced a moment of silence also at 8:46 a.m. Throughout the day's ceremonies, he was also to call for moments of silence to mark the time the second plane hit the south tower, the fall of the south tower, and then the fall of the north tower.  Watch an audio slide show about that day »



"We come each year to stand alongside those who loved and lost the most, to bear witness to the day which began like any other and ended as none ever has," Bloomberg said.



Flanked by police officers, firefighters and other officials, Bloomberg quoted what he called an Irish proverb: "Death leaves a heartache no one can heal. Love leaves a memory no one can steal."  Watch Bloomberg honor the victims »



Relatives then began to read the names of the 2,751 victims at the crash site, commonly called ground zero.



Moments of silence were also observed at 9:03 a.m., the moment in 2001 that the south tower of the World Trade Center was struck by United Airlines Flight 175; 9:59 a.m., when that tower fell; and 10:29 a.m., marking the collapse of the north tower.



The New York Stock Exchange observed a moment of silence before its opening bell sounded.



In Shanksville, Pennsylvania, Sen. John McCain, the Republican presidential nominee, spoke for less than two minutes at a ceremony to remember the 40 passengers and crew of United Airlines Flight 93, who perished after the hijacked plane went down in a field there.



Watch Americans remember 9/11 victims »



It is believed that the passengers and crew, aware of the fate of at least some of the other hijacked

***

KABUL, Afghanistan (CNN) -- Ten French soldiers were killed Tuesday in fighting near the Afghan capital of Kabul after 100 insurgents attacked a patrol, authorities said.



French soldiers patrol in Afghanistan in May 2008.



French and NATO authorities confirmed the deaths and said 21 other soldiers were wounded in the fighting in the Sarobi area in Kabul province, about 30 miles northeast of the capital.



The clashes began late Monday afternoon and continued into Tuesday, when the casualties occurred, French officials said.



French President Nicolas Sarkozy said his "determination is intact" to continue "this battle against terrorism for democracy and liberty."



"The cause is just. It is an honor for France and its armies to defend them," said Sarkozy, who will travel Tuesday night to Afghanistan, the Defense Ministry said.



Last month, nine U.S. soldiers were killed in fighting in eastern Afghanistan.



U.S., British, Canadian and Dutch troops have been engaged in much of the combat in Afghanistan. The United States has been urging other countries in the NATO-led alliance to help ease the burdens of those troops on the front lines.



About 1,670 French troops serve in Afghanistan under NATO's International Security Assistance Force, according to ISAF's Web site. Before this incident, a total of 12 French troops had died in several incidents during the Afghan war, mostly in combat.



As for the latest fighting, NATO said the initial patrol -- which included Afghan forces -- had been "reinforced with quick reaction forces, close air support and mobile medical teams." It said "a large number of insurgents were killed."



Gen. Zahir Azimi, an Afghan Defense Ministry spokesman, said Tuesday that Afghan army forces rushed to the battle scene soon after the attack took place.



He said 27 militants were killed and 14 were wounded in the fighting, and 13 of the bodies were recovered by the Afghan army. He said one of the dead militants was identified as a Pakistani national.



The Taliban posted a Web statement saying its forces attacked an "American" convoy, killing 20 soldiers and destroying five military tanks. It also said foreign forces later Tuesday bombarded the region and killed five Taliban militants and several civilians.



The fighting came after authorities tightened security on Monday in anticipation of militant attacks on the country's Independence Day.



Several suicide bombers struck an American base about 12 miles from the border with Pakistan in Khost province on Tuesday, but U.S. and Afghan forces repelled the onslaught.



Seven insurgents were killed in the attack on Forward Operating Base Salerno, including three suicide bombers who blew themselves up after forces from the base encountered them more than 3,000 feet from the base, ISAF said in a statement.



U.S. and Afghan troops noticed the approaching militants by their "special behavior," the spokesman said. Helicopters flew in to attack them, the force said.



ISAF said it suffered no casualties.



Gov. Arsallah Jamal of Khost province said four commandos -- presumably Afghans -- were wounded when the militants struck late Monday.



A Taliban spokesman, Zabiullah Mujahid, said 15 suicide bombers with small arms and machine guns entered the base and inflicted heavy casualties -- claims that the NATO-led force and Khost governor dismissed.



That attack came after a suicide car bombing outside the same base killed 10 Afghan civilians and wounded 13 others Monday, the U.S. military said. Two other would-be bombers were killed before they could carry out attacks, Jamal said.



Afghan forces stopped a second would-be car bomb near the base, performed a controlled detonation and detained a suspect, the NATO-led force said.



This comes as a source from the Afghan Defense Ministry, who declined to be named, confirmed that Pakistani army chief Gen. Ashfaq Parvez Kayani arrived in Kabul on Tuesday morning to meet with Afghan and NATO military officials.



In southern Afghanistan, a suicide bomber struck a Canadian foot patrol on Tuesday in the Kandahar province district of Panjwayee, local police said.



The bomber and an Afghan interpreter for NATO forces were killed and a NATO soldier and a child were wounded, police said.



The attack

***

(CNN) -- Switzerland defender Philippe Senderos is in talks to leave Arsenal and join English Premier League rivals Everton, according to the Liverpool-based side.



Philippe Senderos is seeking to leave Arsenal to keep his World Cup hopes alive.



The 24-year-old has been out of favor with the London club for the past year or so, and spent last season on loan with Italy's AC Milan.



The center-back made only 15 appearances in his injury-hit stint with the Rossoneri, and returned to Arsenal where he has a year left on his contract.



Everton chairman Bill Kenwright confirmed that talks were underway, but said that no deal had been done despite an earlier claim by the Swiss Football Federation.



"We have been negotiating with Arsenal for the transfer of Philippe. Nothing has been concluded yet but talks are on going," Kenwright told Everton's official Web site on Tuesday.



Everton face the possible departure of England defender Joleon Lescott, the subject of two bids from big-spending EPL rivals Manchester City.  Transfer gossip: City to bid again for Lescott.



Manager David Moyes has rejected both offers and is determined to keep the player, who has been ruled out of recent pre-season friendly action due to a hip injury picked up on the tour of the United States.



Moyes needs cover for injured center-back Phil Jagielka, who is not expected to return to action until November.



The Swiss Football Federation had said on its official Web site on Monday that Senderos had agreed to join Everton because he needed regular first-team action ahead of next year's World Cup finals in South Africa.



Switzerland are level on points with Greece at the top of Group Two after six of 10 games, with the winner qualifying directly and the runner-up hoping to go into one of the four play-offs.



Senderos joined Arsenal in the summer of 2003 from Swiss club Servette, and established himself in the first team alongside Kolo Toure when regular Sol Campbell was injured.



However, he missed the 2006 Champions League final defeat by Barcelona due to his own injury, with England defender Campbell returning in his place to score the opening goal of the 2-1 reverse.



Senderos missed the start of the 2006-07 season after suffering a shoulder problem at the World Cup finals, and subsequently struggled to break back into the Arsenal team.



Arsenal boss Arsene Wenger has a wealth of central defensive resources despite selling Toure to City last month, having brought in Belgium international Thomas Vermaelen from Ajax in June.



William Gallas, Johan Djourou, Mikael Silvestre and Alex Song are also competing for first-team places.

***

(CNN) -- Liverpool manager Rafael Benitez insists Fernando Torres is happy at the English Premier League club after Manchester City were linked with a multi-million dollar bid for the Spain striker.





Torres has scored 18 goals in 22 league games for Liverpool this season but will miss the rest of the campaign after having surgery on a knee injury, meaning the 26-year-old faces a race to be fit for Spain's opening game in the World Cup against Switzerland on June 16.





City spent over $100 million in the transfer market before the start of this season and are currently battling for fourth spot in the league, which would guarantee a lucrative Champions League place.





Liverpool, meanwhile, sit in seventh place and look set to miss out on qualification for the money-spinning tournament. It has led to speculation that Torres could be top of City's wanted list once the season ends.





City's Italian manager Roberto Mancini told reporters: "We are a top team and I think all the top teams are interested in Torres but sometimes it depends on the player because they want to play in the Champions League.





"For me, he is with Carlos [Tevez], [Wayne] Rooney, [Lionel] Messi, [Zlatan] Ibrahimovic, [Cristiano] Ronaldo as the best in Europe. Fernando is a fantastic striker; all the teams in Europe would like him."





The City manager did admit a successful pursuit of Torres may only come about if the club can secure Champions League football next season: "If we don't get into the fourth position I think it will be difficult," he said.





Liverpool were knocked out of Champions League in the group stages but have progressed to the semifinal of the Europa League against Atletico Madrid. They lost the first leg 1-0 in the Spanish capital on Thursday.





After the game Benitez dismissed the possibility of Torres leaving the club. He told reporters: "Torres is happy. The thing he's thinking about now is being ready as soon as possible and that's it. From the beginning, he's said he's been very happy at Anfield.





"We have said repeatedly that Fernando is not for sale and he still has three years of his contract remaining, so how can they sign a player who does not wish to leave?"

***

Rio De Janeiro (CNN) -- The death toll from devastating flooding in Brazil continued to climb Tuesday, surpassing 700, the government said.





A helicopter rescued 18 people from a city in Brazil's Rio de Janeiro state after rains caused devastating flooding and mudslides in the mountainous region.





Four children -- including a 30-day-old baby, were among those lifted to safety Monday. The Air Force said one of them -- 6-year-old Guilherme Carvalho -- summed up the feelings of the group with a simple exclamation: "Relief!"





But rescuers have not been able to reach some hard-hit areas, and many more people are feared dead. Forecasters predict rain will continue for several days in areas already submerged in water.





The death toll from flooding in Rio de Janeiro state has climbed to 710, according to government figures released Tuesday. And thousands are homeless across the state.





Other states in the South American country have also seen heavy rainfall. Last week, authorities in neighboring Sao Paulo state said 24 people had been killed by flooding.





In Rio de Janeiro state, flooding and mudslides turned the once-picturesque tourist town of Teresopolis into a wasteland. Bodies and belongings remained strewn amongst fallen boulders Monday as family members searched for loved ones in the rubble.





Outside a makeshift morgue in Teresopolis -- where the government said at least 292 people had died in flooding -- a crowd of people waited for their turn to identify loved ones.





Marco Antonio Siqueira Costa said the last time he saw his brother, sister-in-law and niece was a few days ago, before mud buried their house.





"I think that last meeting was God's way of granting us a farewell," he said.





Residents in the city donned masks and helped clean streets or deliver first aid. Others combed the city searching desperately for missing loved ones.





Meanwhile, experts and officials tried to pinpoint what caused the catastrophe.





"Combine a weather event and environmental irresponsibility and the sum equals a tragedy," said Carlos Minc, Rio de Janeiro's environment minister.





Minc said he wants to stop construction of homes in high-risk areas, such as river banks or steep mountain slopes -- a practice that he said was encouraged by previous governments. He pointed to Nova Friburgo -- the hardest-hit city, according to government figures, which list 335 deaths due to flooding there.





"We are monitoring river levels, but it isn't enough. In Nova Friburgo, for example, we had warned six hours in advance that the river was overflowing, but...there is no emergency plan or drills with the population so they know what to do in a situation like this," he said.





Brazilian authorities have been criticized for a lack of disaster planning, and for allowing people to build homes in areas known to become treacherous in the rainy season.





They are under increasing pressure to show a strong response. Brazil is scheduled to host the World Cup in 2014 and the Olympics in 2016.





CNN's Helena de Moura, Fabiana Frayssinet and Nelson Quinones contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- In trendy neighborhoods of Tokyo customers are lining up for vitamin injections that promise to improve health and beauty.



These intravenous vitamin "drips" are part of the latest quick-fix, health fad catching on in Japan: the IV cafe.



Each drip pack contains saline solution and specific vitamins and minerals to target a particular health ailment or beauty concern.



"I used to take vitamin supplements, but changed to the IV drip because I feel the effects more quickly," a 20-something woman at the Tenteki 10 Café told CNN. She said she receives specific injections to get better skin, burn fat and boost her energy.



There are 10 different varieties to choose from at Tenteki. The "orange" variety touts anti-aging properties, loaded with antioxidants. The "placenta pack" is said to help rejuvenate and ease muscle stiffness.



Prices range from $20 to $30 per injection, and nurses see about 30 to 40 people each day. Their most common patients are Japanese businessmen who work in the same office building.



"I see a lot of businessmen who say they don't have time to sleep. They can't take a break from working and get the vitamin drip for an extra kick of energy," a Tenteki nurse told CNN.



"Blue" is the most requested vitamin pack among these men: a concoction of B1 and vitamin E that claims to offer relief from exhaustion.



Registered nurses and doctors administer the drips at Tenteki, but there's no conclusive medical evidence to back up the health claims.



Many nutritionists actually caution against using injectable vitamin supplements because the quantities are not regulated.



"More is not necessarily better...some vitamins and minerals can be toxic in high doses," particularly the fat-soluble ones which the body stores like Vitamins A, D, E and K, explained Claire Williamson, Nutrition Scientist at the British Nutrition Foundation.



In Europe and the United States vitamin shots are popular among celebrities with hectic lifestyles and little time to sleep, particularly vitamin B 12.



Former Spice Girl Geri Halliwell and singer Robbie Williams have both confirmed they've used the shots as part of their diets to maintain stamina during tours.



Dermatological injections of Vitamin C are also popular among women hoping to keep their skin looking young. Former supermodel Cindy Crawford has admitted using such injections to keep her skin firm and wrinkle-free.



According to Williamson, it does not matter if supplements are injected into the vein or into the skin. "At the end of the day it will go into the blood stream," she said.



Most of these nutrients we can get sufficient from foods, nutrients tend to be better absorbed by the body if they are consumed in foods."

***

(CNN) -- A federal grand jury indicted a man arrested last week in connection with a mysterious case of exposure to the deadly biological agent ricin, prosecutors said.



Authorities found ricin, weapons and an anarchist manual in Roger Von Bergendorff's Nevada hotel room.



Roger Von Bergendorff, 57, was indicted on charges of possession of a biological toxin, possession of unregistered firearms and possession of firearms not identified by serial number, said Natalie Collins, a spokeswoman for the U.S. attorney's office in Las Vegas, Nevada.



Bergendorff was hospitalized for two months with suspected ricin poisoning, and was discharged before his arrest.



His initial court appearance was last week, Collins said, and he did not enter a plea. An arraignment is scheduled for May 2.



Bergendorff was hospitalized in February complaining of breathing difficulties. Two weeks later, Thomas Tholen, a cousin who went to Bergendorff's Las Vegas hotel room to recover his belongings, discovered what turned out to be ricin.



Authorities also said a search of the room found four guns, the book "Anarchist's Cookbook," a collection of instructions on poisons and other dangerous recipes and castor beans, syringes and beakers. Ricin is extracted from ground-up castor beans.



Tholen was charged earlier in April with failing to report the commission of a crime. A federal grand jury indicted him for allegedly concealing the knowledge that production and possession of a biological agent -- a felony -- was being committed.



Bergendorff previously lived in Tholen's home in Riverton, Utah, just south of Salt Lake City. After the ricin was discovered, the FBI searched that home as well as storage units Bergendorff used in Utah.



Authorities said FBI agents searching the storage units found castor beans, chemicals used in the production of ricin, a respirator, filters, laboratory glassware, syringes and a notebook on ricin production.



If convicted as charged, Bergendorff would face a sentence of up to 30 years in prison. E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- The "best job in the world" contest has generated huge interest around the globe, but the jury is out on whether that will translate into more tourism dollars for Queensland, Australia.



Ben Southall will move into a three-bedroom beach home overlooking the Great Barrier Reef.



"That's the million dollar question," said Anthony Hayes, CEO of Tourism Quensland, which sponsored the contest.



"Quite frankly you can have $150 million worth of publicity, but if it doesn't generate sales you've really wasted your time on a pretty story."



A British man beat 34,000 other applicants Wednesday to win the right to stroll the white sands of a tropical island in Queensland, Australia, file weekly reports online to a global audience and earn a cool $100,000.  Watch as lucky winner is revealed »



For the winner, Ben Southall, the six-month assignment is a far cry from his old job as a fundraiser.



"I love discovering new places," Southall said in his hyperkinetic minute-long application video for the position.



"Last year, I drove all around Africa, I crossed deserts, climbed mountains, run marathons, bungee jump, mountain-bike, scuba-dive and snorkel everywhere because I'm practically a fish myself."



Oh, and he rode an ostrich.



He will move into a three-bedroom beach home overlooking the tropical island's Great Barrier Reef. For six months, he will feed the fish, clean the pool and send weekly blog and video reports on what is happening on the island.



Other benefits include free return airfares from their nearest capital city, transport on the island, computer and camera gear and travel to other islands.



The applicants used various attempts to woo their prospective employer, from wandering round a chilly city center in a bikini, to making their application in the form of a street musical, complete with chorus singers.



Sixteen finalists were flown in to Hamilton Island on Monday for interviews with a four-person panel. The job starts July 1.



The "world's best job" campaign was 18 months in the making as a way to lure more tourism to the 600 islands near the Great Barrier Reef.



"The starting point was how do we get the message out there ... that they're open for business and we want people to come and visit," Hayes said. "The idea of this is to protect jobs throughout our regional parts of Queensland."

***

Editor's note: CNN affiliates report on where job seekers are finding work across the country and how those looking for employment are coping with the situation.



Tennessee's Williamson County Public Library in Franklin is trying to improve computer skills of older job seekers.



(CNN) -- An Ohio company transforming its business model will build its headquarters in the town of Greenville.



LAH Development will become a wind turbine manufacturer and installer after years of constructing commercial buildings.



The company's new building is expected to cost $1 million, CNN affiliate WHIO-TV in Dayton reported. The state of Ohio has granted the company a tax credit of almost $400,000 to help create jobs. The company expects to hire 100 new employees. iReport.com: Share your job hunt story



Under an agreement with the state, the company is required to operate at the new site for 12 years. Read the full report on WHIO



Northeast: Grant money used to train veterans



Pennsylvania is providing $311,000 to train 80 unemployed veterans in the field of welding.



The state's Department of Labor and Industry grant will be used to train the former military members for 96 hours in beginner welding over an eight-week period.



"As more troops return home after tours of duty, it's important that we provide tools and resources to help them reintegrate into civilian life," Allegheny County Executive Dan Onorato told WPXI-TV in Pittsburgh. Read the full report on WPXI



South: Library to teach computer skills to job seekers



In Franklin, Tennessee, the county library is trying to help older job seekers by expanding its computer course offerings.



Teachers will instruct students on how to use social networking sites such as Facebook and LinkedIn to search for jobs as well as make sure they have basic skills.



"If you don't know those skills and you can't use them readily, it makes everything else so much harder," said Janice Keck, director of the Williamson County Public Library, told WSMV-TV in Nashville, Tennessee. Read the full report on WSMV



Midwest: Indiana business to add 125 positions



An Indianapolis, Indiana, life science firm is more than doubling the size of its staff.



Biostorage provides biomaterials storage and distribution for companies around the world, according to WTHR-TV in Indianapolis.



"Ninety percent of our clients are actually outside Indiana," John Mills of Biostorage Technologies told the station. "So we are earning Indiana dollars from companies outside Indiana."



The current staff has 70 people; Biostorage plans to add 125 more employees. Read the full report on WTHR



Around the nation



Quintiles Transnational Corp. is moving its world headquarters to the Research Triangle Park near Raleigh, North Carolina, News 14 Carolina reports.



A new Wal-Mart in Owasso, Oklahoma, is expected to hire 100 people, Tulsa's KOTV-TV reports.

***

New York (CNN) -- South Carolina's first lady, Jenny Sanford, said Monday that writing her much-anticipated memoir of her husband's affair was a "cathartic" and "cleansing" experience.



In an interview on CNN's "Larry King Live," Sanford called "Staying True" -- which hit bookstores Friday -- "an honest account of the values I hold dear."



It was her husband Gov. Mark Sanford's loss of values that she blames on his much-publicized affair with an Argentine woman that was exposed by reporters after he disappeared for several days last summer. Staffers said he was hiking the Appalachian Trail, but he later admitted he was actually visiting his mistress in Argentina.



"It saddens me because I believed in him and a number of people believed in him," Jenny Sanford said Monday.



"I still believe he was a good person. ... Somewhere along the lines, he got off track," she said. "He can get back on track, but it's too late for the marriage."



Jenny Sanford, who filed for divorce in December, said the divorce could be final as early as the end of this month.



She said she found out about the affair in January 2009 when she discovered a letter her husband had written to his mistress.



"It was awful," she said. "I literally was in shock. My stomach felt gut-punched."



She said there had been warning signs, but she "never expected anything like this."



"I felt in some respects that we had lost something that we would never get back," even as she initially considered staying with him, she said.



"Nobody takes a 20-year marriage and decides in [a] snap minute to throw it away," she said. "I came to the decision very prayerfully and carefully over a number of months."



Sanford, 47, moved out of the governor's mansion with their four boys in June. She has said through the entire ordeal that her priority is her children.



"The kids are resilient, and we're back at home settling into a new, normal routine," she said of her sons, ages 11-17. "I feel like they're going to do great."



Asked whether she knows whether her husband is still seeing the Argentine woman, Jenny Sanford says she doesn't know and doesn't want to ask.



"I'm just moving on," she said. "I want to stay happy and positive and raise the kids to the best of my ability."

***

MALE, Maldives (CNN) -- The new president of the Maldives wants to relocate -- his entire country.

Much of Male, capital of the Maldives, was flooded following the 2004 tsunami.

Mohamed "Anni" Nasheed, a former political prisoner, was sworn in Tuesday after he unseated Asia's longest-serving leader in the country's first multi-party elections two weeks ago. He inherits an island nation with several problems.

Foremost among them: the very likely possibility that the Maldives will sink under water if the current pace of climate change keeps raising sea levels.

The Maldives is an archipelago of almost 1,200 coral islands located south-southwest of India. Most of the islands lie just 4.9 feet (1.5 meters) above sea level.

The United Nations' Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has forecast a rise in sea levels of at least 7.1 inches (18 cm) by the end of the century.

The island was badly hit by the December 2004 tsunami, which killed an estimated 273,800 people and left thousands missing across Asia and Africa.

In the Maldives itself, at least 82 people were killed and 26 unaccounted for from a population just over 270,000, according to the Maldives Disaster Management Center. Sixty-nine islands were completely flooded and a further 30 islands half flooded.

The capital of Male was also flooded, although sea walls protected it from further devastation. The government has calculated that creating a similar barrier around the rest of the country would cost too much.  Watch Maldives president vow to save the nation. Â»

And so the tourist nation, which has white sandy beaches that lure well-heeled Westerners, wants to set aside some of the $1 billion a year it receives from tourism and spend that money on buying a new homeland.

"We will invest in land," Nasheed said. "We do not want to end up in refugee tents if the worst happens."

Nasheed's government has said that it has broached the idea with several countries and found them to be "receptive."

Lands owned by Sri Lanka and India are possibilities because the countries have similar cultures, cuisine and climate as the Maldives. Australia is also being considered because of the vast unoccupied land it owns.

Climate change is not the only challenge the new president will have to tackle, though. Other thorny issues include rising unemployment, corruption and a staggering drug epidemic.

By some estimates, one of every three Maldivian youth uses drugs.

Maldivians also worry that their tiny secular nation of 370,000 Muslims could fall prey to the reach of Islamic radicals. A bombing in Male, attributed to Islamic extremists, wounded 12 tourists in September 2007.

"We have made many pledges," Nasheed said in his inaugural address. "The citizens gave their majority vote to us to implement these."

Nasheed said he will work to bring affordable housing and medical care for everyone. Twenty-one percent of the population lives below the poverty line.

Nasheed, a 41-year-old one-time journalist, was among the fiercest critics of former President Maumoon Abdul Gayoom, who came to power in 1978 and ruled the Maldives for 30 years. He won the six previous elections as the only candidate on the ballot.

Nasheed contended that Gayoom ruled with an iron fist, crushing dissent, amassing wealth and stacking his administration with friends and relatives.

Gayoom's critics say his government enforced a system of 'apartheid' tourism that banned most Maldivians from nearly 90 luxury resorts.

Shortly before election day, an auditors' report said that millions of dollars were improperly accounted for by Gayoom's government. He disputed the findings.

Nasheed was arrested several times in the last 15 years and held as a political prisoner.

Five candidates challenged Gayoom for the presidency in elections held on October 9.

Gayoom said he needed a seventh five-year term to see through the reforms he put in place. But critics said Gayoom instituted democratic reforms -- and legalized political parties -- only after violent protests in 2004 and 2005.

Nasheed and Gayoom ended up in a runoff --

***

(CNN) -- A small plane startled shoppers but caused no injuries or damage Tuesday when it made an emergency landing in the parking lot of a New Jersey shopping mall.



The plane's pilot reported a "rough-running engine" before landing Tuesday, an FAA spokeswoman says.



The plane landed around noon at the Rockaway Townsquare Mall, according to Greg Poff, an official with Rockaway Township, about 25 miles northwest of Newark, New Jersey.



Neither of the two people aboard the Cessna 172 was hurt, Poff said.



Footage from the scene showed the plane resting nose down in a part of the parking lot near JCPenney.



Mall employee Jennifer Nelson was relieved to hear that no one was hurt, and kept her sense of humor about the novelty of the incident.



The optician at Pearle Vision did not see the landing, but heard about it when a patient came in and told her a plane was in the parking lot. At first she thought the patient was kidding.



"I did, because, who would think? It's craziness," she said.



The unusual excitement near her store did inspire one idea.



"We'll have to have a plane crash special on eyeglasses," she said with a laugh.



Lori Magie, who works at the JCPenney department store, said that when she heard from others that a plane had landed in the lot, her first thought was to check on her car.



"When I was told, I could not believe there would be an accident like that around here," she said. iReport: Watch video shot at the scene of the parking-lot landing



The pilot of the plane reported a "rough-running engine" before the aircraft landed in the parking lot, according to Federal Aviation Administration spokeswoman Arlene Salac.



One of the plane's wheels apparently hit a tree during the landing, said Les Morris, a spokesman for Simon Property Group, which owns the mall.



FAA records indicate that the plane is registered to an aircraft charter company called Genesus One, based in Paramus, New Jersey.

***

(CNN) -- Greek physician Hippocrates was the first to use the words "carcinos" and "carcinoma" in 400 BC to describe tumors, which led to the term "cancer" being coined.



Greek physician Hippocrates was the first to use the words "carcinos" and "carcinoma" to describe tumors, which led to the term 'cancer."



Since his day, medical advances in the treatment of cancer have evolved significantly. Below we chart some of the key moments in the battle against cancer.



1890 -- William Stewart Halsted, the first professor of surgery at Johns Hopkins, Harvard, and Yale, performs the first mastectomy to treat breast cancer.



1895 -- Wilhelm Conrad Röntgen discovers X-ray radiation, which makes the detection of tumors in the body much easier and non-invasive. Later in 1899, Tage Anton Ultimus Sjogren becomes the first person to successfully treat cancer with X-rays.



1896 -- Removal of the ovaries is performed for the first time to treat breast cancer.



1898 -- Marie and Pierre Curie discover radium and later use it to treat tumors.



1900 --Thor Stenbeck cures a patient with skin cancer using small doses of daily radiation therapy. This technique is later referred to as fractionated radiation therapy.



1900s -- Dr. George Papanicolaou invents the Pap smear test after his findings suggest that vaginal cell smears reveal the presence of cancer.



1943 -- The first electron linear accelerator is designed for radiation therapy. Today, it is widely used for treatment of cancer.



Late 1960s -- Lars Leksell develops the Gamma Knife -- a radiosurgical tool that uses a high dose of radiation to eradicate cancerous cells.



1964 -- The Epstein-Barr virus is linked to human cancer for the first time.



1974 -- Dr. Lawrence Einhorn finds a cure for advanced testicular cancer. This changes the cure rate from 5 percent to 60 percent.



1975 -- Scientists Georges Kohler and Cesar Milstein develop tailor-made antibodies in large quantities in a laboratory, leading to ways of attacking cancer and diagnosing disease. They go on to win the Nobel Prize in 1984.



1976 -- Michael Bishop and Harold Varmus discover oncogene, a gene that, when mutated or expressed at high levels, helps turn a normal cell into a cancer cell. They win the 1989 Nobel Prize.



1980s -- Anti-nausea drugs are developed to suppress the side effects of chemotherapy.



1991 -- The U.S. Human Genome project begins. The first gene transfers in humans also take place in that same year.



1998 -- Tamoxifen, a drug that helps reduce the risks of breast cancer by half in women is approved for wide use by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA).



2004 -- The FDA approves Avastin, a monoclonal antibody that restricts tumor growth by blocking the formation of new blood vessels for the treatment of metastatic cancer.



2007 -- The FDA approves Nexavar, an oral inhibitor for liver cancer. This is the only drug approved for liver cancer.



2008 -- German scientist Harald zur Hausen wins a Nobel Prize for his research that found that oncogenic human papilloma virus, or HPV, causes cervical cancer, the second most common cancer among women. He made the discovery in the early 1980s.



Sources: Emory University, Cure Today, Britannia.com



CNN intern Priyanka Deladia contributed to this report

***

GUANTANAMO BAY, Cuba (CNN)  -- Families of September 11 victims visiting Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, on Thursday urged the Obama administration to drop plans to close the facility and to restart terror trials there.



A guard talks with a detainee at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, earlier this year.



"I am opposed to the closing of this facility because of political reasons," said Gordon Haberman whose daughter, Andrea, was killed when terrorist planes struck the World Trade Center. "I believe that the current administration spoke too quickly on this."



Haberman said he thinks President Obama should not insist on carrying out his campaign pledge to shutter the detention facility.



Haberman was one of nine people visiting Guantanamo this week who lost loved ones in the September 11 attacks. He and the others had the opportunity to observe pre-trial hearings for some suspects on Wednesday and Thursday.



Several were critical of Obama's decision to suspend military commissions at Guantanamo Bay while the administration reviews what to do with each detainee.



"Our government's current executive order to halt the military commissions makes us foolish and weak, and invites more attacks," said Melissa Long, whose boyfriend was a first responder killed in New York. "What is fair and just is to continue the military commissions and punish those who have committed acts of terrorism against Americans, period."



Long later married a man who lost his parents when their plane slammed into the Pentagon on that fateful day.



Brian Long acknowledged that some of the detainees may have gone through some inhumane treatment through the years, but he thinks they are being well taken care of now. "The only injustice is being orchestrated by our leader by making decisions about something he knew nothing about," Long said.



Other September 11 families have visited Guantanamo Bay for previous hearings and voiced support for using the facility for terror trials. The government uses a random process to select names of family members invited to observe.



The family members said they think Guantanamo detainees have been provided with good attorneys, who, in many cases, are paired with clients who don't want their help.



Some of that was on display at a hearing Thursday for five detainees charged with orchestrating the September 11 attacks, including Khalid Sheik Mohammed. Mohammed and fellow prisoner Ramzi Binalshibh refused to come to the proceeding, after being told no detainees would be allowed to make statements.



Three others did show up. But one, Mustafa al-Hawsawi, left quickly because he was not allowed to talk to the judge about problems he said he was having with one of his military lawyers.



All five September 11 suspects want to act as their own attorneys. Thursday's hearing focused on discussions about the competence of al-Hawsawi and Binalshibh to stand trial and represent themselves.



Mohammed and two others have been granted permission to defend themselves.

***

(CNN) -- Chelsea moved a step closer to breaking Manchester United's stranglehold on the English Premier League title with a controversial 1-0 victory at home to Bolton Wanderers on Tuesday night.





Nicolas Anelka headed the only goal against his former club just before halftime to put the London side four points clear of three-time defending champions United with four matches to play.





Third-placed Arsenal can leapfrog United into second place with victory over London rivals Tottenham on Wednesday and be three points adrift of Chelsea.





Bolton, just five points above the relegation zone, were angry after not being awarded a penalty in each half for alleged handball by Didier Drogba and John Terry -- but were lucky not to concede more goals as Chelsea dominated late in the match.





"They weren't claims for a penalty," Bolton boss Owen Coyle told match broadcaster ESPN. "They were stonewall penalties. I knew it at the time.





"Didier Drogba is a world-class player, but looking at this replay he could be a world-class volleyball player.





"I've asked the linesman about [the Terry incident] after the game but he's said it hit his shoulder. He needs to take another look at that."





Chelsea boss Carlo Ancelotti chose not to comment on the incidents.





"It is not my job to judge the work of the officials," the Italian said. "It is a difficult job, sometimes they make the right decisions, sometimes they make bad decisions.





"We have to maintain this level. We are doing well, we are very focused and in a very good position, but we have a very difficult game on Saturday against Tottenham and we have to do our best to win that game."





Chelsea were less impressive in the first half, and it took until the 43rd minute before France striker Anelka broke the deadlock with a close-range header from Drogba's left-wing cross for his first goal since January.





Bolton striker Kevin Davies had told reporters before the match that his former teammate Anelka was unhappy playing with Drogba, but the duo combined well to end Wanderers' stubborn resistance.





The recalled Salomon Kalou should have made it 2-0 in the 54th minute but goalkeeper Jussi Jaaskelainen blocked the Ivory Coast forward's shot with his legs.





Davies was booked for a crude tackle on Jon Obi Mikel in the 77th minute, and Frank Lampard hit the post soon after with a fierce low shot after a clever dummy by Kalou's replacement Joe Cole.





England midfielder Cole gave Chelsea fresh impetus, with Michael Ballack heading his cross tamely at Jaaskelainen.





Terry drove a shot just wide from a corner but soon after was beaten in the air at the other end by Bolton substitute Johan Elmander -- however, the Swede's header went wide.





Cole should have doubled the lead in injury-time, but somehow stumbled over Yuri Zhirkov's low cross when it seemed easier to score.





Meanwhile, Inter Milan moved into the final of the Italian Cup with a 1-0 victory away to Fiorentina on Tuesday night, winning 2-0 on aggregate.





Cameroon striker Samuel Eto'o scored the only goal in the 57th minute to keep Jose Mourinho's team in the hunt for three trophies this season.





The Champions League semifinalists, who drew 2-2 with Fiorentina at the weekend, will face either new Serie A leaders Roma or Udinese in the title match.





Also on Tuesday, Cagliari sacked coach Massimiliano Allegri after the Sardinian team's slump to 12th in the Italian top flight following a haul of just two points from nine matches.





Allegri was voted Serie A coach of the year by his peers for guiding Cagliari to ninth place last season, but became the 16th to be dismissed this campaign.

***

(CNN) -- The space shuttle Discovery landed in California on Friday evening after bad weather near Kennedy Space Center forced it to wave off a landing in Florida.



Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base after a 13-day mission to the international space station.



"Welcome home Discovery," mission control said after the shuttle landed. "Congratulations on an extremely successful mission, stepping up science to a new level on the international space station."



The shuttle touched down at 8:53 p.m. ET at Edwards Air Force Base in the Mojave Desert, where NASA described the weather as "pristine."



This may be the last California shuttle landing, because there are only six missions remaining on the NASA schedule, unless Congress gives the space agency more money.



Flight controllers prefer landings at Kennedy Space Center because of cost and schedule.



A California landing adds a week to the turnaround time before the shuttle can be ready for another mission. NASA has estimated it costs about $1.7 million to bring a shuttle home to Kennedy Space Center from California. It rides cross-country piggy-back on a Boeing 747.



Discovery was initially scheduled to return to Earth on Thursday, but poor weather in central Florida forced a delay.  Watch the shuttle land in California »



Both Florida landing opportunities Friday were canceled by "a very deep moisture system that descended over the Florida spaceport," a NASA spokesman said.



The seven astronauts are wrapping up a 13-day mission to the international space station, where the crew made repairs and delivered supplies.



The crew executed three spacewalks and dropped off the Combined Operational Load Bearing External Resistance Treadmill, or COLBERT treadmill, named after comedian Stephen Colbert.



Colbert won an online poll conducted by NASA to name the newest space station compartment. Instead, Colbert and the space agency worked together to give the moniker to the treadmill. The new compartment was given the name Tranquility.



While in space, mission specialists Danny Olivas and Christer Fuglesang installed an ammonia tank on the international space station. The depleted tank assembly is being returned to Earth in the shuttle's cargo bay.



The tank is part of a cooling system that cycles 600 pounds of ammonia through the space station to "get rid of excess heat generated by the station's systems," NASA said.



Astronaut Nicole Stott remained at the space station as a flight engineer, replacing astronaut Timothy Kopra, who returned home aboard Discovery as a mission specialist, according to NASA's Web site.



Another space icon is also coming home aboard the shuttle -- Buzz Lightyear.



The 12-inch Disney/Pixar action figure has been aboard the space station for more than a year, according to NASA.



The action figure went into space aboard Discovery in May 2008 as part of a joint initiative between Disney and NASA to encourage students to study math, science and technology.



Weather and technical problems delayed Discovery's launch three times before the mission began.

***

STANFORD, California (CNN) -- Students and professors at Stanford University are protesting Donald Rumsfeld's appointment to a campus think tank, saying the former defense secretary does not uphold the "ethical values" of the school.



Donald Rumsfeld has been appointed to the Hoover Institution, a think tank at Stanford University.



Shortly after Rumsfeld's appointment was announced in September, professor Pamela Lee began an online petition from faculty members opposed to bringing him to the Hoover Institution.



Since then, the petition has gained more than 3,500 signatures, including nearly 300 faculty members from such diverse disciplines as law, computer science, electrical engineering and drama.



"We view the appointment as fundamentally incompatible with the ethical values of truthfulness, tolerance, disinterested inquiry, respect for national and international laws, and care for the opinions, property and lives of others to which Stanford is inalienably committed," the petition reads.



"As word of the letter got out, my inbox was flooded with messages from professors, students, staff and alumni asking to sign on," said Lee, a professor of art history.



The petition's signers include hundreds of Stanford students in addition to the faculty.



"He's a war criminal," said Sam Dubal, one petitioner, who also created a Facebook group called "Rumsfeld -- You Are Not Welcome at Stanford!"



"He's not worthy as an established member of Stanford," Dubal said.



Despite the protests, school officials say that it is well within the Hoover Institution's right to appoint Rumsfeld.



"There are lots of temporary appointments made around the university," said Jeff Wachtel, special assistant to Stanford president John Hennessy. "Departments have the right to invite people to campus in a variety of capacities."



Rumsfeld's one-year appointment as Distinguished Visiting Fellow places him on a task force on terrorism and ideology. He will be joined by current Hoover Fellow George Schultz, secretary of state under Ronald Reagan.



Despite being housed in a tower on the center of campus, Hoover has only loose affiliation with the university. Meanwhile, supporters of Rumsfeld's appointment say that his presence on campus will help foster academic dialogue and fuel positive political discourse.



The outcry against Rumsfeld follows last April's attempt by President Bush to visit campus. Bush planned to meet with Fellows at the Hoover Institution but was blocked by protesters. His meeting was later moved to Schultz's nearby house.



"Many of us believe that Donald Rumsfeld, in his role as secretary of defense, has behaved in ways that are dishonorable, disgraceful and always disingenuous," said Dr. Philip Zimbardo, professor emeritus of psychology.



"Rumsfeld authorized a list of interrogation methods that violated the Geneva Convention and the Convention against Torture used on detainees at Guantanamo Bay ... and Iraq's Abu Ghraib Prison," said Zimbardo, whose most recent book, "The Lucifer Effect," finds that given the right "situational" influences, anyone can be made to participate in violent and depraved acts.



Lee said her position does not discourage debate or public exchange of ideas.



"Let me stress that the petition objects to Rumsfeld's appointment as Distinguished Visiting Fellow, an appointment we find without merit," Lee said. "In fact, there is nothing in the language of the petition that says Mr. Rumsfeld is forbidden to air his views at Stanford or is not welcome for a public lecture or open forum."



But not everyone disagrees with the appointment.



"Personally I disagree with his politics," said Brett Hammon, a political science major. "But at the same time, I'm not sure I think it would be prudent for the university to refuse hiring him just because most students disagree with his politics. I know I would hate it if I went to school in Texas and the university refused to hire a prominent liberal politician just because most of the student body was conservative." E-mail to a friend

***

London (CNN) -- Three one-time insiders at the defunct News of the World tabloid testified Monday before a British government-backed panel investigating press ethics and behavior.





Former chief reporter Neville Thurlbeck -- who has been arrested in connection with a police probe into phone hacking -- said he would not talk about illegal eavesdropping because of the arrest. He has not been charged.





He appeared at the Leveson Inquiry after the paper's most famous undercover reporter, Mazher Mahmoud, known as the "fake sheikh" for the disguise he often adopted to get stories.





He described doing stories on prostitution and drug dealing, but insisted repeatedly the tabloid "never engaged in entrapment."





He defended his methodology, saying criminals had gone to prison because of his work.





"Exposing criminality gives me great satisfaction," said Mahmoud, whose appearance was not televised in order to protect his identity.





But he said he had never heard about phone hacking by the News of the World until royal reporter Clive Goodman was arrested for it in 2006.





The inquiry was prompted by widespread public outrage this summer at the revelation that the Rupert Murdoch-owned tabloid had hacked into the voice mail of a murdered 13-year-old girl in 2002.





Murdoch's son James, the chief executive of the News Corporation subsidiary that published the tabloid, has repeatedly denied knowing about the scale of illegal eavesdropping at his papers.





James Murdoch ordered the paper shut down over the scandal.





Former News of the World deputy editor Neil Wallis also testified Monday. Like Thurlbeck, he has been arrested and released on bail in a police investigation into phone hacking.





He argued that Britain's downmarket tabloids were the "ones that people out there want to read," and far outsold so-called quality papers such as the Guardian and the Times.





A former News of the World journalist testified last month that the editors of the tabloid knew that their reporters were hacking phones in search of stories.





Paul McMullan named Andy Coulson, who went on to become an adviser to British Prime Minister David Cameron, and Rebekah Brooks, a Murdoch protege, as editors who were aware of the practice.





Coulson resigned as editor of the tabloid in 2007 when Goodman went to prison for hacking the voice mails of Prince William's staff, and he later became Cameron's communications director.





Coulson has always denied knowing about phone hacking, saying he quit the paper because he was ultimately responsible for the actions of his staff.





The Leveson Inquiry has been hearing from high-profile figures since last month, including celebrities such as "Harry Potter" author J.K. Rowling and actor Hugh Grant, both of whom complained about press intrusion into their lives.





Police investigating phone hacking by journalists say that about 5,800 people, including celebrities, crime victims, politicians and members of the royal family, were targets of the practice by journalists in search of stories.





It involves illegally eavesdropping on voice mail by entering a PIN to access messages remotely.

***

(CNN) -- Scientists have found a decline in oxygen levels in the Gulf of Mexico following the BP oil spill but have found no "dead zones" as a result, a federal task force reported Tuesday.





Levels of dissolved oxygen in deep water have dropped about 20 percent below their long-term average, according to data collected from up to 60 miles from the well at the center of the worst oil spill in U.S. history. But much of that dip appears to be the result of microbes using oxygen to dissolve oil underwater, and the decline is not enough to be fatal to marine life, said National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration official Steve Murawski, the head the Joint Analysis Group studying the spill's impact.





"Even the lowest observations in all of these was substantially above the threshold," Murawski said.





The samples were collected from 419 points at varying distances from the ruptured well at the heart of the disaster and at depths as far down as 4,800 feet, the group reported. The task force is made up of NOAA, the Environmental Protection Agency and the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy.





The undersea gusher erupted in April, releasing an estimated 4.9 million barrels (205 million gallons) of crude before being temporarily capped in July. The volume of oil -- and the amount of chemical dispersants used to break it up -- have created concerns about the long-term health of the Gulf. At the same time, the spill delivered a severe economic blow to the region, where fisheries and beach resorts are major employers.





Early findings from a mid-August survey led by the University of South Florida indicated oil had settled to the bottom of the Gulf further east than previously suspected and at levels toxic to marine life. At about the same time, a team from Georgia Sea Grant and the University of Georgia released a report that estimates that 70 to 79 percent of the oil that leaked from the well "has not been recovered and remains a threat to the ecosystem."





The latest study "does not discuss the broad ecosystem consequences of hydrocarbons released into the environment," NOAA said. But it concludes that the oil is continuing to break up and disperse underneath the surface, making the emergency of a major oxygen-poor dead zone unlikely.





In early August, the federal government estimated that about three-quarters of the oil spilled had either evaporated or been dispersed, or had been skimmed or burned off the surface.





The disaster began with an April 20 explosion aboard the oil rig Deepwater Horizon that left 11 men dead. The blast uncorked a BP-owned well off southeastern Louisiana that spewed for 87 days before being temporarily capped.  Operations are under way to permanently seal the well.





BP, rig owner Transocean and well cement contractor Halliburton have blamed each other for the disaster. BP plans to release the findings of its internal investigation of the accident on Wednesday, the company said.

***

Washington (CNN) -- U.S. President Barack Obama met Monday night with his national security team on Afghanistan and Pakistan, the White House announced.



It was the ninth meeting of the president's war council to consider whether to send more troops to Afghanistan, as requested by the U.S. commander on the ground there.



The White House made no statement after the meeting ended at 10 p.m. ET (0300 GMT).



The meeting included Vice President Joe Biden, Defense Secretary Robert Gates, Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman Adm. Michael Mullen, Afghanistan commanding Gen. Stanley McChrystal, U.S. Ambassador to Afghanistan Karl Eikenberry and other senior officials, the White House said earlier.



At the last war council meeting -- on November 11, Veteran's Day -- Obama pushed for revisions in proposed plans for troop increases to clarify how and when U.S. troops would turn over responsibility to the Afghan government.



Obama would seek answers to the questions he posed on November 11 about "not just how we get people there, but what's the strategy for getting them out," White House spokesman Robert Gibbs said before the meeting.



No matter what happened at the meeting, Gibbs said, Obama will not announce a decision on troop deployment until at least next week.



One option calls for sending about 34,000 more U.S. troops to Afghanistan in addition to the 68,000 already committed to the country, with other options involving variations of that plan, sources told CNN.



Before the November 11 meeting, Gen. David Petraeus, the top U.S. military commander in the Middle East, told CNN that the decision-making process was approaching completion. Petraeus emphasized the need to focus on the mission of ensuring that Afghanistan "does not once again become a sanctuary or safe haven for al Qaeda and the kind of transnational extremists that carried out the 9/11 attacks."



The Obama administration has expressed concerns about Afghanistan President Hamid Karzai's viability and has ratcheted up pressure to end corruption in order to combat an intensifying Taliban insurgency.



Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, on a trip to Afghanistan last week to attend Karzai's inauguration after his recent re-election, reiterated the U.S. concerns in a dinner meeting with Karzai and encouraged him to seize the "clear window of opportunity" before him at a "critical moment" in Afghanistan's history.



The United States and other countries are increasing their civilian presence in Afghanistan to bolster efforts to stabilize the country, the the U.S. special representative to Afghanistan and Pakistan, Richard Holbrooke, told reporters on Monday.



Asked about the corruption problem, Holbrooke noted that some Afghan government ministers have "extraordinary records" of accomplishment. The United States will work with those ministers, while recognizing that years of civil war and social woes have weakened overall leadership capabilities in Afghanistan, he said.



"This is one of the main reasons we're increasing our civilian role," Holbrooke said. "And it's extremely delicate to get the mix right. We want to help the Afghans help themselves. We do not want to replace a sovereign government with internationals."



Republican opponents are pushing Obama to quickly agree to McChrystal's reported request for up to 40,000 additional troops in Afghanistan as part of a counterinsurgency strategy.



"This won't be perfect or easy, but it will allow America's fighting men and women to leave Afghanistan with honor, and it will enable Afghans to build a better, more peaceful future," said a letter to Obama from 10 Republican senators sent on Veteran's Day.

***

(WIRED) -- Motorola is taking another shot at the tablet game with the Droid Xyboard, the company's latest Android device to hit Verizon stores.





After getting our hands on one yesterday, we found that it's a solid, well-performing slate that's easy on the eyes. Too bad it has such a stupid name.





The 4G Xyboard is Motorola's follow-up to its pricey, not terribly popular Xoom tablet, which was released in February. Available in 8.2-inch and 10.1-inch versions, the Honeycomb-powered Xyboard enters the market hot on the heels of the super-hot Kindle Fire. It's on sale today for $430 (for the 8.2-inch) or $530 (for the 10.1-inch) with a two-year contract from Verizon, with options for 16GB or 32GB of memory on the smaller version, and up to 64GB on the larger one.





The first thing that struck me about the Xyboard is its industrial design. Rather than being perfectly rectangular in shape, the 8.2-inch slate has clipped corners, which actually makes it fit more comfortably when you hold it one-handed.





The back, too, shows some stylistic creativity. A rubberized outer rim houses a power button and volume rocker, while centered in the back of the tablet is a sheet of dark gray brushed metal held in place by six visible screws. Think robot chic.





The positioning of the device's only two buttons makes for a clean appearance, but leaves your fingers searching when it's time to crank up the volume or send it to sleep. The 8.2-inch size, however, is a great compromise between the 7-inch 'tweeners and 10-inch stunners.





It's small enough to wield in one hand with ease (the 0.86-pound weight helps with that too), yet large enough that watching a full-screen, HD YouTube video or a movie on Netflix is pleasant. Pair that with Verizon's 4G speeds, and you've got great streaming video quality.





The overall experience is smooth, an improvement over many of the past buggy iterations of Honeycomb (perhaps the longer lead time gave Google the room to stabilize). Powered by a dual-core 1.2GHz processor with 1GB of RAM, app loading times are reasonably swift, and swiping from one screen to another on its Honeycomb interface is stutter-free.





Unlike HTC and Samsung devices, it's not overly skinned, so you can actually experience the Android OS for what it is, rather than a bogged down, bloated mess. The Xyboard will be eligible for an Ice Cream Sandwich upgrade at some point in the future, but for now, it runs Honeycomb very well.





Both the 8.2- and 10.1-inch models have a 1280 x 800 resolution display. After turning up the brightness from auto to full, the tablet's battery life dropped from around 20 percent to around 5 percent in less than an hour, so it looks like you'll need to be conscious of your 4G and brightness settings if you don't want your tablet to die on you quickly.





If you're one of those people who likes to take pictures with their tablet (read: you are a dork), the Xyboard has a 5-megapixel back-facing camera and a 1.3-megapixel front-facing camera on its face. The rear camera's quality is relatively sub-par compared to what you'd get from other comparable cameras, and definitely shoddier compared to the 8-megapixel standard of most 2011 handsets.





The colors are bright and close to true to life, but the overall image lacks sharpness. The camera does have some variable settings though, for white balance, color effects, and scene mode. Video quality was also just 'meh': a video taken indoors at the Wired offices was noticeably grainy.





Overall, the Xyboard seems like a decent tablet. The slate looks slick and feels good in your hands, and is powerful enough to provide a successful tablet experience. It's a bit of a shame that it's shipping with Honeycomb instead of ICS, but that's certainly not a deal breaker.





What's a real shame, though

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- All 18 people aboard a helicopter that crashed off the coast of Scotland have been recovered alive, a Royal Air Force officer told CNN.

A Super Puma helicopter, similar to the one in this file photo, went down about 120 miles east of Aberdeen.

The Super Puma ditched about 120 miles east of Aberdeen while approaching an offshore platform.

"Everyone has been recovered from the water," said James Lyon, assistant controller of the RAF's aeronautical rescue coordination center at RAF Kinloss, Scotland. "We don't know their condition, but we believe there are no major injuries."

Five helicopters were scrambled when the Super Puma helicopter ditched.

"Some were recovered by helicopter and some by boat from the platform," Lyon told CNN.

The RAF was providing helicopter assistance to the Aberdeen Coast Guard in the rescue.

Lyon said earlier that rescuers had been picking up emergency signal beacons  from the lifejackets of the 18 people.

He did not know if the pilot transmitted a mayday before the aircraft ditched.  View a map of the crash site »

"We believe it was quite close to the platform it was supposed to be landing on," he added.

The area is home to a number of offshore oil rigs. Lyon said he did not know which one the helicopter was heading to or where it was coming from.

The RAF received its first report of the crash at 6:43 p.m. (1:43 p.m. Eastern time).

Lyon said the Super Puma is regularly used to transport people to and from oil platforms in the North Sea and as far as he was aware it has a good safety record.

Weather at the crash site is relatively good, though slight fog is hampering visibility, he said.

A spokesman for BP told the UK's Press Association: "The 16 passengers and two crew who were on board have been accounted for and have been rescued. Three people are on the ETAP Platform and a further 15 are on the Caledonian Victory rescue vessel.

"The priority of the company is the safety of all personnel involved in this incident and we have implemented our full emergency response procedures."

***

New York (CNN) -- The U.S. population is expected to top out at close to 312.8 million people just around the time crowds gather to watch the ball drop on New Year's Eve, according to new census data released Thursday.





The figure represents a 0.7% increase from last year, adding 2,250,129 people to the U.S. population since the start of 2011, and a 1.3% increase since Census Day, April 1, 2010.





The agency estimates that beginning in January, one American will be born every eight seconds and one will die every 12 seconds.





U.S.-bound immigrants are also expected to add one person every 46 seconds.





That combination of births, deaths and migration is expected to add a single person to the U.S. population every 17 seconds, the Census Bureau said.





Meanwhile, millions are set to ring in the new year.





In New York, authorities are preparing for large crowds in Manhattan's Times Square, where Lady Gaga is expected to join Mayor Michael Bloomberg to push the button that drops the Waterford Crystal ball at 11:59 p.m. ET on New Year's Eve.





"And I'm so looking forward to performing on NYE+dropping the Ball with Mayor Bloomberg!" the pop star posted on Twitter. "What an honor as a New Yorker."





Past guests have included Muhammad Ali, Rudy Giuliani, Colin Powell and Bill and Hillary Clinton.





On Thursday, officials conducted New York's annual "airworthiness test" -- a process in which confetti is tossed by handfuls above Times Square -- in preparation for the annual city tradition of dumping one ton of confetti over revelers in the iconic square.





The Big Apple this year edged out Las Vegas for the first time in seven years as the top travel U.S. destination for those celebrating the new year, according to a December travel booking website poll.





Seven New York neighborhoods made the top 10 list, with two districts in Las Vegas and one in New Orleans making up the other three, according to the Priceline poll.





"It appears that New York City will be helped this year by a weather forecast that calls for warmer than usual temperatures over the holiday weekend," said company spokesman Brian Ek.

***

Los Angeles (CNN) -- The man accused of shooting and paralyzing a U.S. Army soldier at a homecoming party in the soldier's honor faces one count of attempted murder, the spokesman for the San Bernardino, California, district attorney said Tuesday.





District Attorney Michael Ramos filed the charge Tuesday against 19-year-old Ruben Jurado, spokesman Christopher Lee said. He also filed "four special allegations involving premeditation and the use and discharge of a firearm causing great bodily injury," the DA's office said in a statement.





Jurado was being held at the West Valley Detention Center and was expected to be arraigned Wednesday or Thursday.





Jurado is accused of shooting Army Spc. Christopher Sullivan on Friday night at a homecoming party in Sullivan's native San Bernardino. Sullivan was there celebrating his recent return to California from Kentucky, where he was stationed while recovering from wounds sustained in a suicide bombing a year ago in Afghanistan.





Sullivan narrowly survived the attack, which killed five members of his unit and left him with a cracked collar bone and brain damage, according to the San Bernardino County Sun. Sullivan was awarded the Purple Heart after the incident.





He was shot at the party after an "argument and physical confrontation" with Jurado, San Bernardino Police Department Sgt. Pete Higgins told CNN.





Accompanied by an attorney, Jurado turned himself in to authorities in Chino Hills early Monday afternoon, said Lt. Gwendolyn Waters.





The fight at the party broke out after Jurado and Sullivan's younger brother began arguing about football, the brothers' mother, Suzanne Sullivan, told CNN.





Jurado "pulled out a gun and shot him twice," she said.





Higgins said Jurado fled the scene after the shooting.





Sullivan was rushed to a hospital, where he was being treated, officials said.





"Right now, my son is hanging in physically," Suzanne Sullivan told CNN. "He's on 100% life support. He can move his head and he responds through nodding and blinking to us. His eyes aren't always open, but we try to encourage him to do so as often as possible."





She said her son tried to ask what happened to him at the hospital and when they told him he wanted to know, "Why?"





"We told him what it was about and he just closed his eyes," Suzanne Sullivan told CNN.





She said she was told that the suspect and her son might have gone to school and played football together. She also said she couldn't believe what had happened to her son, who she said joined the Army to try and help her out.





"He's a wonderful son. ... the best person you could meet on this Earth," she said. "He's a giver, not a taker, and just wants to be there for and help people. He was so happy when he joined the Army, because he really wanted to defend his country."





The mother and her family have been at her son's hospital bedside. A fellow soldier from Christopher Sullivan's 101st Airborne Division brought the infantry's flag to the hospital, Suzanne Sullivan told CNN.





"He loved his platoon. He loved his fellow soldiers," she said as she began to sob. "He was so proud to serve our country."





Tears rolled down Christopher Sullivan's face when he saw the flag of the Screaming Eagles, the nickname for the division, his mother said.





"I asked Chris if he wanted to me to hang it on the wall or cover him in it," Suzanne Sullivan said. "He nodded that he wanted me to cover him with it. Once I did that he started to cry, which made me start to cry. It's been really hard on all of us."





She said she was distraught over the news that her son, who was already recovering from injuries sustained during his tour abroad, had returned to the United States only to be paralyzed during a party.





"He once told me that if defending this country takes his life, so

***

(CNN) -- Billionaire oilman T. Boone Pickens is sinking billions of dollars into a new wind farm in Texas. It is likely to become the biggest in the world, producing enough power for the equivalent of 1.3 million homes. CNN's Ali Velshi asked the oil legend why he thinks wind could be the answer to this country's energy problems:



T. Boone Pickens explains his investment in a 4,000-megawatt wind farm to CNN's Ali Velshi.



Ali Velshi: Tell me about the wind. Now, you are buying, for a start, more than 600 wind turbines from General Electric. You're going to put them on this big tract of land in Texas, and you're going to generate a lot of electricity.



What happens to that electricity? Tell me where you think you're going to make your money and how this is going to help the situation in America.



T. Boone Pickens: Well, that's the first step to a 4,000-megawatt wind farm. This is 1,000 megawatts.



We start receiving those turbines in mid 2010. We will have the total 4,000 megawatts finished by the end of 2015. That power will go into a transmission line that will tie into the Electric Reliability Council of Texas system in the state of Texas, and it will be transmitted downstate.  Watch why Pickens is willing to spend billions on wind »



Velshi: What's your view of wind power? It's one of several things that we should be looking at in terms of powering our homes, electrical power? We get most of it from coal and natural gas, and some from nuclear. Are you thinking it's one of the formats of power we should be thinking about, or is this going to be bigger than we all thought?



Pickens: The Department of Energy came out with a study in April of '07 that said we could generate 20 percent of our electricity from wind. And the wind power is -- you know, it's clean, it's renewable. It's -- you know, it's everything you want. And it's a stable supply of energy.



It will be located in [the] central part of the United States, which will be the best from a safety standpoint to be located. You have a wind corridor that goes from Pampa, Texas, to the Canadian border. And it has -- the wind, it's unbelievable that we have not done more with wind. Look at Germany and Spain. They have developed their wind way beyond what we have, and they don't have as much wind as we do. It's not unlike the French have done with their nuclear. They're 80 percent power generated off of nuclear, we're 20 percent.



Velshi: I'm fascinated by wind power. I love going by a field of these turbines. And I think they're fascinating.



You don't happen to think they're attractive, and you're not really putting them on your land. You're going to be using other people's land to put these things on.



Pickens: That's right. And it's very clear, these are my neighbors. And they want them. It generates income for them.



A turbine will generate somewhere around 20,000 [dollars] a year in royalty income. And on a 640-acre tract, you can put five to 10 of these on the tract. And you don't have to have them if you don't want them.



Velshi: And it's quite common that people who maybe have a piece of land, they might be farmers or something like that, this is extra income to them by making a deal with somebody like you who is going put these things up, if they don't mind having them on the land. Do they get the electricity from it or do they just get a royalty check?



Pickens: A royalty check. But look at Sweetwater, Texas. That town was 12,000 people, then went down below 10,000. The wind came in, it's above 12,000 in population now. The local economy is booming.



That can be repeated over

***

If home is where the heart is, a new survey suggests that most people aren't sure exactly where they live. More than half of people cannot pinpoint the exact location of the human heart on a diagram, and nearly 70 percent can't correctly identify the shape of the lungs, according to the survey.



This lack of knowledge isn't just embarrassing -- it could lead to a poorer quality of health care, some experts say.



In the study, published in the journal BMC Family Practice, a research team surveyed 722 Britons -- 589 hospital outpatients and 133 people in the general population. They gave the volunteers four diagrams of human figures and asked them to choose the one that showed the correct size and location of a specific organ. (For example, the heart diagrams showed various size organs on the far left side of the chest, directly in the center, anchored on the center/left chest, and on the right side of the chest.)



Overall, people knew less basic anatomy than the researchers expected -- even those patients being treated for a specific condition involving that organ. Participants generally answered half the questions correctly, including 46.5 percent who knew which drawing represented their heart. In all, 31.4 percent correctly identified the lungs, 38.4 percent the stomach, 41.8 percent the thyroid, and 42.5 percent the kidneys.



The intestines and bladder were the most easily identified, with 85.9 percent and 80.7 percent, respectively, answering the question correctly. Health.com: Are you cholesterol smart? Take this quiz



There was little to no improvement compared with a similar study conducted in 1970, says lead author John Weinman, Ph.D., of King's College London. In that study, subjects correctly identified eight major body parts about half of the time. (The researchers used the same body parts from the 1970 study and added three more: the pancreas, gallbladder, and ovaries.)



Given the accessibility of the Internet and the prominence of health stories in the news media today, Weinman's team expected that people would now know more about their body.



Weinman says he wouldn't be surprised if a study based in the United States produced similar results -- or worse. "I imagine they would be similar, but there could well be regional variation, depending on which part of the U.S. the participants were from," he says. "Actually, I asked one of my colleagues, who is from the U.S., and she felt that Americans might be worse because, to quote her, 'Very many Americans don't even know where New Jersey is, so how would they know where their pancreas is?'" Health.com: Eat Smarter in your 30s, 40s, and 50s



That may sound harsh, but time and again, U.S. studies have shown that doctors overestimate how much their patients understand about their conditions and treatment.



Adam Kelly, Ph.D., an assistant professor of medicine at the Baylor College of Medicine, in Houston,  Texas, conducted a 2007 study, that showed that doctors overestimate patient literacy and that a lack of patient knowledge leads to poorer care. Kelly believes the problem could be "even more profound" in the United States, although a similar study has not been conducted in America.



Still, anatomy may not be the best measure of health literacy, says Sandeep Jauhar, M.D., the director of the heart failure program at the Long Island Jewish Medical Center, and the author of "Intern: A Doctor's Initiation." Health.com: Computer games that boost your memory



"They would like us to draw the conclusion that because the patients can't identify these organs anatomically that that is an indication of low health-care literacy -- and that may or may not be true," he says. "I work with heart failure patients, and whether they can identify where their heart is is not so important to me as long as they know which medicines to take and when."



Many patients with heart failure, unfortunately, don't know which medicines to take, can't identify their symptoms, and don't follow up with their doctors, Jauhar says. "So

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- China's military is developing longer-range ballistic and anti-ship missiles that are "shifting the balance of power in the region" and could help Beijing secure resources or settle territorial disputes, a report released by the Pentagon said Wednesday.



U.S. and Chinese militaries need "resumption of dialogue,"  Adm. Timothy Keating told Congress.



China also continues to build up short-range missiles and increase its "coercive capabilities" against Taiwan. The report suggests such moves constitute an effort to pressure Taiwan into settling the cross-strait dispute in favor of China, though tensions between the two countries have receded over the past year.



The report, called the "Military Power of the People's Republic of China," is the Pentagon's annual briefing to Congress on the status of the communist country's military might.



While China continues to proclaim that its military buildup is for defense purposes to protect its interests, the report says the country's lack of transparency is worrisome and could lead to an unintended conflict.



"The limited transparency in China's military and security affairs poses risks to stability by creating uncertainty and increasing the potential for misunderstanding and miscalculation," according to the report. "Much uncertainty surrounds China's future course, particularly regarding how its expanding military power might be used."



The lack of transparency causes Washington "to speculate to some degree on what their intentions are," Pentagon spokesman Geoff Morrell told reporters at a Wednesday briefing.



According to Adm. Timothy Keating, the head of the U.S. Pacific Command, some of that uncertainty is due to the cessation of talks between the Chinese and U.S. militaries.



In March of 2008, the United States and China installed a hot line between the two countries' militaries. But there have been no military-to-military talks since November 2008, when Washington announced it was selling weapons to Taiwan.



"We are looking for the resumption of that dialogue so we can engage in discussion with our colleagues in the People's Republic of China and their Army, Navy and Air Force so we can have a sense of their way ahead," Keating told the House Armed Services committee on Tuesday. "We don't have a clear idea of their broad strategic way ahead."



The Pentagon report comes after a recent incident in which Chinese ships, including a Chinese navy vessel, confronted an unarmed U.S. Navy surveillance ship in the South China Sea in international waters. The confrontation prompted the United States to move a destroyer ship to the area to protect the surveillance vessel.



While the report does not discuss the incident, it notes the importance China puts on controlling its waterways and the surrounding territories because "China's economic and political power is contingent upon access to and use of the sea, and that a strong navy is required to safeguard such access."



The analysis also said that while much of China's capability is more for regional disputes, it did send two destroyers and one supply ship off the coast of Africa to protect Chinese vessels from pirate attacks.



That move was a sign of Chinese intent to expand its militaries to protect expanding economic and political interests around the world, according to a China analyst.



"The Chinese military is being told to develop capabilities to deal with Chinese national interests beyond the pure defense of Chinese territory," said David Finklestein, the Director of China Studies for CNA, a nonprofit research group that does analysis for the U.S. military and other clients. "China, with a global economy, now obviously has global political interests and clearly has expanding global security interests."



Though the Pentagon report concludes that "China's ability to sustain military power at a distance remains limited," it does have a growing space program, nuclear weapon system and cyber warfare capabilities, "the only aspects of China's armed forces that, today, have the potential to be truly global," the report explained.



In citing China's cyber warfare, the report notes that U.S. government computers were the target of "intrusions that appear to have originated" from China, although they were not confirmed to be

***

GAALKACYO, Somalia (CNN)  -- The U.S. government is delaying "tens of millions" of dollars in crucial humanitarian aid over concerns that the money is being diverted to a notorious militant group, a senior U.N. official said.



Al-Shabaab militants ride through Mogadishu, Somalia, after a religious gathering in September.



The U.S. government, concerned about the challenges in delivering assistance in a country wracked by civil war, says allegations that Al-Shabaab is stopping aid from reaching the people are under review.



Although one U.S. government source said aid continues to flow to Somalia and hasn't been suspended, another said aid might not reach "some parts of the country" because of Al-Shabaab, the al Qaeda-linked terror group that is trying to overthrow the government.



Located in the Horn of Africa, Somalia has long been a lawless, war-ravaged nation. The United Nations says that nearly half the population is dependent on humanitarian assistance, and one in five children are acutely malnourished.



Somalia has suffered through five consecutive seasons of drought, and the ongoing conflict has caused more than a million people to be displaced.



Kiki Gbeho, head of office for the U.N. Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in Somalia, said the United States is reviewing whether its aid helps fund Al-Shabaab.



The U.N. office, in a report issued in September, said the U.S. delay in reaching a decision on humanitarian funding "is already impacting on many agencies and their programmes."



The United Nations estimates that 60 percent of the people it needs to reach with emergency assistance live in areas controlled by Al-Shabaab.



"According to humanitarian principles, we have to serve people and need to deal with those in charge," Gbeho said.



Peter Smerdon, chief spokesman for the World Food Program, the agency responsible for delivering aid to Somalia, would not comment on the U.S. funding controversy but said investigations into whether Al-Shabaab is assisted by U.N. aid assistance are "ongoing."



Food supplies could run out for millions of Somalis in the next few weeks, according to the United Nations. The U.S. government is traditionally the biggest donor for food assistance.



The issue of breakdowns in humanitarian aid in Somalia has long concerned the United States. A senior administration official and an administration official spoke about the issue on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to speak publicly.



The senior U.S. administration official said that Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and Transitional Federal Government President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed discussed in August how the "delivery of services" to the Somali people be broadened.



Clinton said publicly in Nairobi that the United States continues to provide "humanitarian assistance to the Somali people where delivery is feasible and effective."



The administration official said that the aid has never stopped, adding that food bound for the World Food Program in Somalia is on a vessel and should arrive in a few weeks.



The senior administration official said, "We are working with groups there to ensure that we can deliver assistance without having to pay off Al-Shabaab in the process. It does mean that aid may get to certain parts of the country but not others."

***

(CNN) -- The next generation of space robot is here.





It looks like an astronaut in a spacesuit, with a head, a torso, two arms and two hands that can grasp and hold objects just like a human hand.





Its name is R2, short for Robonaut 2. And it's heading to the International Space Station aboard the space shuttle Discovery in September.





For more than three years, a team of General Motors engineers and NASA scientists worked side by side at the Houston's Johnson Space center -- designing, engineering and building the 300-pound, human-like machine.





At first, the partnership between a space agency and an auto maker may seem unlikely but it made perfect sense for the R2 venture.





GM has used both industrial and commercial robots in its auto assembly plants, mainly single-arm robots.





"We've used robots for years and years," said Marty Linn, GM's principal robotics engineer. "We use robots in basically every single one of our manufacturing plants today around the world."





Turns out that what the astronauts need on a space mission is not very different from what an operator in an assembly plant needs.





"We spent a lot of effort working on the technologies that will allow us to have robots work right next to human operators very safely," Linn said. "For General Motors, it's really about the the technologies and being able to make the robots safe to work around."





NASA has the same goal.





"This project exemplifies the promise that a future generation of robots can have both in space and on Earth, not as replacements for humans but as companions that can carry out key supporting roles," said a statement from John Olson, director of NASA's Exploration Systems Integration Office.





"The combined potential of humans and robots is a perfect example of the sum equaling more than the parts," he said. "It will allow us to go further and achieve more than we can probably even imagine today."





Linn said the R2 will be an astronaut's helper.





"That's really what it was designed to do, to help astronauts in performing their regular tasks," Linn said.





And at GM, he said, the R2 was about developing technologies that will help build safer manufacturing plants and better-quality vehicles.





It's hoped that the robot will minimize danger to astronauts, relieve them of ergonomically challenging tasks as well as jobs that are dull and repetitive.





R2 will be able to perform a variety of experiments in micro-gravity, basically working side-by-side with the astronauts, but will still be in a testing phase when it arrives at the International Space Station. It isn't built to withstand the extreme temperatures in space, so it will be confined to a lab inside the station. But in the years ahead, scientists hope the R2 will be enhanced enough to move freely around the complex.





Is the R2 a precursor of things to come?





Are there robotic teachers and robotic drivers in the near future? How about robotic babysitters or store clerks?





"I'm a big fan of imagination," Linn said. "And certainly you could imagine all those things. Is it that far off? I don't think so."

***

(CNN) -- A U.N. special investigator called for the resignation of top Kenyan officials and sweeping changes in the country's security forces to end reported widespread killings by police across the African nation.



The report urged President Mwai Kibaki to publicly acknowledge his commitment to ending the killings.



"The special rapporteur concluded that police in Kenya frequently execute individuals and that a climate of impunity prevails," Philip Alston said in a report a recently submitted to the U.N. Human Rights Council in Geneva.



"Most troubling is the existence of police death squads operating on the orders of senior police officials and charged with eliminating suspected leaders and members of criminal organizations."



The report calls for the resignation of Kenya's attorney general and the immediate replacement of the police commissioner. It also says Kenyan President Mwai Kibaki should publicly acknowledge his commitment to ending unlawful killings by the police.



The Kenyan government expressed its "deep displeasure" with the report, questioning the special investigator's "approach, conduct and method of work."



"The government expresses grave concern regarding the allegations contained in the report by the special rapporteur," said Alfred Mutua, a spokesman for the Kenyan government. "His questioning of the very basis of the Kenyan state and, in particular, its institutions is totally unacceptable and impinges on Kenya's sovereignty."



Alston also accused government security forces of torturing and killing hundreds of men in a March 2008 crackdown on a militia in the Mt. Elgon district, in western Kenya. And he said there was compelling evidence that what he called police death squads were operating in Nairobi and Central Province with a mandate to "exterminate" suspected Mungiki gang members.



"These are not "rogue" squads, but police who are acting on the explicit orders of their superiors," he said.



The Mungiki militia, which is loyal to Kibaki's Kikuyu tribe, began as a religious sect, but over the years has morphed into a gang that runs protection rackets -- particularly in the slums.



The U.N. investigator suggested Kibaki acknowledge the alleged police killings and commit to stop them. He also advocated creating an independent civilian police oversight body, and said the prosecutor of the International Criminal Court should investigate violence after the 2007 election. He urged the government to create a witness protection program as well.



Alston, who investigates human-rights problems around the world for the United Nations, traveled to Kenya at the government's invitation. He stayed for 10 days in mid-February while 100 interviews were conducted in the U.N. member nation.



There is hope for Kenya despite his criticism, Alston said.



"While the existing situation is bad, it is far from intractable," the report says. "If it so chooses, Kenya can significantly reduce the prevalence of unlawful killings."

***

(CNN) -- The medals have been presented, the caldron extinguished and the crowds dispersed, but there's one record from the 2010 Vancouver Olympics that may have been overlooked: Most condoms distributed at a Winter Games.





It's hard to say this conclusively, and judges from other host cities may demand a recount, but Clay Adams of Vancouver Coastal Health said the word on the public health street is that Vancouver is king of the prophylactic winter rings.





Over the course of 17 days, the health agency doled out 100,000 condoms, supplied by the British Columbia Centre for Disease Control. And after buzz, some based on rumors, grew that there was a shortage -- "We were not getting calls from people saying, 'Help, I need condoms,'" Adams laughed -- an emergency shipment of 8,500 additional rubbers came in from the Canadian Foundation for AIDS Research.





Some media outlets reported that the supply was strictly for Olympic and Paralympic athletes and officials, totaling about 6,500 people according to the Vancouver Organizing Committee. That would suggest an average of at least 15 condoms per person, and rampant sex of Olympic proportions.





But Adams, spokesman for Vancouver Coastal Health, clarified and said the free condoms were available not just to athletes and game officials. They were on the cruise ships that housed security, support staff and volunteers. They were in washrooms at public venues, including the downtown pavilions where visitors gathered for free concerts. They were handed out by volunteers and readily available in clinics.





The mass distribution of rubbers was part of a greater effort to improve HIV and AIDS awareness, Adams said.





Lots of people don't have the same kind of access to public health messages about disease prevention, and "when you've got a global audience like this, it's a huge opportunity to educate the world," he said.





Since the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona, Spain, condoms have been distributed free to athletes. About 40,000 of the original 100,000 in Vancouver were for those staying in the athlete villages in Vancouver and Whistler, Adams said.





How many of them were actually used is an impossible question to answer. Some say condoms were snagged as souvenirs, although Adams said they were not branded with Olympic rings. He said he did hear stories of athletes from countries with inferior condoms stuffing their suitcases with the coveted rubbers.





But no matter what happened to the condoms, the public health effort in Vancouver is one that makes him proud.





"Indications are that Vancouver topped the podium for Winter Olympics," Adams said. "Although we recently heard that they issued 35 million condoms for Mardi Gras in Rio, so I suppose we all have a long, long way to go to reach that mark."

***

Islamabad, Pakistan (CNN) -- Thirty-six people were killed and dozens were injured in explosions at a market in Lahore, Pakistan, on Monday, an official said.





Rizwan Naseer, chief of Lahore's rescue service, also said 109 people were wounded.





The explosions did not appear to be a suicide attack but could instead have been bombs detonated by remote control, Punjab Police Chief Tariq Salim said.





The nation's state-run news agency, Associated Press of Pakistan, said the blasts were the result of "bomb explosions."





The explosions occurred at Moon Market in the Iqbal Town neighborhood, the news agency said. It cited Iqbal Town Division's Ali Nasir Rizvi as saying most of the victims were women.





Khusro Pervaiz, a senior government official in Lahore, said in a television interview that 60 people had been taken to five Lahore hospitals.





The blasts happened around 8:45 p.m. at the popular market, said Rai Nazar Hayat, a spokesman for Lahore police.





Earlier, ten people were killed -- including two police officers -- when a suicide bomber detonated outside a district courthouse in Peshawar on Monday, officials said.





At least 36 were injured, six of them seriously, said Dr. Hameed Afridi, CEO of the Lady Reading Hospital.





The bomber got out of a rickshaw and detonated himself, according to witnesses.





The attacker was wearing a suicide jacket with about 6 kilograms of explosives, said Shafqat Malik, head of the North West Frontier Province bomb disposal unit.





Peshawar is the capital of the Northwest Frontier Province, where the Pakistani government waged a recent military offense against Taliban militants.





Meanwhile, five people were hurt in a bomb attack in Quetta on Monday morning, said Jamil Kakar, a Quetta police official. The explosives were placed in a car and destroyed two other cars and three motorbikes.





The courthouse attack comes three days after four militants armed with guns and grenades stormed a mosque in Rawalpindi frequented by military personnel. At least 36 were killed and 75 wounded.





Among the dead were 17 children, according to military officials. Also killed were an army general and eight other military officials, six of senior rank.





The Pakistani Taliban claimed responsibility for the mosque bombing. The Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan reiterated its claim in an e-mail to CNN the next day, after media outlets quoted officials who doubted the group's participation.





"We reconfirmed it, that the TTP has done it and will do more which are already planned," the group said in the e-mail. "We once again mention that we are not against the innocent people and the state of Pakistan but against those officers and ministers who are American by hearts and minds and Pakistani just by faces."





Rawalpindi is the headquarters of the Pakistani army.





CNN's Reza Sayah contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Arriving in central Bangkok from the sparkling international airport, a visitor might not know at first glance that much of the city is under water.





Shops and restaurants are open as usual, while the futuristic sky train continues to ferry commuters to work in the numerous office complexes that make up the central business district.





But just a few miles northwards along the Vibhavadi Rangsit highway, the road gradually disappears into a sea of filthy brown water -- floodwater from the north of Thailand that shows little sign of disappearing quickly.





This is due in large part to a system of floodgates set up to protect the commercial center of the city and other key industrial areas by diverting the run-off to these parts.





For almost a month, residents in outlying areas such as Rangsit and Lumlukka have been living in water that is often chest-high. Many defied government evacuation orders to protect their property, even if it meant being stranded with limited food and no clean running water.





Read predictions that flooding would remain for weeks





Romeo Romei, a local businessman, lost his house and is battling to save his factory, but he still manages to take a boat out each day with his friend Alex Stamp and cousin Duccio Lucchesi to distribute water, food and clothes to those in need.





From his factory office in Rangsit, supplies donated by friends and family are sorted into rescue packs for men, women and children, while the factory workers man an array of water pumps -- some of them cannibalized swimming pool pumps -- around the clock, praying that the defensive wall they erected around the warehouse doesn't collapse. They are literally under siege from the water.





Yet Romeo is concerned about the 10 families around the corner who have been forced to set up camp on the upper floors of a dilapidated industrial building nearby.





Watch Romeo visiting families in a Rangsit warehouse





Riding in the fully-laden dinghy across what was once the factory's car park, he explains what spurred him into action. "For the first few days after the floods we went about our business dealing with the factory. But soon we couldn't bear to see people suffering."





He says the government is not helping these people, while aid agencies are nowhere to be seen around these flood-hit streets. "I saw one boat with around 10 packs of food, but there are thousands of people here," he said.





On Tuesday, Prime Minister Yingluck Shinawatra laid out a three-point recovery plan, including immediate aid to those whose homes and businesses have been destroyed. Meanwhile, relief workers have been distributing aid to evacuation centers but face difficulties reaching residents who have decided to wait out the crisis in their homes.





As we unload the supplies of eggs, fruit, rice and medicine at our destination, the conditions the families are living in is humbling. On the ground floor, children play in the same stagnant water that dogs defecate in, while the adults gather in their damp makeshift sleeping areas with what little they could salvage from their homes.





However, the atmosphere is not depressing, especially since a year-old baby has taken his first steps in this unlikely setting. Romeo points out that Thais never complain and always have a smile on their faces.





He contends this is because there is no expectation that anyone will be there to help them.





Watch Romeo and friends boat down a road in Rangsit





As the boat pushes off to find more people to help, we're immediately surrounded by people. Some are asking if we have water, while others are looking for diapers. No one seems greedy or aggressive. They paddle around in anything that will float, from polystyrene blocks to an old refrigerator, while small children swim about in "life jackets" made from empty plastic bottles strung together and stuffed into pieces of clothing.





This, Alex says, is evidence of the Thai ability to improvise and adapt in adversity.





Impact Your World: See how you can help





An internet security consultant, Alex frequently has to field calls from clients on the boat. He says he even

***

ISLAMABAD, Pakistan (CNN)  -- In Pakistan's combustible Swat Valley, some girls refuse to wear uniforms so they can make it to school without being harmed.



Shiza Shahid, left, a 20-year-old Stanford University student, is helping to teach young girls in Pakistan.



Other girls hide textbooks in their shawls to escape harassment.



School-age girls are among the victims in the fierce fighting between government soldiers and Taliban militants in the Swat Valley. The Pakistani government said it has flushed much of the Taliban out of the area, but some fighting persists.



Many girls remain banned from schools. Dozens of their schools have been bombed, and militants have burned books.



A new program has taken 26 girls out of the battle-scarred region to Islamabad for a 10-day retreat, where they can learn in safer surroundings.



A group of college students of Pakistani background is helping the girls. Among them are Shiza Shahid, 20, from California's Stanford University, who organized the program called Shajar-e-llm, or Tree of Knowledge.



Shahid said she was moved to help after hearing about how the girls struggled to get an education.



"I think we were so angry, upset and emotional that we decided we have to do something," she said.  Watch as Shahid says she had to act to help the girls »



Though well-intentioned, the program sometimes seems disorganized.



"We need support. We need unfortunately more organization, more of the bureaucratic nitty-gritty that you don't want to do, but you have to," Shahid said. "We are young, and that does come with the burden as not being equally trusted or seen as capable."



Nonetheless, the group has ambitions for a boys' learning retreat as well.



The lessons are simple enough -- confidence-building exercises, critical-thinking lessons -- all framed in the context of Islamic values.



The girls -- ages 11 to 14 -- spoke about their dreams. One wants to meet a poet; another wants to learn calligraphy. Another wants to grow up to lead Pakistan.



"I want to become president and rule this country in a good way," said 12-year-old Malila.



One day during the retreat, the girls were taught a song about freedom of speech. As a guitarist strummed, the girls sang that God gives everyone the right to free speech and no one can take it away.



Free speech seemed to end with the song, however. The girls could not risk talking about Taliban harassment, because the militants' version of Islamic law lingers. Such Islamic law, or shariah, also keeps females from going to school or going outside without their husbands.



The United Nations estimates that 375,000 Swat Valley residents fled their homes during fighting that started in April. In all, 2.5 million Pakistanis were displaced in what was said to be one of the largest human migrations in recent history.



Many residents have returned to their homes, but peace has not been completely restored to the region.



And soon, the girls at the learning retreat will return home to the Swat Valley as well.



Organizers said they hope the girls will carry a new love for education.



"There were tears and there were tough moments," said Madihah Akhter, a volunteer with the program. "But the girls surprised me. They were really resilient. They were beyond their years."

***

(CNN)  -- The U.S. government has dropped charges against Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri, the suspect in the bombing of the destroyer USS Cole, according to a Pentagon spokesman.



Parents and friends at the funeral in 2000 for a sailor killed during the bombing of the USS Cole.



The charges were dropped "without prejudice" by Susan Crawford, convening authority at the U.S. prison camp at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, according to Pentagon spokesman Cmdr. Jeffrey Gordon. The proceeding did not address specifics of the government's case against al-Nashiri, who remains a "high value" detainee held at Guantanamo.



In removing the charges without prejudice, prosecutors can resubmit charges at a later date while at the same time complying with President Barack Obama's order to the military to hold off on cases for four months.



On his first day in office, Obama ordered the halt, requiring prosecutors to seek delays in the 14 active cases before military commissions there. But the judge, Col. James Pohl, ordered arraignment for Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri to go ahead as scheduled on Monday.



With this move, all cases at Guantanamo are now in line with the president's order to halt court proceedings at the detention center, according to Gordon.



Al-Nashiri is accused of planning the October 2000 bombing of the Cole while it was in the Yemeni port of Aden. The attack killed 17 American sailors and crippled the vessel, which returned to service in 2002.



The Office of Military Commissions, which manages the prosecutions of suspected terrorists, said last week that it might have to temporarily drop charges against al-Nashiri to comply with the presidential order.



When prosecutors asked for a continuance in the trial, Pohl denied the request, saying the government's "argument for continuances were unpersuasive," according to a copy of his opinion. Pohl noted there had been no previous requests for a delay, and that the public's interest in a speedy trial would be harmed by further delay.



Al-Nashiri was captured in 2002. He was held in secret locations until being transferred to Guantanamo Bay in 2006.



Meanwhile, the White House has invited families of sailors who died in the Cole bombing to meet with Obama on Friday.



A number of the families were called Thursday afternoon, according to Andrew Hall, the lawyer who represented families.



The invitation was for the families to attend "without their lawyers," according to Hall. They were not told why they were going to meet with Obama, he added.



According to the White House schedule for Friday, Obama will meet privately with families of the Cole attack and also with families of victims of the 9/11 attacks.



"The president wants to talk with these families about resolving the issues involved with closing Guantanamo Bay -- while keeping the safety and security of the American people as his top priority," the schedule said.

***

Los Angeles, CALIFORNIA (CNN) -- Whitney Houston swept into the room in full diva mode -- hair, makeup and entourage. She looked the part.



Whitney Houston has credited mentor Clive Davis, right, for her comeback after a seven-year absence.



She smiled and cooed over mentor Clive Davis, calling him "Big Papa" and "Daddy" while the music mogul patted her arm like a proud parent.



The pair was in a side room at the Beverly Hilton Hotel just before the Los Angeles, California, listening session for "I Look to You," Houston's first album in seven years, scheduled to be released Sept. 1.



"I just took a break, which sometimes you have to," said Houston, 45, looking elegant in diamonds and a black Prada dress.



"You have to know when to slow that train down and kind of just sit back and relax for a minute."  Watch an interview with Whitney Houston »



This was definitely the old Whitney -- pre-troubled marriage to Bobby Brown and pre-comment to Diane Sawyer that "crack is wack."



Next door, several hundred industry folks, journalists and friends gathered in a ballroom surrounded by large screens emblazoned with the words, "The Wait is Over."



Jane Fonda, Halle Berry, Magic Johnson, Penny Marshall and Jackie Collins sat in the front while Barry Manilow, Brian McKnight and producer David Foster found seats in the back of the room.



Davis, who has steered Houston's career for more than 25 years, introduced each of the album tracks, mostly slick, upbeat, radio-friendly tunes penned by proven hit makers such as R. Kelly, Alicia Keys, Akon and Johnta Austin.



Heads bobbed while the songs thumped over the loudspeakers, with applause and cheers erupting after each cut. To the amusement of those seated in the audience, even Davis shook his shoulders behind his podium and pumped his fist to the beat from time-to-time.



A ballad on the new disc, "I Didn't Know My Own Strength," alludes to Houston's personal troubles in recent years.



The song, written especially for Houston by Diane Warren, includes the lyrics:



I didn't know my own strength



And I crashed down and I tumbled



But I did not crumble.



Houston deftly steered the focus away from herself, saying she identified with the lyrics because everyone has been through ups and downs in life.



At the end of the session, Houston stepped from the wings to a standing ovation.



"I'm humbled," she said, her hand on her heart. "There's so much love in the room." Then she joked, "Jane Fonda's at my listening party? How cool am I?"



AEG chairman and CEO Randy Phillips also was hanging around, no doubt ready to pounce on a chance to promote her next tour.



"I think it's the biggest hit she's had," Barry Manilow said.



"It was really, really good," Stevie Wonder said. "God takes care of his children."

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- White House communications director Anita Dunn fired back at criticism from TV commentator Glenn Beck on Friday, saying that a Mao Tse-tung quote Beck took issue with was picked up from legendary GOP strategist Lee Atwater.



White House communications director Anita Dunn she picked up Mao Tse-tung from a legendary Republican.



"The Mao quote is one I picked up from the late Republican strategist Lee Atwater from something I read in the late 1980s, so I hope I don't get my progressive friends mad at me," Dunn told CNN.



As for Beck's criticism: "The use of the phrase 'favorite political philosophers' was intended as irony, but clearly the effort fell flat -- at least with a certain Fox commentator whose sense of irony may be missing."



On Thursday night's program, Beck showed exclusive video of Dunn discussing the communist leader, who was responsible for a cultural revolution in 1966 that included re-education camps and setting the army and students on witch hunts against his opponents.



Millions of Chinese suffered or died, most notably teachers, writers, political opponents or anyone deemed a "reactionary."



Dunn, taped in a speech in what appears to be a church, said the leader's philosophies were a guidepost for her own strategy on politics. She also praised the philosophy used by religious icon Mother Teresa.



"The third lesson and tip actually comes from two of my favorite political philosophers: Mao Tse-tung and Mother Theresa -- not often coupled with each other, but the two people I turn to most to basically deliver a simple point which is 'you're going to make choices; you're going to challenge; you're going to say why not; you're going to figure out how to do things that have never been done before."



The comments set Beck into a tirade.



"It's insanity. This is her hero's work," he said. "She thinks of this man's work all the time?



"It would be like me saying to you, 'you know who my favorite political philosopher is? Adolf Hitler.' Have you read Mein Kampf? [She wants to] fight your fight like Hitler did," Beck said.



Dunn recently blasted Fox News saying that the cable news organization often operates as either "the research arm or the communications arm of the Republican Party."



"When he [Obama] goes on Fox, he understands that he's not really going on it as a news network at this point. He's going to debate the opposition. And that's fine. He never minds doing that.



"They're widely viewed as a part of the Republican Party. Take [the GOP's] talking points, put them on the air, take [the GOP's] opposition research, put them on the air," Dunn said.



Fox News in a statement to CNN said its programming was comparable to the editorial page of a newspaper.



Still, Beck wasted no time Thursday in using Dunn's comments to blast the Obama administration for promoting what he deems a radical agenda.



"America, how many radicals is it going to take? How many radicals surrounding our president before you understand that when the president said he wants to transform the country, he wants to transform it all right," Beck said.



Dunn pointed out that during his presidential campaign and since being elected President Obama has been interviewed by Fox News and will be again in the future.  Watch more of Dunn's comments »



"He'll go on Fox because he engages with ideological opponents," Dunn said. "He has done that before, and he'll do it again."



But it's not just Dunn, a Democrat, who has used Mao as someone she reads.



Media Matters for America, a liberal media watchdog group, points out that former Speaker of the House Newt Gingrich, also a Fox News contributor, quoted Mao in a 1995 Roll Call profile.



"War is politics with blood; politics is war without

***

NEW YORK (CNN)  -- The wife of accused swindler Bernard Madoff pulled $15.5 million out of a Madoff-related brokerage firm in Massachusetts in the weeks before his arrest, authorities there disclosed Wednesday.

Bernard Madoff is under 24-hour house arrest in his Upper East Side luxury apartment.

The withdrawals by Ruth Madoff took place in November and December, according to a complaint filed by state regulators against Cohmad Securities, a firm they said was "intertwined" with Madoff's New York-based company.

The regulators say Cohmad has refused to provide information about its ties to Madoff, who is accused of running a Ponzi scheme that may have cost investors up to $50 billion.

Daily wire transaction reports show Cohmad was aware of transfers to and from Madoff-related accounts, the filing states.

"For example, the few reports produced by Cohmad show that Ruth Madoff withdrew $5.5 million on November 25, 2008 and withdrew $10 million on December 10, 2008," investigators said.

Bernard Madoff, 70, was arrested December 11 and is currently under house arrest in his Manhattan luxury apartment. He faces one charge of securities fraud in connection with an international scheme that has cost some investors their life savings and could face up to 20 years in prison and a $5 million fine if convicted.

In January, prosecutors tried to revoke his $10 million bail after he mailed more than $1 million worth of diamond-studded jewelry to friends and family, a move they said showed he was trying to move assets out of government hands. But a judge ruled Madoff was neither a danger to the community nor a flight risk.

Prosecutors and Madoff's lawyers have agreed for a second time to push back the deadline for an indictment or probable cause hearing for the former investor, sources close to the case said Wednesday. The previous deadline of Wednesday -- which was itself a delay -- has now been moved back another 30 days.

Madoff and the Securities and Exchange Commission already have agreed to a partial civil judgment against the disgraced investment manager, one that could eventually force him to pay fines and return investors' money.

Under the terms of the deal, Madoff will keep a previously reached agreement to freeze his assets and not to violate any other securities laws, but it does not require him to admit or deny any allegations.

CNN's Allan Chernoff and Amy Sahba contributed to this report.

***

PHOENIX, Arizona  -- New England's failure to protect star quarterback Tom Brady proved the decisive factor as the Patriots flunked their chance of a perfect 19-0 season and Super Bowl glory.



Brady is sacked by defensive end Michael Strahan in the third guarter of the Super Bowl.



Brady has weaved his magic behind an all but impregnable offensive line all season but not on Sunday as he was sacked five times in the 17-14 defeat to the New York Giants.



"They have some great pressure schemes, obviously some great pass rushers," Brady said.



"Once we kind of got the idea of what we were doing, I thought we handled it much better, but we didn't get the ball in the end zone enough."



Coming in, Brady had been sacked a career-low 24 times this season playing behind a line that produced three Pro Bowlers in Koppen, left tackle Matt Light and left guard Logan Mankins.



Throw in right guard Stephen Neal and right tackle Nick Kaczur, and Brady played most of his record-breaking season not having to worry much about getting hit by bloodthirsty defenders.



"I like when I don't get touched," Brady said earlier in the week.



Then, disaster struck -- in the form of an all-out, pressure-packed swarming defensive attack by the Giants -- in the worst possible setting. It was the first time Brady had been sacked as many as five times since the New York Jets did it on Sept. 21, 2003.



New England had no answer for the Giants' bulldozing defense.



"If I could tell you, we'd have it fixed," running back Kevin Faulk said. "At the same time, they outplayed us."



They sure did, and left Brady wondering what hit him. Brady simply had no time to find Randy Moss and his other targets on a regular basis against the Giants.



With 19 seconds left in the game and the Patriots facing a do-or-die scenario, Brady was sacked for the final time when Jay Alford pulled him down at New England's 16-yard line.



Brady was left with nothing to do but try two straight desperation heaves to Moss to no avail.



"I think their intensity from the beginning snap to the end of the game was really higher than ours," Moss said. "We just couldn't meet that intensity."



With help from their linemen, the Patriots set NFL records for points scored and total touchdowns, while Brady broke the league mark for TD passes and Moss set the record for scoring receptions. That high-powered offense was held to a season-low 14 points in the Super Bowl -- mostly because it couldn't get time.



"They played well defensively," coach Bill Belichick said. "They've been able to rush. They led the league in sacks, they rushed all year. They are a good defensive football team. They played well."



"We all could've done things better tonight," Brady said. E-mail to a friend

***

Lima, Peru (CNN) -- Peru will turn over to Chilean authorities all evidence into allegations that a Peruvian air force officer was spying for the neighboring country, Peruvian President Alan Garcia said Monday.



Garcia ordered his foreign minister and justice department to hand over all details of the investigation so Chile could "give the corresponding explanations," he said in a televised address.



The alleged spying by Chile, Garcia declared, was the result of fear and an inferiority complex by the Chileans. He added that Peru will not let the incident become a full-blown crisis between the two nations.



The suspect, Victor Ariza Mendoza, remained imprisoned at a maximum security facility north of Lima, authorities said.



Two other Peruvian air force officers, accused of being collaborators, also were detained, as were two Chilean military officers who were alleged accomplices, CNN en Español reported.



Mendoza could face charges of treason, which carry a minimum sentence of 25 years.



News of the spy case caused Garcia to prematurely end a trip to Singapore for the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation.



Garcia and his Chilean counterpart, Michelle Bachelet, had planned to attend a workshop Saturday with other world leaders, but the Peruvian leader canceled his agenda to return to Lima.



Chile has dismissed the espionage allegations.



"Chile has nothing to do with this case," Chilean Foreign Minister Mariano Fernandez told reporters after a meeting with his nation's ambassador to Peru.



According to local media, the suspected spy once worked at the Peruvian Embassy in Chile and sold secrets to the Chileans since 2002, CNN en Español reported.



Chile and Peru have a history of animosity, having fought in the War of the Pacific from 1879 to 1883. Hard feelings linger to this day.



The two nations nearly came to war in 1975, when left-wing Peruvian leader Juan Velasco, who was backed by Cuba, wanted to invade Chile, which was led by right-wing Gen. Augusto Pinochet. The invasion was called off, and Velasco was deposed in a coup a short while later. Tensions rose again when Peru discovered a Chilean spy mission, but war was averted.



More recently, tensions between the two South American nations flared in December after the revelation that Peru's top army general said at a party that Chileans in Peru would be sent back in coffins or body bags.



Both countries said they would work to heal relations after the general's comments.



Journalist Gisu Guerra contributed to this report.

***

HERMOSILLO, Mexico (CNN)  -- Parents in northern Mexico on Sunday began to bury the children who died in a horrific day care fire as Mexican authorities raised the death toll from the blaze to 41.



Maria Jesus Coronado Padilla mourns her 2-year-old daughter, Paulette Daniela Coronado Padilla on Sunday.



A large crowd of mourners attended a funeral for six of the victims Sunday afternoon in Hermosillo, about 200 miles (320 kilometers) south of the U.S. border. The cause of Friday's fire at ABC Day Care wasn't known, but investigators concluded that the fire didn't start inside the building, said Eduardo Bours, the governor of Sonora state.



Neighbors described parents arriving at the day care center completely desperate on Friday, seeing it engulfed in flames and knowing there was no way to get the children out. The building had two doors, one of which was padlocked shut, and windows were too high for the children to reach, officials said.



Some parents rammed their vehicles into the building to try to free the trapped children, witnesses told CNN.  Watch parents gather at site of fire »



"When we went out and ran towards the nursery, teachers already had many children outside, those who could walk properly," said one man at the scene, who did not give his name. "A pickup truck broke down the walls. The dad of one of the kids broke down one of the walls with his car driving in reverse, and that helped us a bit."



Others said they waited for hours for news of their children.  Watch a town in deep shock »



"They didn't tell us anything, nothing, until like 6 p.m.," said Ofelia Vasquez, whose 4-year-old son Herman was in the building. She said she eventually was told he was at Chavez Hospital.



"We went there and we saw that he was badly burned, 75 percent of his body was burned," she said.



Herman Vasquez died after surgery, his mother said.



As of Sunday afternoon, 26 children remained hospitalized, 12 of them in critical condition, Sonoran authorities said. Another 10 children had been transported to other hospitals: eight to Guadalajara, one to Ciudad, Obregon, and two to Sacramento, California.



A team of 29 medical experts in Hermosillo was deciding if any more victims would be moved to the Shriners Hospital for Children in Sacramento, or elsewhere.



In addition, six adults were injured, Sonora spokesman Daniel Duran said.



"Without a doubt this is the worst disaster we've had," Bours told CNN.



President Felipe Calderon traveled to Hermosillo on Saturday. He arrived with Interior Secretary Fernando Gomez Mont and Health Secretary Jose Angel Cordova to get firsthand updates from doctors and investigators, the state news agency Notimex reported.



Calderon ordered the nation's attorney general to investigate the blaze.



Most of the victims died from smoke inhalation and not burns, Bours said. But the fire was serious enough for the roof to collapse, he added.



At the time of the blaze, 142 children were inside the ABC Day Care. The day care is for children ages 2 to 4, but Bours confirmed that children even younger were among the victims.



All the children at the center had been accounted for by Saturday evening, Bours said.



A severely burned 3-year-old girl arrived Saturday at the Sacramento hospital -- where pediatric burn treatment is a specialty -- and was in critical condition, according to Dr. Tina Palmieri, assistant chief of the burn unit.



The child was burned over 80 percent of her body, the doctor told reporters. She said the hospital normally can save just over half of the children with burns that severe.



In Hermosillo, a large crowd gathered outside of the emergency entrance of the city's general hospital and many people consoled each other, video from the scene showed.



"They told me that this happened in a matter of five minutes," Hermosillo Mayor Ernesto Gandara told reporters after surveying the scene.

***

Bangkok, Thailand (CNN) -- High tide on Friday sent some water pouring into the Bangkok's Chinatown area, but it receded within a few hours, while the commercial district remained largely dry.





Those who have stayed in the city despite the government's pleas to leave are waiting to see if the highest tide, forecast to come Saturday afternoon, will overwhelm defenses along the city's river and many canals and bring more damaging floods.





Floodwaters that drenched much of central and lower parts of northern Thailand crept Thursday into Bangkok, stressing embankments and flooding roads, parking lots, factories and markets and sending many residents fleeing for dry ground.





Up to 1 meter (3.2 feet) of water was expected in some areas, said Thai Prime Minister Yingluck Shinawatra, as the Chao Phraya River spilled into the city of 12 million people.





Several districts were under a mandatory evacuation order.





"There is water from underground coming up," said Pracha Promnok, chief of the Flood Relief Operations Center. "We are unable to do anything (to stop it)."





Yingluck fielded criticism that the flood relief center had not done enough and -- with tears in her eyes -- called on the public to sympathize with emergency staff, as some of them had also become victims of the flooding.





"Many are exhausted and some problems cannot be controlled and were not caused by (the center)," Yingluck said, according to MCOT.





Thailand's government declared public holidays through the rest of the month in 21 flood-affected provinces, and appealed to Bangkok residents to head to the countryside.





People flocked to bus terminals and crowded the Suvarnabhumi Airport, the main airport, in hopes of reaching higher ground. The smaller domestic airport, its runways inundated, was closed until November 1, but Suvarnabhumi was operating normally, protected by 3.5 meters (almost 12 feet) of dikes, said Toopetch Booyarith of the Airport Authority of Thailand.





"We are confident that we will not be affected," Toopetch said.





CNNGo: Updated info for tourists





The streets of the normally bustling metropolis that is notorious for massive traffic jams stood empty Thursday, save for a few public buses and taxis that were able to navigate through. There was even water standing before the Grand Palace, perhaps the most adored of Bangkok's landmarks.





In some neighborhoods vacated by people, domestic animals were left to fend for themselves. "You'll see dogs stranded on rooftops, dogs trying to swim," said Marcelo Cacciola, of the Soi Dog Foundation. "So we went to these little towns around the Bangkok area with boats and rescued the dogs."





Some hotels slashed prices to accommodate the flood-affected and some tourist areas reported full occupancies. In the resort town of Pattaya, fleeing Bangkok residents found it hard to get a room in hotels overflowing with European tourists, the Bangkok Post reported.





Thanyarat Hemkittiwat said she was planning to leave Bangkok to stay with relatives outside the city. "Some families in southern Bangkok had their house flooded," said the 31-year-old worker at a furniture export company, which was shut after it, too, was flooded. "The water level is two meters (six feet) high and smells very bad," she said.





She said the military had set up a flood relief center, "but now even that has water coming in it."





UNICEF said it was providing $300,000 in aid that includes 20,000 insecticide-treated mosquito nets.





The U.S. State Department issued a travel alert recommending against all but essential travel to affected areas. It noted that most tourist destinations, such as Phuket and Chiang Mai, were unaffected.





U.S. Ambassador Kristie Kenny said the crisis was slow-moving and it was hard to know what would be hit next.





The United States has already provided civilian relief resources, including water pumps, water purifiers and life vests, she said, and two U.S. helicopters are helping the Thai military determine the extent of the flooding.





The floods, caused by monsoon rains that saturated rivers, have killed 373 people nationwide

***

WEST PALM BEACH, Florida (CNN) -- To pick up the morning paper and see the word "recount" in a headline stirs an ominous case of déjà vu.



Judge Robert Rosenberg examines a ballot in Broward County, Florida, during the election recount in 2000.



At issue in recent days in Palm Beach County is a local judicial race that is hardly of national note. But problems with administering the local election, and statements from county officials that some critics call confusing, if not contradictory, have some worried about the coming presidential election.



Polls showing a dead heat in the battle for Florida's 27 electoral votes only add to the drama.



"Managerially, software-wise, procedure-wise, training-wise, there is no confidence that these people will be ready in less than 50 days for the election we are all going to have," said Sid Dinerstein, the Palm Beach County Republican chairman.



"Never again!" was the county's promise after the butterfly ballots and hanging chads of the 2000 recount drama.



For 2004, the county switched to touch-screen machines. There were no major issues here. But some local Democrats, including Rep. Robert Wexler, demanded changes because they said the touch-screen system might be vulnerable to fraud and did not, in their view, provide a reliable audit trail.



So the county switched again, to its third system in eight years, this time a paper ballot that is scanned by an optical reading device. The paper is then retained in case of recounts or other irregularities.



Local officials say the system works and promise a smooth Election Day.



But Dinerstein says the recount in the judicial race proves the folly of switching.



"We could have had nice, reliable computers counting and giving all of us an honest count," he said in an interview.



The 2000 recount drama led to major changes -- more than 40 states made changes or adjustments to the way they conducted and administered elections.



"We have had more change in our election process since 2000 than we have seen since the Voting Rights Act of 1965," said Indiana Secretary of State Todd Rokita, a recent past president of the national association of top state elections officials. Indiana alone spent some $67 million on new equipment, including a statewide voter file, and also requires a color photo ID on Election Day.



Rokita takes issue with those who question the reliability of newer, high-tech systems.



"You know, we use technology in every one of our financial transactions and social transactions -- why did we not until 2000 put that type of technology to use when it comes to our most sacred civic transaction, you know, the voting process?" Rokita asked in an interview at his office in Indianapolis.



"The technology is just a tool. And what the conspiracy theorists want you to believe is the technology runs the election -- and nothing could be further from the truth," he said.



"If you have well-trained people who know how to use that technology and those tools, to know what to do if a battery dies on election day, all those things, then you will have a fair and an accurate election and the people are the ones who will produce that. And If they are not trained and they are not prepared, then you are not going to have a good election. But it is the people, not the machines."



Indiana expects a record number of new voters this year, and Rokita is changing his usual advice as a result. In the past he has encouraged voting on Election Day, saying it builds community spirit and gives voters up to the last moment to ponder their choices.



But this year, given the high interest in his state and nationwide, he suggests voters who are certain they will not change their minds help ease the burden -- and the potential for mistakes on Election Day -- by taking advantage of any early voting options in their states.

***

(CNN) -- Shortly after McDonald's celebrated its 30-year presence in France, the fast-food chain is conquering one of the country's most valued cultural institutions --the Louvre.



McDonald's burgers and fries will be available under the glass pyramid of the Louvre.



The restaurant will be serving its fast burgers in the Carrousel du Louvre, an underground shopping mall which lies under the main entrance of the museum and which still contains an ancient wall that was discovered during construction works.  McDonald's plans seem to have caused more media attention abroad than in France, but for some French outlets, the idea of combining fast food and ancient art is stomach churning.



The Parisian Web site "Louvre pour tous" (Louvre for everyone) describes the company's plans to open a restaurant in the prestigious museum as "bad taste" and blamed the Louvre's directors for failing to prevent what could result in "fragrances of fries drifting under Mona Lisa's nose".



Marion Benaiteau, spokeswoman for the museum, told CNN it was not their decision and declined to comment further on the issue.



The Carrousel du Louvre mall is managed by Unibail-Rodamco, Europe's largest property company, and not the museum itself.



The mall, which is situated next to the most visited museum in the world, counts 8.3 million visitors a year and enjoyed a total gross sales of $75 million in 2008.



Le Parisien, a daily newspaper described the difference between McDonald's and the Louvre by comparing Ronald McDonald, the restaurant's clown character, to Venus de Milo, the famous ancient Greek statue of Aphrodite, which is on display at the Louvre.



Should McDonald's be in the Louvre? Tell us what you think in the Soundoff box below.  McDonald's sees the opening of its new restaurant next to the home of Mona Lisa as nothing out of the ordinary.



"There are already many other restaurants in the mall, so we will only be one of the many restaurants that offer visitors their products." said a spokeswoman for McDonald's in France, who declined to be named. "There's even a Starbucks," she added.



Museum lovers in France are shocked about the news, but not surprised, one told CNN.



"Museums have to offer services like restaurants and boutiques, it's completely normal," Jean-Michel Raingeard, President of the Federation of French Friends of Museums told CNN.



What worries him, however, is the choice of shops.



"Museum directors seem to care more about the number of people they attract rather than the quality of people. Should a museum be a museum or an amusement park?" asks Jean Michel Raingeard, who is also the European Vice President for The World Federation of Friends of Museums.



Criticism, though fierce, has not halted the plans: construction work will start soon and the restaurant should be open "by the end of the year," Mcdonald's said.



The menu will also very likely stay the same. "McDonald's functions the same way in all of France, so there will probably be no special menus," the spokeswoman said.

***

Las Vegas (CNN) -- President Barack Obama traveled to Las Vegas on Monday to launch a Western trip that mixes campaigning with presidential business -- and an appearance on "The Tonight Show."





After a campaign event at The Bellagio hotel and casino Monday afternoon, Obama met with homeowners at a private residence to announce new efforts to help homeowners with refinancing.





The government's Home Affordable Refinance Program will be changed to make it easier for homeowners to capitalize on current low interest rates by refinancing old, high-interest mortgages.





The new rules will allow homeowners who owe more than 125% of the market value of their homes to get the new loans.





"So let me just give you an example. If you've got a $250,000 mortgage at 6 percent interest rates, but the value of your home has fallen below $200,000, right now you can't refinance. You're ineligible," Obama said, according to a copy of his remarks released by the White House.





"But that's going to change. If you meet certain requirements, you will have the chance to refinance at lower rates, which could save you hundreds of dollars a month, and thousands of dollars a year on mortgage payments."





In addition, Obama told the gathering,"there are going to be lower closing costs, and certain refinancing fees will be eliminated -- fees that can sometimes cancel out the benefits of refinancing altogether." The changes also will allow consumers to shop around for better rates beyond their original lenders, he said.





Learn why the program probably won't help the real estate market





The president then traveled to Los Angeles, where he was expected to deliver remarks at two more campaign events.





On Tuesday, Obama will tape an appearance on "The Tonight Show with Jay Leno," according to the White House.





The last time the president appeared on the show, in March 2009, he caused controversy by attempting to poke fun at his poor bowling skills -- evident during a 2008 campaign stop. He told Leno he bowled 129 in the White House bowling alley and said his bowling skills were "like Special Olympics or something."





Before the show aired, the president called Special Olympics Chairman Tim Shriver to apologize, White House officials said, and stress his intention was not to humiliate the disabled. Shriver called Obama's apology "sincere and heartfelt," but noted in a written response, "This is a teachable moment for our country."





After the "Tonight Show" taping, Obama will travel to San Francisco for a fundraiser, according to the White House. On Tuesday night, he will be in Denver to push his jobs agenda. Other private fundraisers will also be sprinkled in, officials said.





A Democratic official estimates the campaign will haul in more than $4 million from six fundraisers in three states.





It's the second time in less than a month that Obama has headed west to push for jobs and raise campaign cash.





A senior campaign official noted the importance of spending time in the region, saying the "campaign has already established an extensive operation in Western states."





And they expect to make "heavy investments there."





The official singled out Colorado, Nevada, New Mexico and Arizona, where the campaign has offices and field staff.





In 2008 Obama won decisively in Nevada, Colorado and New Mexico, but lost to Republican John McCain in McCain's home state of Arizona.





This time around the economy remains under heavy downward pressure despite efforts by the Obama administration to turn things around.





In Nevada, home prices have plummeted by 53% since the peak, and according to online real estate site Zillow, 85% of the state's homeowners owe more than their homes are worth.





At his fundraiser at the Bellagio Hotel in Las Vegas Monday, the president acknowledged that "things are tough right now," but he reminded the audience of some 300 supporters of his accomplishments.





"AsÂ tough as things are right now, weÂ were able to stabilize this economy and make sure it didn't go into a

***

(CNN) -- The American man who swam to Aung San Suu Kyi's home in Myanmar said Thursday he still believes he did the right thing, even though his visit led to an extension of the pro-democracy leader's house arrest.



John Yettaw told Aung San Suu Kyi he had a vision she would be murdered.



John Yettaw, 53, swam across a lake to Suu Kyi's home in May and stayed for two days before authorities arrested him along with Suu Kyi and two of her staff.



His presence violated the terms of Suu Kyi's house arrest -- which was about to expire -- leading a judge to extend it by another 18 months.



But Yettaw said he made the trip to Yangon to save Suu Kyi from assassination, and that it was successful. What critics have described as a "stunt" brought enough attention to her plight, he said, to ensure that Suu Kyi could not be killed by the country's ruling military junta.



Yettaw said on CNN's "American Morning" that he is "grateful that she's alive, grateful that the entire world is watching and there's no way these generals are ever going to try to assassinate her."



To many, however, his visit did more harm than good. Some thought he might be mentally ill to attempt what he did -- an idea he rejects, though he says he can understand why people believe it.



But Yettaw said he had no idea that Suu Kyi would be arrested and put on trial for something that he would do.



"I wept every day and I've suffered every day" because of the punishment she received, he told CNN. He called her sentence "heartbreaking."



The case of Suu Kyi, a Nobel Peace Prize laureate who has been the symbol of the country's opposition for two decades, first came to Yettaw's attention when he was in Thailand and saw her photograph.



"I instantly had a premonition, or a vision, that I saw myself going through a lake and over a fence and was at a back door of a house," he told CNN. "Then (I) Googled from there and realized she lived next to Inya Lake and I got a visa to get into Yangon. And I thought, since this has been presented to me, I'm going to make this happen."



The retired bus driver and Vietnam veteran from Missouri told his wife only that he had a premonition he would become a political prisoner in Myanmar. She told her husband not to go, but he went anyway.



In November 2008, Yettaw said, he managed to swim across the lake and leave scriptures from the Book of Mormon for Suu Kyi. But later he had a vision that Suu Kyi would be assassinated, so he decided to make another trip.



That was the fateful trip on May 3.



"The second time that I came was the same route, in through the sewer tunnel and into the water," he said. "But this time of year the water level was much lower and I had two bags filled with a lot of stuff, and so I had to military-crawl with these two bags and I got caught. Two soldiers spotted me.



"Fortunately, by the time they got close to me, I rolled over into the water with my bags which were tied together, and I literally was walking through the water and they were frightened. They, I don't think, saw me -- they saw this bag floating through the water and moving at a consistent rate, so they started throwing rocks at it. And inside I prayed, 'What do I do?' and the only response that I felt, inspiration, was 'keep walking.' And that's what I did."



Yettaw managed to reach Suu Kyi's house and was able to explain that he had a vision she would be murdered. He said Suu Kyi didn't think he was crazy, and she was "absolutely" happy to see him.



Yettaw was arrested and convicted of violating immigration laws, municipal

***

ATLANTA, Georgia (CNN) -- Four active-duty U.S. soldiers -- three of them elite Army Rangers -- have been arrested and charged with planning to rob drug traffickers.



A courtroom sketch shows David White, left, Stefan Champagne, center, and Carlos Lopez.



Wearing street clothes, Rangers Carlos Lopez, 30, and David Ray White, 28, and Army medic Stefan Andre Champagne, 28, appeared in federal court Friday.



They're charged with conspiracy to possess and distribute cocaine and with carrying firearms in connection with that conspiracy.



U.S. Magistrate Judge Alan Baverman ordered them held in custody until a preliminary hearing Wednesday.



Another Ranger, Randy Spivey, 32, is scheduled to appear in court Monday.



"It is a sad day when members of one of America's most elite corps of soldiers, the Army Rangers, are alleged to have become involved in criminal activity," U.S. Attorney David E. Nahmias said of the case.



"These men were trained to defend the people and principles of this country, not to use their skills to steal cocaine from drug dealers at gunpoint."



Lopez, White and Champagne were arrested Thursday at a storage facility in Sandy Springs, Georgia, a suburb just north of Atlanta, by agents of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives who had set up a sting operation.



Spivey was apprehended at Camp Frank D. Merrill, an Army Ranger training center in Dahlonega, Georgia, on Friday, the ATF said. Dahlonega is about 60 miles north of Atlanta.



Lopez, White and Champagne were to commit the robbery while Spivey covered for them back at the camp, where the men are stationed, according to an affidavit filed with U.S. District Court.



All four were to get a cut of the spoils of the robbery, the affidavit from ATF Agent Brett Turner says.



The investigation began in November, when the ATF "became aware" that some soldiers were interested in robbing drug dealers of their cocaine, Turner says.



He posed as a disaffected security guard for the drug traffickers who wanted to "rip them off." The first try to set up the "robbery" failed, but a second attempt earlier this month succeeded, leading to the arrests at the storage facility and, a day later, the Ranger camp.



A subsequent search found that Lopez, White and Champagne were carrying semiautomatic pistols and had an AR-15 assault rifle and a field pouch with 15 magazines of ammunition for it in their vehicle. Agents also found a ski mask, binoculars and a Taser among the items the men brought with them.



The four soldiers face minimum mandatory sentences of 10 years in prison each for the drug conspiracy and an additional five years, consecutive, for the weapons allegation.



The Army Rangers are an elite light infantry fighting force capable of deploying anywhere in the world within 18 hours.



They became a permanent presence in the U.S. military in the 1970s. From the Colonial Era until that time, Rangers were activated for specific missions or conflicts and then deactivated when their work was completed. E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- Actress Lynn Redgrave died Sunday after a seven-year battle with breast cancer, according to her family.





Redgrave, 67, was surrounded by her children at her Connecticut home when she died, the family said in a statement Monday morning.





The star of stage, film and television was twice nominated for an Academy Award: for best actress in 1966 for her role in "Georgy Girl" and for best supporting actress in the 1998 film "Gods and Monsters."





"She lived, loved and worked harder than ever before," the family said. "The endless memories she created as a mother, grandmother, writer, actor and friend will sustain us for the rest of our lives. Our entire family asks for privacy through this difficult time," the statement said.





Redgrave is from "a family of actors, embracing as it does more than five generations," she wrote on her official website.





She is the younger sister of Oscar-winning actress Vanessa Redgrave and the aunt of the late actress Natasha Richardson.





Her parents, Sir Michael Redgrave and Rachel Kempson, were British stage and film actors.





Her paternal grandparents, Roy Redgrave and Margaret Scudamore, were stage and silent film actors.





Redgrave teamed with daughter Annabel Clark in 2004 to produce the book "Journal: A Mother and Daughter's Recovery from Breast Cancer."





"I thought I was living very fully before this happened," she said in 2005. "But in comparison, no, I really wasn't. I wasn't taking the time to notice things. I didn't see things as brightly or as sharply or as memorably as I do now.





"I really don't let a moment slide by. I just don't. It's a big price to pay, isn't it, to have to have cancer to learn that? But it is in the end, I have to say, a price worth paying," Redgrave said.





Redgrave's professional acting debut was in 1962 at London's Royal Court Theatre in a production of "A Midsummer Night's Dream." A year later, she was invited to join Britain's National Theatre for its inaugural season under the direction of Sir Laurence Olivier, according to her personal biography.





Her first film performance came in "Tom Jones," a 1963 movie co-starring Albert Finney and her mother.





Redgrave's "Georgy Girl" role three years later, opposite James Mason, earned her a best actress Golden Globe and the Academy Award best actress nomination. Her portrayal of a wisecracking young woman was a box office hit.





Other early film roles included "The National Health," "Everything You Always Wanted to Know About Sex," "The Happy Hooker" and "Getting It Right."





Redgrave enjoyed a revitalized film career late in life. She won a second Golden Globe and her second Oscar nomination for her comedic role in "Gods and Monsters."





She continued to make movies despite her illness, including her last film role in "Confessions of a Shopaholic," which hit theaters a year ago.





Redgrave debuted on Broadway in 1967 in "Black Comedy." The first of three Tony nominations came in 1976 for "Mrs. Warren's Profession." She was nominated again for her Broadway roles in "Shakespeare for My Father" in 1993 and "The Constant Wife" in 2005.





She teamed with her sister Vanessa Redgrave on the London stage in "Three Sisters" in 1991.





The sisters worked together the same year in a television version of "Whatever Happened to Baby Jane?"





Her three Emmy nominations all came for TV work in the 1980s, including an episode of "House Calls" in 1981, "The Shooting Company" in 1982 and "Walking on Air" in 1987.





CNN's David Daniel contributed to this report.

***

Sunny Hostin is a legal analyst on CNN's "American Morning."



Hollywood private eye Anthony Pellicano represented himself at his federal trial. The jury's still out.



NEW YORK (CNN) -- There's a courthouse adage: A person who represents himself has a fool for a client.



When a defendant utters those tragic words, "I'm going to represent myself," judges blanch, attorneys snicker, and even the court reporters grimace. I've been on the opposite side of those who have chosen to represent themselves. It wasn't pleasant.



Since 1975, when the U.S. Supreme Court held that the Sixth Amendment "grants to the accused personally the right to make his own defense," many defendants have decided to take the law literally into their own hands.



The most recent self-represented "client" is Anthony Pellicano, the Hollywood private investigator who's been on trial for 78 counts lodged against him and two co-defendants.



Pellicano's jury has been out for a week, so it's not yet clear whether the outcome of his case will follow the conventional wisdom.



The 64-year-old celebrity sleuth is accused of leading a criminal enterprise that raked in more than $2 million by illegally spying, allegedly using wiretaps and law enforcement databases, on Hollywood's rich and famous. He then dished the dirt to their rivals.



If convicted of leading a criminal conspiracy, known as a RICO charge, he could spend up 20 years to life in prison. RICO, by the way, stands for the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act. It's the law the Justice Department used to bring down the mob.



Prosecutors have to prove that Pellicano and his co-defendants ran a corrupt enterprise that profited from information they obtained illegally.



U.S. District Judge Dale Fischer granted Pellicano's request to represent himself, but she wasn't too happy about it. "If the U.S. Supreme Court didn't require me to let defendants represent themselves, I wouldn't do it," she said.



Even without a law degree, Pellicano seemed to realize that getting the jury to acquit him of the conspiracy charge was important. During his 15-minute closing argument, he denied he led a criminal enterprise and insisted that he acted as a "lone ranger" while gathering information for his clients.



He also told the jurors that he shared no information with colleagues as he conducted investigations and allowed others to learn only what he wanted them to know. "There was no criminal enterprise or conspiracy. Mr. Pellicano alone is responsible. That is the simple truth," he said, referring to himself in the third person.



But unlike a seasoned attorney, he failed to address the evidence against him, including illegally taped conversations. Instead, he bragged about his career, while wearing an orange prison jumpsuit, saying of himself, again in the third person: "Perhaps his business card should read, 'I deliver,' because he did it over and over again." Courtroom observers said his "cross-examination" often consisted of little more than settling old scores.



So is Pellicano a fool, or absolutely brilliant?



Well, if history is our teacher, he would do better if he had a lawyer, even a bad one. If you have a bad lawyer and you get convicted, you can always argue on appeal that your lawyer was ineffective and get a new trial.



The following self-appointed lawyers learned the hard way that they had fools for clients:



In fact, I can't think of a defendant who represented himself or herself as well, or better, than a lawyer. So maybe I'm biased, but lawyers are trained professionals.



We're trained in the art of trial war. Let us do our jobs.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Some "Occupy" demonstrators who've clashed with police in New York City have migrated south as the new year begins, joining their colleagues in the nation's capital where authorities continue to allow protest camps at two locations.





"We're here because we got pushed out of New York, but we're also here because this is the heart of where all politics happen," said a protester who would not give his name. "Police know me," he explained, as he tried to repair a tarp torn free by high winds early Monday.





He said he has been joined by a handful of other Occupy Wall Street demonstrators pushed out by New York police.





On New Year's Eve, New York City police arrested 68 Occupy Wall Street demonstrators at their longtime camp in Zuccotti Park.





The young man, who said he left the Wall Street location weeks ago after authorities began to pressure protesters to leave, reflected on a strategy for the new year as he spoke Monday at the larger of two encampments in Washington -- at a small downtown park known as McPherson Square, near the White House .





"I think (the movement's) most important stage right now is to inform the American people, before we can give any kind of particular answer or one message," he said.





"This is still, relatively, in my opinion, a young movement, and I don't think it's so much that it's anybody having the same answers but everybody asking the same questions right now," he told CNN, speaking on camera with most of his face concealed by a heavy winter scarf.





Among the questions being asked include those from a ranking U.S. congressman, Rep. Darrell Issa, R-California, demanding to know why protesters have been allowed to make camp in the first place. Issa, in a letter two weeks ago to the U.S. Department of Interior, said he believes the camping is illegal.





But the National Park Service, which is in charge of McPherson Square, has applied the most liberal interpretation of rules against overnight camping, and officials instead consider the makeshift tent city a "24-hour vigil.





A handwritten bulletin board maintained by the protesters Monday noted it is "Day 93" of the demonstration there.





At a second location in Washington, known as Freedom Plaza, the National Park Service in recent days extended a required permit through the end of February, acting just before it was to expire on New Year's Day.





The extension may further provoke Issa, who chairs a House panel on government reform. His December 13 letter to Interior Secretary Ken Salazar expressed concern that the tent city in McPherson Square has ruined some of a $400,000 restoration project at the park, paid for with economic stimulus money.





Issa said the National Park Service has allowed "the Occupy DC movement to ecologically damage the park significantly over the past two months, by camping and killing the newly planted grass" at the location.





Protest organizers and supporters have distributed straw around the tents to deal with mud that followed heavy rains last month. Other areas where grass remains now show signs of damage from the tents and tarps blocking sunlight.





National Park Service spokeswoman Carol Johnson told CNN the protesters in McPherson Square do not require a permit because their group contains fewer than 500 people and is considered a 24-hour vigil. Police in the area have said their enforcement so far has been to keep city streets clear of protesters, and to respond to petty crime that may take place around the camps.





CNN's Greg Seaby contributed to this report.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- How does a man from an unassuming Dutch village go to being loved in South Korea, adored in Australia, revered in Russia and admired in England?



Guus Hiddink, the Russia and Chelsea coach, has had much to smile about in his 22-year managerial career.



By being an exceptional football manager, for one.



Enjoying success around the world -- at different levels with different players in different cultures -- has made Guus Hiddink one of the most admired bosses around.



Born in rural Varsseveld, near the German border, in 1946, Hiddink's early years were unremarkable. While playing semi-professional football, he spent 10 years as a gym teacher at a school for children with learning difficulties.



Most of his playing days were in the midfield of De Graafschap, a smallish club with no history of winning silverware. He later spent two years playing in America before returning to retire at De Graafschap.



Watch CNN's exclusive interview with Hiddink »



Little, then, to suggest that here was a man who would achieve so much in his later career. But great players seldom become great managers.



His first steps in that direction came at De Graafschap, Holland, where he was assistant manager before moving to the same role at Dutch giants PSV Eindhoven.  See key moments from Hiddink's career »



By 1987, at the age of 40, he was in charge of PSV and led them to their 1988 European Cup win, a feat unthinkable today. He almost reached the final again in 2005 during his second spell in Eindhoven.



Hiddink's keeper at PSV, Hans van Breukelen, revealed some of the manager's methods. "He's very interested in people and immediately tries to create a family environment," he told Britain's Sun newspaper.



"I can vividly remember him smoking and having a cup of coffee with his players. I don't know if he still smokes, but he was a chain smoker at PSV."



Hiddink's resume includes stints in other high-pressure jobs such as Fenerbahce, Valencia and Real Madrid, but it's on the international scene where his shrewd tactical mind, organizational skills and motivational prowess grabbed attention.



Semifinalists with Holland at the 1998 World Cup, he took over South Korea in 2001 and led the co-hosts of the 2002 World Cup to the last four. No Asian country had ever gone as far in a World Cup before and he left the job a national hero.



He agreed to coach another underdog in the shape of Australia in 2005 and led them to the 2006 World Cup. There, the Socceroos had eventual winners Italy rattled for much of their second-round match before succumbing to a late, controversial penalty.



Hiddink took Russia to Euro 2008, where they were beaten by Spain at the semifinal stage.



Naturally his hometown Varsseveld wanted to capitalize on Hiddink's huge global popularity. The "Guuseum" was built in his honor, which for a time was particularly popular with South Koreans on a pilgrimage to see from where their idol hailed.



Chelsea were in the doldrums when he arrived on a short-term deal in January as a favor to his comrade, Roman Abramovich, the club's billionaire owner.



And the Hiddink magic has worked again, giving the Blues direction to a season that was drifting under previous boss Luiz Felipe Scolari.



But the straight-speaking Dutchman is loyal to the project he has in charge of the Russian national side and insists he will leave Chelsea at the end of the season regardless.



Sure of himself but free of ego, Hiddink knows what he wants. And, as he's repeatedly proved, he knows how to get it too.

***

(CNN) -- Former Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice described Moammar Gadhafi's crush on her as "weird and a bit creepy," saying she breathed a sigh of relief when she realized a video he made of her was not raunchy.





In her new book, "No Higher Honor: A Memoir of My Years in Washington," Rice said the ruler once played her a video montage of herself set to a tune called "African Flower in the White House."





A Libyan composer wrote the song, she said.





Earlier this year, anti-Gadhafi fighters ransacking his compound in Tripoli found an album of photos of the former top Bush administration official.





"Quite extraordinary, weird and a bit creepy, " Rice told CNN's Piers Morgan on Wednesday night about the scrapbook. "I had actually known that he had this fixation on me."





Rice said when Gadhafi showed her the video montage years ago in Libya, she tried to keep the conversation on business.





"My job was to go there and do diplomatic business and get out, so that's what I did," she said. "But I have to say I did have that terrible moment when he said that he had the video. I am just glad that it all came out all right."





Gadhafi was captured and killed in October, ending a Libyan revolution that started in February against his regime.





Rice also weighed in on GOP presidential contender Herman Cain's claims that racism is behind the recent surfacing of old sexual harassment allegations against him.





"I actually don't like playing the race card on either side," Rice said. "I don't like it when people say that the criticism of President (Barack) Obama is because he is black. The criticism is because he is the president, and we tend to criticize our presidents."





Rice said Cain is "an interesting person. He has an interesting background. Obviously, a lot of business experience. He is sort of shaking up the race. I don't think that's necessarily a bad thing."





Watch Piers Morgan Tonight weeknights 9 p.m. ET. For the latest from Piers Morgan click here.

***

Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic (CNN) -- A man who acted as a legal adviser to the American missionaries arrested on child kidnapping charges in Haiti is himself facing allegations of human trafficking in El Salvador and human smuggling charges in the United States.





An international arrest warrant was issued Saturday for the legal adviser on sex-trafficking charges. Salvadoran police raided a home in May that turned up passports and an ID card in the names of both Jorge Torres Puello and his alias, Jorge Torres Orellana.





Each of the documents bore photos of the same man. His wife was arrested in that raid and charged with sex trafficking, and her trial is pending.





In a phone interview with CNN on Sunday, Jorge Torres Puello acknowledged he is the same man wanted by Salvadoran authorities. He denied the charges against him.





Full coverage of the earthquake aftermath in Haiti





According to the warrant, Torres Puello is accused of running an international sex trafficking ring that lured women and girls from the Caribbean and Central America into prostitution with offers of modeling jobs. A wanted poster released by Interpol, the international police organization, includes crimes against children as one of the offenses that Torres Puello is being sought for.





"I never did anything," Torres Puello said Sunday. "I started helping a Dominican pastor helping a lot of people who were stranded to get back to their home countries. We once gave some Nicaraguan and Costa Rican women some money to return home and instead they went to the authorities and put in a complaint against us. I never had anybody against their will."





Torres Puello also denied Salvadoran allegations that he ran a brothel out of his home with wife Ana Josefa Ramirez Orellana, who remains jailed pending trial, according to Salvadoran police.





"I want to clear the Salvador matter up and I am hiring a lawyer to do that," he said. "I know I am innocent and I want to clear my past."





His mother, Soledad Puello, told CNN Sunday that she first heard of the Salvadoran accusations when her son called to tell her of his wife's arrest. She said her son told her he had known about the sex ring, but wasn't involved in it.





Soledad Puello led CNN to believe that her son remained in the Dominican Republic, but she would not say where.





Torres Puello, who said he was born in Yonkers, New York, in 1977 to a Dominican mother and a Puerto Rican father, also said he is wanted in the United States on charges of smuggling people between Canada and the United States, which he also denied.





He said he spent 18 months in a Canadian jail pending what he called an unsuccessful extradition request by U.S. authorities.





He has served jail time in the United States before, he said -- one year in 1998 for handling funds related to a drug-trafficking operation, and was jailed again briefly between late 2001 and January 2002 for violating parole. He denied the drug charge.





Both his mother and Torres Puello say he served briefly in the U.S. Army in a military intelligence unit, and Torres Puello said he also worked undercover with the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration and the Department of Homeland Security.





A family photo shows Torres Puello in a military uniform alongside a truck with the words "U.S. Military" printed across the bumper.





CNN was unable to reach government officials to confirm his claims of working with the military, the DEA and Homeland Security.





Torres Puello's statements regarding the charges against him could not be immediately verified. But on Sunday, four men showed up at his mother's home while CNN reporters were present.





The men said they were from the U.S. Embassy and looking for Torres Puello. One of the men told Soledad Puello that her son has three outstanding arrest warrants -- two in the United States and one in El Salvador. He did not specify the charges. One of the men was wearing a T-shirt emblazoned with the words "U.S. Marshals Service, Fugitive Task Force."





Torres Puello said he made contact with the Central Valley Church in Idaho and their family representatives