(CNN) -- Somalia is facing life-threatening food and water shortages leaving millions at risk for starvation, the International Committee of the Red Cross said Wednesday.

A growing percentage of Somalia's population has become dependent on humanitarian aid.

"The Somali people are going through unbearable hardship," said Pascal Hundt, head of the ICRC's delegation for Somalia, in a written statement. "We are witnessing the worst tragedy of the past decade in Somalia."

Somalia's last severe famine, from 1991 to 1993, devastated crops, killed between 240,000 and 280,000 people and displaced up to 2 million, according to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

Humanitarian workers view Somalia's food crisis as one of the worst in the world. With winds ripping though the country, hundreds of thousands of Somalis are finding their crops as dry as the surrounding landscape, preventing harvests, killing livestock and leading to a mass risk of starvation.

The continual armed conflicts in central and south Somalia have aggravated the situation, hindering people from accessing shelter and medical attention.

A growing percentage of the population has become dependent on humanitarian aid. The ICRC, World Food Program and CARE plan to deliver four months worth of food to 435,000 Somalis within the next few weeks.

International donors are being asked by the ICRC to provide some of the emergency money. Aid includes giving blankets, kitchen sets and other shelter supplies to 150,000 people.

The WFP will be increasing the amount it spends in Somalia to $163 million in food assistance, the group said at a U.N. conference in Rome Wednesday.

In addition to drought and armed conflict, high inflation on food and fuel have also exacerbated the situation. Similar factors have affected other developing nations in Africa and other parts of the world.

Ethiopia's food crisis has affected 4.5 million people, said the United Nations Children's Fund.

As a result of widespread food shortages and little rainfall, an estimated 126,000 children are in need of medical assistance to combat severe malnutrition, while the WFP projects $193 million will be needed for urgent food distributions.

***

(CNN) -- Malaysian opposition leader Anwar Ibrahim came out of hiding Monday, and says he has damaging evidence that proves senior members of the government faked evidence for sodomy charges against him.



Malaysian opposition leader Anwar Ibrahim says he has proof sodomy charges against him were fabricated.



"I have new evidence about the fabrication of evidence against me in 1998," Anwar told CNN Monday. "I totally reject these malicious attacks."



Anwar was the heir apparent to former premier Mahathir Mohamad until 1998, when he was sacked and charged for corruption and sodomy.



The sodomy conviction was overturned, but the corruption verdict was never lifted, barring him from running for political post until this year.



In the CNN interview, Anwar rejected the sodomy charges and also said he had evidence of threats on his life that caused him to go into hiding at the Turkish embassy in Kuala Lumpur.  Listen to Anwar Ibrahim defend himself »



CNN could not immediately reach members of Malaysia's ruling party.



The ruling party, National Front Coalition, has led Malaysia since the country declared independence in 1957. Anwar's opposition party has gradually chipped away at the National Front's power.



Recently Malaysian police have said they are investigating a new sodomy charge against him, Anwar said.



The new charges were also false and were fabricated to usurp his political gains, Anwar said.



"I will challenge these attacks on every ground," Anwar said.

***

Berlin, Germany (CNN) -- The head of the German army has resigned after a news report that he knew civilians could be killed in a September airstrike in Afghanistan, Germany's defense minister told Parliament Thursday.





Gen. Wolfgang Schneiderhan, the army's chief of staff, asked to be relieved of his duties following the report in Germany's Bild newspaper, said German Defense Minister Karl-Theodor zu Guttenberg.





The Sept. 4 NATO airstrike in the northern province of Kunduz killed at least 90 people. The German commander in the area called in the strike after Afghans tried to siphon fuel from two tankers hijacked by the Taliban a day earlier.





The fuel had been earmarked for NATO's International Security Assistance Force (ISAF).





Local Afghan officials said at least half of those killed were civilians, and NATO acknowledged soon afterward that civilians had been killed.





NATO and Afghan officials launched an investigation, the results of which are still classified, ISAF told CNN Thursday.





Bild, which said it had access to confidential documents and posted a video of the airstrike on its Web site, reported that German Colonel Georg Klein was not able to rule out the possibility of civilian victims before he ordered the strike.





Bild said a report dated September 6 -- two days after the strike -- made clear that it was impossible for Klein to verify information his informant had provided before he called in the airstrike.





CNN's Diana Magnay contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Australian authorities have declared several coastal areas near Brisbane disaster zones after a massive oil spill earlier this week, according to the Queensland government.





Large stretches of Queensland's coastline are being affected by the oil.





"This is a very serious situation," Queensland Premier Anna Bligh said, according to a news release on Friday. "It appears the volume of oil involved is much greater than originally reported by the Pacific Adventurer. And the effect of the oil spill is more widespread."





The Pacific Adventurer sustained damage early Wednesday when Cyclone Hamish struck the waters of eastern Australia with more than 125 kph (77 mph) winds. The cargo ship lost 30 of its 50 containers of ammonium nitrate about 13 kilometers (8 miles) off the coast of Cape Moreton. Those containers are still missing.





The damaged ship also spilled a large amount of oil that is covering at least 60 kilometers (37 miles) of beach in and around Brisbane, according to Australian Broadcasting Corporation (ABC).  Watch sludge washing up on shorelines »





The ship's owner, Swire Shipping, initially said no more than 42,000 liters (11,100 U.S. gallons) of oil escaped from the ship, but now says that "substantially more oil was spilled," ABC reported Friday.





The ship is currently in the custody of Australia's Maritime Safety Authority in Brisbane, as the investigation into the spill continues.





A massive clean-up effort is also under way. So far, 13 oil-covered birds have been recovered, according to the Queensland government.

***

(CNN)  -- The Rev. Franklin Graham has arrived in North Korea bearing a gift for North Korean leader Kim Jong Il, the country's official news agency reported Wednesday.



The Rev. Franklin Graham reportedly will oversee the delivery of $190,000 in equipment for a dental school.



Graham handed the present, which was not identified, to a high-ranking official Wednesday to give to Kim, the Korean Central News Agency reported.



Graham, the son of the Rev. Billy Graham and the president of Samaritan's Purse, arrived Tuesday in North Korea's capital, Pyongyang, KCNA said.



On its Web site, Samaritan's Purse said Franklin Graham was to meet with high-level government officials and to inspect medical facilities that the organization has installed.



"I believe it is important to make visits like this to help improve relations and to have a better understanding with each other," Graham said, according to the Samaritan's Purse Web site.



The group said Graham will visit a hospital and also will oversee the delivery of $190,000 in equipment to outfit a dental school that can train up to 70 dentists per year.



KCNA reported that Graham said he hoped he could act as a bridge for better relations between the United States and North Korea.



The visit marks Graham's third trip to North Korea. His father visited the country in 1992 and 1994 and met with President Kim Il Sung, Samaritan's Purse said.



His mother, the late Ruth Bell Graham, attended a mission school in Pyongyang in 1934, the organization said.



Later this week, Graham is scheduled to travel to China, where he'll dedicate a clinic that Samaritan's Purse built, visit a city destroyed by last year's earthquake and speak at churches, the organization said.

***

(CNN) -- Japan is grappling with its worst economic crisis since the end of World War II, the nation's economic and fiscal policy minister said Monday.

A businessman walks past a homeless man taking a nap at a Tokyo park.

The comments from Kaoru Yosano followed news of Japan's gross domestic product falling 12.7 percent in the fourth quarter in 2008.

"This is the worst economic crisis in the post-war era," Yosano said at a press conference, according to Japan's Kyodo news agency.

The global economic crisis has pummeled Japan, which depends largely on its auto and electronics exports. The slump in exports has led to tens of thousands of layoffs across Japan.

"Behind [the contraction in GDP for] the October-December quarter is a terrific downturn in exports," he said, according to Kyodo.

"Like other major countries, our country cannot avoid the pains of structural change," Yosano said.

To stimulate the economy, the Japanese parliament needs to act quickly on key budget measures, he said, referring to bills related to a second supplementary budget for fiscal 2008 and early passage of the state budget for fiscal 2009.

Asked about Japan possibly producing a new economic stimulus plan in the short term, Yosano said wide-ranging discussions would be needed first.

"After seeing this level [of GDP], it is our duty to think of various policy options," he added.

***

TEHRAN, Iran (CNN) -- Twenty-nine people convicted of various crimes, ranging from murder to being a public nuisance while drunk, were hanged in Iran, state TV said.



A convicted Iranian drug dealer is hanged from a crane in the southern city of Shiraz in September.



Iran's semi-official Fars News Agency reported earlier that 30 people would be put to death. It was not immediately clear if the last person's life was spared.



The Iranian judiciary's statement said that all 30 were convicted of various crimes, which included: murder, murder in commission of a crime, disturbing public safety and security, being a public nuisance while drunk and being involved in illegal relationships -- relationships between men and women who are not married to each other.



Kidnapping and using weapons while committing a crime were also among the charges.



The statement also said that 20 of the convicts were convicted of drug and alcohol dealing, armed robbery and smuggling arms.



The judiciary statement said that the convicts had their cases tried by the highest judicial authorities and were found guilty of the charges brought against them. The verdicts were final with their sentences carried out on Sunday.



The judiciary said the hangings should serve as a warning to those who are contemplating committing such crimes, the agency reported.



The statement also said that several other individuals are currently awaiting trial and their sentences will be carried out as soon as the verdicts are pronounced by the courts.



According to Amnesty International, Iran executed 317 people last year, second only to China's 470.



Iran's government launched a campaign March 20 to increase public security and bring the crime rate down.



Police cracked down on alleged drug dealers, whom they called criminal gang members, and alleged habitual criminals who use guns in the commission of their crime. Alleged weapons smugglers and people who break social and religious laws, including adulterers, were also targets.



National television showed scenes of what were described as criminals being paraded publicly in chains as a deterrent to others. The wave of arrests has now subsided, as officials are now prosecuting the alleged criminals and sentencing those convicted.



Journalist Shirzad Bozorgmehr contributed to this report.

***

Lagos, Nigeria (CNN) -- A series of bomb and gun attacks targeting police stations, mosques and churches left 65 people dead in northeastern Nigeria, the Red Cross said Saturday.





Attackers also left scores injured -- probably more than 100 -- in a three-hour rampage in the Yobe state city of Damaturu, according to Ibrahim Bulama of the Red Cross. Sixty-three people died.





"It is a very bad scene," he said.





Gunmen first attacked the police headquarters and the anti-terror office before moving to churches and mosques, he said. Most of the casualties were police officers.





In Potiskum, also located in Yobe state, gunmen attacked a book shop near the police station, killing two and injuring 5, the Red Cross said.





The Friday attacks came the same day suicide bombers suspected to belong to a militant Islamist group targeted a military base in nearby Maiduguri.





Three suicide bombers drove a stolen black SUV toward a Joint Task Force headquarters, but could not get through the gate, military spokesman Lt. Col. Hassan Mohammed said.





The blast damaged roofs and walls of the base.





Mohammed said two other simultaneous explosions took place at other military facilities. An unspecified number of Nigerian soldiers suffered injuries.





Saturday evening, a suicide bomber launched another attack in Maiduguri, Mohammed said. No casualties were reported except for the bomber.





He blamed the militant group Boko Haram for the attacks.





Loosely translated, the group's name means "Western education is sinful." It wants to establish a state based on Sharia, or Islamic law, in northern Nigeria.





The Red Cross official said Boko Haram is suspected in the Damaturu attack as well.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN)  -- Last week's "balloon boy" incident is being investigated by the Federal Aviation Administration, an agency representative said Tuesday.



The Heene family -- including Falcon, second from right -- on CNN's "Larry King Live" last week.



Richard and Mayumi Heene, whose son Falcon was thought for several hours to have flown away in a homemade balloon, are facing a number of local charges, a Colorado sheriff said this week.



The Fort Collins couple could be charged with conspiracy, contributing to the delinquency of a minor and attempting to influence a public servant, Larimer County Sheriff Jim Alderden said Sunday. The family also probably will be charged with filing a false police report, which is a misdemeanor, Alderden said.



Their lawyer, David Lane, said the sheriff was overreaching and that the family deserves the presumption of innocence.  Watch the Heenes' friends talk about the incident »



FAA spokeswoman Diane Spitaliere confirmed Tuesday that the agency was "investigating the circumstances" of the incident, in which police and military scrambled to rescue the 6-year-old boy, who later turned out to be hiding in his family's attic.



A source familiar with the investigation said no record has been found indicating that Richard Heene called the FAA. The agency does not record all of its calls, and the search for a record of any call is continuing, the source said.



The Heenes may have violated FAA regulations barring people from flying balloons or kites within 5 miles of an airport, an FAA official said. The official declined to be named because the case is under investigation.



The giant silver balloon was apparently not visible on radar, the official said, and the FAA is relying on pilot reports to determine its approximate flight path during the roughly three hours it was aloft Thursday.



CNN's Mike M. Ahlers in Washington contributed to this story.

***

(CNN) -- "Banchao! Banchao!" Save me! Save me!





A rescue worker could hear the screams of a passenger on Air India Flight IX-812, but the plane was consumed with flames. Fire was leaping in every part of the Boeing jet that crashed early Saturday in southern India.





The rescue worker heard things bursting in the extreme heat, he told CNN's sister network, CNN-IBN. Then it was quiet, and he understood that no one else was alive.





The Air India plane had flown in from Dubai, United Arab Emirates, carrying 160 passengers and six crew members. Among them were 19 children and four infants.





Some people were returning home. An anxious young bride-to-be and a man on his way to perform last rites for his father were also on the flight.





Others were migrant workers. Millions of Indians work as laborers in Persian Gulf states.





Most perished, charred beyond recognition in the fiery wreckage. Only the aircraft's tail was left intact, officials said.





Rescuers scrambled to find survivors all day Saturday. Mostly they pulled bodies.





The eight who survived recounted their harrowing tales for CNN-IBN.





Ummerfarook Mohammed said the cabin quickly filled with smoke after the jet skidded off the runway and hit a boundary wall. The impact created a hole in the plane's body, he said. He crawled out and ran for his life. Nearby villagers carted him to the hospital in a rickshaw.





And then there were those who counted their blessings on Saturday for not having boarded their ill-fated flight in Dubai.





Vasant Shetty's friend had booked him on the Mangalore-bound plane, but he was too busy at work and decided not to take the flight.





"It's all God's grace. I missed the flight and survived," Shetty told the Press Trust of India news agency.





"I don't know what to say about the ill-fated passengers who were killed," he said. "I pray for them."

***

(CNN) -- Five people were detained off Somalia's coast Wednesday after pirates mistook a French ship involved in an anti-piracy operation for a commercial vessel, the French Defense Ministry said.



A German-flagged warship taking part in the EU's anti-piracy mission is pictured in this April 2009 file photo.



There were no injuries as a result of the attack on the BCR Somme, the ministry said. The pirates opened fire at midnight local time, about 250 nautical miles (463 kilometers) off Somalia's coast, officials added.



An hour after the attack, the French command and supply ship chased down one of the pirates' skiffs, and detained five suspected pirates, it said. A second skiff involved in the attack got away.



The BCR Somme was carrying supplies off Somalia's coast to forces involved in the European anti-piracy operation, called "Atalante," the ministry said.



Europe and other Western powers have stepped up their maritime patrols off Somalia's coast following a spate of pirate attacks over the past year.



Somalia's transitional government, which has a tenuous grip on power, has been unable to stop the pirates, many of whom are based in Somalia's port cities.



Those who have tracked pirate activity say it started in the 1980s in Somalia, when the pirates claimed they were aiming to stop the rampant illegal fishing and dumping that continues to this day off the Somali coast.



Piracy accelerated after the fall of the Somali government in the early 1990s and began to flourish after shipping companies started paying ransoms. Those payments started out being in the tens of thousands of dollars and have since climbed into the millions.



Some experts say companies are simply making the problem worse by paying the pirates.

***

(CNN) -- A 27-year-old woman from eastern China has died of bird flu, Chinese authorities said, making her the second person to die this year from the deadly virus.





Human-to-human transmission of avian flu is rare, but in some cases, the virus has passed from poultry to humans.





The woman fell ill on January 5 in Shandong province on the country's east coast and died on Saturday, the Ministry of Health said in a statement.





Two tests on the woman were positive for H5N1 avian influenza, said the ministry, which did not say how she might have contracted the virus.





On Saturday, the World Health Organization said a 2-year-old girl in northern China had tested positive for bird flu -- now the country's third confirmed case of the virus this month.





The girl fell ill on January 7 in central Hunan province and was taken to her home province of Shanxi in northern China, the state-run news agency Xinhua said. The report did not say how she became infected.





On January 5, a 19-year-old Beijing woman died of bird flu after handling poultry, officials said.





Xinhua said the woman bought nine ducks at a market in Beijing's neighboring Hebei province and cleaned their organs before falling ill.





Since the end of 2003, the H5N1 virus has infected numerous species of birds in more than 60 countries in Asia, Europe and Africa. It has not been found in birds in North or South America or the Caribbean, according to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.





Human-to-human transmission of avian flu is rare, but in some cases the virus has passed from poultry to humans. It has killed more than 200 people since 2003.





China reported its first human-to-human infection case in 2005. So far, 30 cases have been confirmed. Twenty of them have been fatal, according to Xinhua.





On Friday, China announced it was setting up a nationwide network to test for the virus.

***

Jerusalem (CNN)  -- Israeli authorities discovered and disarmed an explosive barrel Wednesday, the third to wash up on an Israeli beach this week, the Israel Defense Forces said.





The barrel was found Wednesday afternoon at Palmachim beach south of Tel Aviv.





On Monday, Islamic Jihad, the Fatah Al Aqsa Martyrs Brigade and the Nasser Salah A din Brigades issued a leaflet in Gaza claiming responsibility for sending three explosive devices to the coastal cities Ashkelon and Ashdod.





The other two barrels packed with explosives -- one found at Ashkelon and one at Ashdod -- were discovered Monday and disposed of.





In response, the IDF said, the Israeli Air Force attacked "two Hamas terrorist targets" in southern Gaza.





"One of the targets was a terror tunnel, used for the infiltration of terrorists into Israel, while the other was used for smuggling of weapons. Direct hits were identified," the IDF said.





Hamas, the movement controlling Gaza, has been vowing retaliation against Israel since one of the founding members of its military wing, Mahmoud al-Mabhouh, died last week in Dubai.





Al-Mabhouh's brother, Fayek al-Mabhouh, said that preliminary results of Hamas' investigation of the death showed his brother was killed by electrocution and strangulation with a piece of cloth.





Hamas officials accused Israel of assassinating Mahmoud al-Mabhouh. Israeli officials have not responded to that allegation.

***

MEXICO CITY, Mexico (CNN) -- Helicopters were bringing 2,000 Mexican troops into the U.S.-Mexican border city of Juarez on Friday to quell a wave of drug-related violence blamed for 200 deaths since January, the city's mayor said.



Mexico has ordered troops to move near Juarez, shown here with El Paso, Texas, in the distance.



"Two rival drug cartels tried to push each other out of the city," Jose Reyes Ferriz told CNN.



Among those killed were about 20 police officers representing the state, the military and the federal and city governments, he said.



"Many [people] say the drug cartels targeted specifically the heads of the police departments," he said.



"The violence got extremely bad in the city."



He said no uninvolved civilians have been injured.



"The two rival drug cartels in Mexico, one's from the Gulf, one's from the Pacific -- and Juarez being right down the middle, they tried to push the other one out of the area," he said.  Watch police clash with suspected drug smugglers »



Juarez sits across the Rio Grande from El Paso, Texas. The majority of the troops will be based in the city.



Defense Secretary Guillermo Galvan said Thursday 2,026 soldiers, 180 military tactical vehicles, three airplanes and more than a dozen drug detection devices would be used in the military operation.



Mexican Attorney General Medina Mora stressed that the violence that goes along with drug trafficking is "not in any way a sign of strength, but a sign of weakness, deterioration and decomposition."  E-mail to a friend



CNN's Ariel Crespo contributed to this report.

***

New York (CNN) -- The son of actor Michael Douglas apologized to a federal judge before being sentenced to a five-year prison term Tuesday, promising to follow "the true right path" when released.





Cameron Douglas, 31, pleaded guilty to distributing large quantities of methamphetamine and cocaine in January.





"I apologize to the court for my decisions and actions that put me in front of you today," Douglas said in a trembling voice. He added, "I have developed, in my mind, the idea that I want to take the right path, the true right path."





U.S. District Judge Richard Berman rebuffed pleas by defense lawyers for a more lenient sentencing, telling the spectators that prison may be Douglas' "last chance."





Cameron Douglas is the son of the two-time Academy Award winner and his first wife, Diandra Luker, both of whom attended the sentencing. As Cameron Douglas spoke, his mother was crying and his father appeared to be fighting back tears.





Douglas, who was arrested in July 2009 at a Manhattan nightclub, asked Berman "for opportunity to be a role model to my younger brothers and sisters."





"I believe, your honor, things will be different this time," he added. If given a second chance, he said, "I will never squander that opportunity."





Berman acknowledged that numerous letters sent on the defendant's behalf by celebrities and others, but said some of the letters implied that he should not make an example of Douglas because he is the son of a famous actor.





"None acknowledged appropriately the numerous impacts to victims of society for dealing drugs," the judge said.

***

(CNN) -- Seven suspected pirates rescued by a Danish warship were turned over to authorities in Yemen early Friday, two days after they were picked up in the pirate-plagued Gulf of Aden.

The French frigate Nivose escorts commercial ships in the Gulf of Aden on November 28, 2008.

The men were rescued by the HDMS Absalon on Wednesday after being found in a powerless skiff with rocket-propelled grenades and AK-47s aboard, Danish Navy spokesman Jesper Lynge told CNN. They were found approximately 75 nautical miles (140 km) off the coast of Yemen following a distress call, Lynge said.

"These guys had been without propulsion on their small boat for several days without food or drinking water," he added.

After receiving medical treatment aboard the Absalon, the ship's crew turned them over to Yemen's coast guard Friday morning, said Rasmus Tantholt, a reporter for Denmark's TV2, who was aboard the warship. The skiff's small engine was broken, and the Danish vessel sank the boat in order to prevent any hazard to sea traffic.  Watch how NATO is fighting piracy Â»

The men are suspected to be pirates because of the weapons on board, Lynge said. Pirates frequently use small boats to attack commercial vessels with small arms and grenades, but Lynge said Absalon crew could not connect the men "directly with another pirate attack in the area," Lynge said.

Lynge said the skiff was found in Yemeni waters, and the Absalon crew was instructed to hand over the men to the Yemen Coast Guard. Yemeni authorities must conduct any investigation because the episode took place in their jurisdiction, he said.

CNN was unable to obtain an immediate comment from Yemeni authorities.

Pirates have seized many ships in recent weeks in the waters of the Gulf of Aden, which separates Yemen from Somalia.

So far this year, pirates have attacked almost 100 vessels off the coast of Somalia and successfully hijacked nearly 40, according to the International Maritime Bureau.

A multinational fleet, including vessels from the United States, NATO member states, Russia and India, has been patrolling waters of Indian Ocean near the Gulf, which connects the Red Sea and the Arabian Sea.

Around 20,000 oil tankers, freighters and merchant vessels pass along the crucial shipping route each year.

CNN's Katy Byron contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- His golf career might be in a seemingly downward spiral, but Tiger Woods is still the world's most valuable sportsman according to a top business magazine.





The American, who this week dropped out of the world's top 50 golfers for the first time in 15 years, has retained his position as Forbes' top individual sports brand.





The 36-year-old has, according to Forbes' calculations, lost $17 million from his brand worth in the past year. But his $55 million value is still $29 million higher than the second-placed athlete, tennis star Roger Federer.





Despite the scandal that broke in late 2009 about the marital infidelities that led to his divorce from wife Elin Nordegren, Woods has begun to restore his portfolio of endorsements with June's agreement with Japan's Kowa Company, which deals in medical equipment and pharmaceuticals.





Fellow golfer Phil Mickelson is ranked third with $24 million, while basketball star LeBron James is catching fast with $20 million.





The Miami Heat player earned half that total from his deal with Nike -- again Forbes' most valuable overall brand, up 40% to $15 billion after spreading its swoosh into even more world markets.





English football club Manchester United lost top spot in the team brands to baseball's New York Yankees.





While United suffered due to the British pound weakening against the dollar, with a worth of $269 million, the Yankees' value -- now $340 million -- has boomed 57% since 2007 according to Forbes' Mike Ozanian.





"Had the exchange rate held fast since 2007 the Red Devils, who are looking to capitalize on their global fan base with an IPO (public share offering), would still be the most valuable team brand," Ozanian said.





The NFL's showpiece Super Bowl, with a brand value of $425 million, stayed well clear of the Summer Olympics ($230 million) and the FIFA World Cup ($147 million).

***

Washington (CNN) -- The Federal Aviation Administration Wednesday proposed a $2.9 million fine against American Eagle Airlines for allegedly conducting more than 1,100 flights using planes with landing-gear doors that had not been repaired as prescribed by the FAA.





The proposed fine comes just weeks after the FAA proposed a $2.5 million fine against the airline for allegedly operating flights without adequately ensuring that the weight of baggage was properly calculated.





The Fort Worth, Texas-based American Eagle -- a regional affiliate of American Airlines -- flew four Bombardier regional jets on more than 1,100 flights between February and May 2008, with main landing-gear doors that had not been repaired as ordered by the FAA in August 2006, the FAA said.





"Following Airworthiness Directives [repair orders] is not optional," FAA Administrator Randy Babbitt said in a statement. "The FAA does not hesitate to levy fines if maintenance standards are violated."





American Eagle responded that it was disappointed in the FAA's actions, saying the airline did not endanger the public and it considered a fine unwarranted.





The repair order required airlines to inspect landing-gear doors and take necessary action, fixing the doors or replacing them with new ones. In this case, American Eagle found damage on four aircraft, but rather than removing the doors as required, the airline repaired them while they remained on the planes.





American Eagle said it self-disclosed to the FAA that repairs were performed while the landing-gear doors remained on the aircraft, a process that the FAA and the aircraft manufacturer subsequently approved, the company said. American Eagle subsequently removed the landing-gear doors on each of the affected aircraft and repaired them in accordance with the Airworthiness Directive.





The airline said it will meet with the FAA to discuss the matter.





The proposed fines are the latest in a string of multimillion dollar fines the FAA has proposed against airlines for failing to follow repair orders. In October, the FAA proposed to fine US Airways $5.4 million and United $3.8 million for other maintenance violations.





In March, Southwest Airlines agreed to pay $7.5 million to settle a complaint that it flew unsafe planes.

***

(CNN) -- A proposal to house federal prisoners, including some detainees from Guantanamo Bay, in a largely vacant maximum-security prison would be an economic boost to struggling northern Illinois, state officials said Sunday.



"This is something that is very good for our state, it's good for our economy, it's good for public safety," Illinois Gov. Pat Quinn told reporters.



Officials from the departments of Defense, Justice, Homeland Security and the federal Bureau of Prisons will visit the Thomson Correctional Center on Monday, the officials said. Quinn's office on Saturday said the officials would see whether the "virtually vacant, state-of-the-art facility" in Thomson, about 150 miles west of Chicago, could be of use to the Bureau of Prisons.



If it is, the governor and other officials said Sunday, it could provide up to 2,000 jobs and up to $1 billion in federal money to the area.



And Dick Durbin, the Senate's second-ranking Democrat, said he believes the proposal provides a "once-in-a-lifetime opportunity" for his state's residents.



"There are other states that want to take these jobs," Sen. Durbin said. "We've got to win this competition."



Under the proposal, he said, federal officials have said fewer than 100 detainees from the Guantanamo Bay prison camp in Cuba would be housed in the 1,600-bed facility. They would be in a wing under the control of the Department of Defense, while the Bureau of Prisons would assume responsibility for the rest of the facility.



The United States is asking other countries to house some of the Guantanamo detainees when the prison is closed, said Durbin, the Senate majority whip. But those countries are asking why America is not housing some of the inmates itself, he said, and use of the Thomson facility would demonstrate to them that the United States is willing to shoulder some of the responsibility.



An Obama administration official said Saturday that as part of the conversion at Thomson, the Bureau of Prisons and Defense Department would enhance security to exceed those of the nation's only supermax prison -- the U.S. Penitentiary Administrative Maximum Facility in Florence, Colorado. No person has ever escaped from the prison.



The Thomson proposal, first reported Saturday by the Chicago Tribune, triggered immediate concern from critics. U.S. Rep. Mark Kirk, R-Illinois, whose district covers suburban Chicago, circulated a letter addressed to President Obama to Illinois leaders Saturday, opposing the possible transfer of detainees and saying that housing them in Thomson would turn metropolitan Chicago into "ground zero for Jihadist terrorist plots, recruitment and radicalization."



As home to Chicago's Willis (formerly Sears) Tower -- the nation's tallest building -- "we should not invite al Qaeda to make Illinois its number one target," says Kirk, who is running for the same Senate seat once held by Obama.



Durbin on Sunday pointed to the federal maximum-security prison in Marion, Illinois, which he said already houses 35 people convicted of terrorism, along with members of Colombian drug gangs and Mexican drug cartels -- "some of the most dangerous people in America."



"They're all in our prisons, and they're all held safely," he said. And "things haven't changed in Marion, Illinois."



Those housed in the Marion penitentiary include Ali al-Marri, who is serving a sentence of eight years and four months after pleading guilty in federal court to conspiring to provide material support to al Qaeda.



The Thomson prison was built in 2001 and sat empty for five years because the state lacked the resources to open it. Despite being built as a maximum-security facility, it houses 144 minimum-security male inmates, according to the Illinois Department of Corrections Web site.



"After living in limbo for eight years, we're open to any and all alternatives for Thomson," said Jerry "Duke" Hebeler, Thomson village mayor. He estimated that the move would cut the county's unemployment in half.



"I'd never chase jobs if I thought

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN)  -- While automakers lay off staff and shut down plants in response to the economic downturn, one automaker announced Thursday that it will open a manufacturing plant in the United States, potentially creating hundreds of jobs in the area eventually chosen.



Tesla unveils its Model S sedan, with a base price of $57,400. The manufacturing plant will be in California.



Tesla Motors, maker of a high-end electric sports car, says it will build an all-electric sedan in Southern California.



Thursday's announcement was made in Hawthorne, California, where Tesla unveiled the Model S sedan at a base price of $49,900, after a federal tax credit of $7,500.



That's less than half the price of its first model, the Roadster.



Started in 2003 and bankrolled by PayPal millionaire Elon Musk, Tesla has attracted investments from the Silicon Valley elite, among them Google founder Larry Page.



It is widely believed that the Model S sedan will be built near the Space Exploration Technologies Corporation facility in Hawthorne. That aerospace company, more commonly known as SpaceX, was founded by Musk in 2002.



SpaceX recently won a NASA contract to deliver cargo to the international space station when the space shuttle program is retired next year. That contract, worth $1.6 billion, was won over such industry mainstays as Boeing and Lockheed.



The promise of a high-performance, all-electric vehicle became a reality with the startup's first model, the Tesla Roadster, a car with the look, speed and price tag -- a steep $109,000 and up -- that rivals other high-end, high-performance vehicles.



Recently though, the economic downturn has forced Tesla to delay production of their would-be flagship Model S until 2011. They've also had to lay off more than 80 workers, which is about 25 percent of the company's staff.



Nonetheless, Tesla predicts it will manufacture 20,000 Model S vehicles a year. That would make it more of a mass-market vehicle than the Roadster; only 1,200 of which are produced yearly.



The company faces many challenges, the foremost of which is convincing consumers to pay almost $50,000 for an all-electric sedan when they could pay thousands less for another brand of upmarket sedan or a gas-electric hybrid.

***

Mexico City (CNN) -- A US Airways flight attendant was found dead in his hotel room in Mexico City, company spokeswoman Tina Swail said Saturday.





Authorities are investigating the circumstances of Nick Aaronson's death, she said.





A spokesman for the attorney general in Mexico City said authorities were called in the early morning to the Hilton Hotel, where they found the body of a man, estimated to have been between 30 and 35 years old.





His body indicated he had been struck several times, Rene Hernandez Cueto said.





Investigators are collecting evidence in the case, he added.





Preliminary reports do not indicate a safety breach at the hotel, according to a statement from the Association of Flight Attendants (AFA) Council 66.





"Therefore, we do not believe our crew members are at risk. However, until this matter is resolved, layover crews will be temporarily relocated to an alternative location," said the union.





Deborah Volpe, president of AFA Council 66, described Aaronson as "very popular" and a "much-loved flight attendant."





"This was a very tragic event and it has affected us all. Right now, we are focusing on taking care of our crew members," she said.





CNN's Krupskaia Alis, Carloo Perez and Helena DeMoura contributed to this report.

***

HONG KONG, China (CNN) -- Unilever is recalling four batches of Lipton Milk Tea sold in Hong Kong and Macau after finding traces of the chemical melamine in the product, the company said Tuesday.



Unilever Hong Kong Limited described it as a precautionary measure and said no other Lipton Milk Tea Powder products were affected.



The announcement came a day after British confectioner Cadbury said it has recalled all of its Chinese-made candy products after preliminary tests showed they contained trace amounts of melamine. Some of the products were exported to Taiwan, Hong Kong, Australia, Nauru and Christmas Island, according to the company.



They are the latest companies to get caught up in China's tainted milk scandal, which began earlier this month when authorities discovered melamine in powdered infant formula.  Watch how scare affects companies outside China »



Contaminated milk has sickened nearly 53,000 children in China, killing four.



Countries around the world have since banned the import of Chinese products containing milk, or have withdrawn products that contain milk from China -- such as chocolates -- amid worries they contain melamine.



Authorities have arrested 40 people in connection with the milk scandal, including two brothers who could face the death penalty if convicted.



Investigators suspect people watered down milk in an attempt to sell more of it, and added melamine in order to fool quality checks, Chinese authorities have said. The toxic chemical is used to bolster apparent protein levels in diluted or poor-quality milk.



Others arrested include 19 managers of pastures, breeding farms and milk-purchasing stations. Chinese authorities have said those arrested were involved in a network that made and sold melamine.



Authorities have implicated 22 Chinese dairy companies in the scandal.



Melamine is the same industrial contaminant from China that poisoned and killed thousands of U.S. dogs and cats last year.



Health experts say ingesting melamine can lead to kidney stones, urinary tract ulcers, and eye and skin irritation. It also robs infants of much-needed nutrition.



The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has said a company in Taiwan, the King Car Food Industrial Company, had recalled seven instant coffee and milk tea products that were sold in the United States under the Mr. Brown brand name. They contain a non-dairy creamer found to be contaminated with melamine.



The FDA also recommends that U.S. consumers not eat White Rabbit Creamy Candy, which in China has been found to contain unacceptable levels of melamine. The candy's maker, Guanshengyuan, has recalled its exports of White Rabbit Cream Candy.

***

(CNN) -- Singer Fantasia Barrino gave birth to a boy in North Carolina on Tuesday, her representative said.





Dallas Xavier Barrino, weighing 7 lbs 9 ounces and measuring 21 inches, was born at Presbyterian Hospital in Charlotte, according Sherlen Archibald.





"I feel so blessed that my son Dallas Xavier was born healthy, and is a wonderful new addition to our family," Barrino said, who also has a 10-year-old daughter. "I thank all my fans for their well wishes and continued support."





The 2004 "American Idol" winner announced her pregnancy in August at a Florida concert. She has not said who the father is.





The past 18 months have been difficult for the 27-year-old Barrino, who acknowledged a relationship with a married man in the summer of 2010. She initially denied knowing Antwaun Cook was married.





She was treated at a Charlotte, North Carolina, hospital for a "sleep aid" overdose several days after Cook's wife filed a child-custody petition that included allegations of the affair.





Barrino later testified in the child custody case that she knew from the first day of her relationship with Cook that he was married and still living with his wife, according to court records.





Barrino's raw talent as a songstress, combined with her hard-luck story as a teenage mother, won her many fans, starting with her winning the third season of "American Idol."





Her six-year-long entertainment career has been pockmarked with adversity, including being sued by her own father and well-publicized financial troubles.





CNN's Denise Quan contributed to this report.

***

(CNET) -- Well, here's what we've all been waiting for. Apple put out a couple of announcements on Tuesday related to its desktop computers.



Apple on Tuesday announced a new Mac Pro high-end desktop powered by Intel's "Nehalem" processor.



The company unveiled a new Mac Pro high-end desktop powered by Intel's "Nehalem" processor, a new and more graphics-intensive Mac Mini machine, and updated iMacs that include the lowest price point yet for the consumer desktops.



Let's look at the new Mac Pro first: priced at $2,499 for the quad-core version and $3,299 for the eight-core version, those Intel "Nehalem" Xeon processors run at 2.93 GHz, and the interior of the machine has been cleaned up to make physical expansions easier. On the green front, it meets the new Energy Star 5.0 requirements that will go into effect later this year.



The new iMac desktop is a 24" machine that is priced at $1,499, the cost of Apple's previous 20" iMac. The 20-inch is now $1,199. The 20" is powered by a 2.66 GHz processor; the 24" has processor speed options of 2.66 GHz, 2.93 GHz (for $1,799), or 3.02 GHz (for $2,199).



The 24" comes with a 640GB hard drive and 4GB of RAM expandable to 8GB; the 20" comes with a 320GB hard drive and 2GB of RAM expandable to 8GB.



"Our flagship 24-inch iMac with twice the memory and twice the storage is now available for just $1,499," Apple chief operating officer Tim Cook, currently standing in at the helm of the company in place of iconic CEO Steve Jobs, said in a release.



"The Mac mini is not only our most affordable Mac, it's also the world's most energy efficient desktop computer."



As for the new Mac Mini, the big upgrade is NVIDIA GeForce 9400M integrated graphics that Apple says will improve its graphics performance as much as fivefold.



The monitor-free machine costs either $599 for a lower-end edition (1GB RAM, 120GB hard drive) or $799 for the higher-end (2GB RAM, 320GB hard drive).



All these machines, like the new Mac Pro, meet Energy Star 5.0 requirements.



Rumors of new Apple desktop computers were first reported at AppleInsider.



© 2009 CBS Interactive Inc. All rights reserved. CNET, CNET.com and the CNET logo are registered trademarks of CBS Interactive Inc. Used by permission.

***

(CNN) -- Tropical Storm Claudette was gaining strength Sunday as it churned in the Gulf of Mexico toward the Florida Panhandle, the National Hurricane Center said.



A satellite image from 2 p.m. ET Sunday shows a tropical storm nearing the Florida Panhandle.



At 2 p.m. ET, Claudette's winds had picked up to near 50 mph, based on observations by an Air Force reconnaissance plane. The center of the storm was about 40 miles south of Apalachicola, Florida, and about 160 miles from Pensacola, the center said. It was moving at about 14 mph, putting it on course to hit land by Sunday evening.



A tropical storm warning was in effect from the Alabama-Florida border east to the Suwannee River. A tropical storm warning means that weather conditions will likely deteriorate in the next 24 hours.



The storm could bring 3 to 5 inches of rain, with isolated amounts up to 10 inches, and storm surges across portions of North Florida.



Meanwhile, two other tropical storms were in the Atlantic Ocean on Sunday. Tropical Storm Ana was moving west but losing strength, forecasters said, while Tropical Storm Bill was gaining strength as it followed behind Ana.



Ana was about 240 miles (385 kilometers) east of Dominica at 2 p.m. ET Sunday. It was expected to arrive at the Leeward Islands by late Sunday or early Monday, the center said. It was moving about 25 mph, and its maximum sustained winds were close to 40 mph, the center said.



Tropical storm watches were in effect for Dominica, Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands, the British Virgin Islands, Montserrat, Antigua, Barbuda, St. Kitts, Nevis, Anguilla, St. Maarten, Saba, St. Eustatius, Guadeloupe, St. Martin, and St. Barthelemey.



Tropical Storm Bill -- which could become a hurricane on Monday -- should be watched closely as it heads west-northwest in the Atlantic, possibly toward Florida, CNN meteorologist Reynolds Wolf said. The storm was 1,555 miles east of the Lesser Antilles at 11 a.m. ET Sunday.



Bill may reach Category 3 status as it bears down on the Leeward Islands Wednesday or Thursday, he said.

***

(CNN) -- The father of a Florida girl who has been missing for nearly six months was charged Thursday with burglary with assault, police told CNN.



Ronald Cummings was arrested on felony charges of burglary with assault, officials said.



Ronald Cummings is being held on $12,500 bond for the felony charges, the Florida Putnam County Sheriff's Office said.



There were no other details on his arrest available.



Cummings' daughter, Haleigh Cummings, went missing from his home in Satsuma, Florida, on February 9.



Cummings has made several public pleas for information about his daughter's disappearance, even begging whoever might be holding her to just return her home.



Police have said they think Haleigh was abducted but have provided few details.



In March, Cummings married his then-girlfriend Misty Croslin, who was the last person known to have seen the 5-year-old child alive, saying it was what Haleigh would have wanted.



Croslin, 17, said she tucked Haleigh and her 4-year-old brother into bed about 8 p.m. the night Haleigh disappeared. Croslin said she went to sleep herself at about 10 p.m. but awoke at 3 a.m. to find Haleigh missing and a back door propped open by bricks.



Ronald Cummings called police and reported his daughter missing when he returned from work at dawn.



CNN's Maria White and John Couwels contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Liverpool have secured the biggest sponsorship deal in the English Premier League club's history after they announced a four-year deal with Standard Chartered Bank.



Liverpool legend Kenny Dalglish and managing director Christian Purslow confirm the new sponsorship deal.



The Reds have confirmed that the bank will replace current sponsors Carlsberg at the start of the 2010-11 season, ending a 17-year association with the Reds, for the beer maker.



The figure for the sponsorship has not be disclosed but reports in British newspaper The Guardian suggest the deal is worth $133 million.



Liverpool managing director Christian Purslow spoke of his delight on sealing the sponsorship agreement for the Anfield-based side.



"I am tremendously excited - it's a hugely important day in the history of Liverpool FC," he told the club's official Web site.



"This is the largest commercial agreement we have ever entered into. To have attracted a partner of the caliber of Standard Chartered Bank says everything about where we are trying to take this football club.



"They operate in a number of markets around the world where we have a long term plan to increase the family of Liverpool fans and this agreement will be very helpful to us in doing that."



Purslow added: "Many branches in these countries will effectively be a shop window for Liverpool FC and a means of attracting more supporters to the cause.



"We aspire to be the best at what we do on and off the field. This is the first commercial agreement the club has entered into which can truly be described as the best of its kind in world football.



"I hope this tells everyone, especially our fans, what we are trying to do with this football club in the future."



The move follows Liverpool's American owners, George Gillett and Tom Hicks, concluding a deal in July to re-finance a $380 million bank loan they took out to buy the club in 2007.



Plans to develop a new 60,000-seater stadium at a cost of $580 million were shelved due to the recession in 2008 by the club, despite planning permission being granted by the local city council.

***

(CNN) -- U.S. President Barack Obama called Pakistan's president Sunday to express condolences over the airstrike that killed 24 soldiers near the Afghanistan border more than a week ago, the White House said in a statement.





"The president made clear that this regrettable incident was not a deliberate attack on Pakistan and reiterated the United States' strong commitment to a full investigation," the statement said. "The two presidents reaffirmed their commitment to the U.S.-Pakistan bilateral relationship, which is critical to the security of both nations, and they agreed to stay in close touch."





The conversation between Obama and Pakistani President Asif Ali Zardari was the latest bid to address strained relations between the two nations after a NATO airstrike killed the Pakistani troops on November 26.





After the attack, Pakistani Prime Minister Yousuf Raza Gilani told CNN that Pakistan was re-evaluating its relationship with the United States.





NATO later called the subsequent mass casualties caused by the strike "tragic (and) unintended." U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and Defense Secretary Leon Panetta have called the incident a "tragedy" and offered condolences, though Washington has not issued a formal apology.





The issue of U.S. and fellow NATO forces coming into Pakistan has been an especially sensitive topic in that country since May, when U.S. commandos killed then al Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden in Abbottabad without Pakistani leaders' consent





During an exclusive interview last week with CNN, Gilani said the country wants to maintain its relationship with the United States as long as there is mutual respect and respect for Pakistani sovereignty.





Asked directly if Pakistan is getting that respect, the prime minister said: "At the moment (it is) not."





"If I can't protect the sovereignty of my country, how can we say that this is mutual respect and mutual interest?" he asked rhetorically.





Pakistan has taken several steps aimed at NATO since the attack.





That includes an announcement Friday, by Foreign Minister Hina Rabbani Khar, that NATO and International Security Assistance Force supplies could no longer be routed through Pakistan. The country has served a vital supply route for allied forces who have been fighting for more than a decade in neighboring Afghanistan.

***

BAGHDAD, Iraq (CNN) -- Turkish troops fired artillery shells into northern Iraq on Wednesday nearly a week after Turkey completed its eight-day ground offensive targeting Kurdish militants, an Iraqi official told CNN.



Turkish troops patrol near the border with Iraq during the February offensive.



Jabbar Yawer, spokesman for Iraq's Kurdish Regional Government security forces, said at least 16 rounds were fired on Dashti Barzji -- an uninhabited area in Iraq's Irbil province located about 12 miles from Iraq's border. Irbil is one of the three provinces compromising Iraq's Kurdish region.



The Turkish military in Ankara had no immediate comment about the report.



Yawer said Turkish helicopters were seen in the area during the strike but said that the choppers were not involved in the attack.



The border conflict has wider implications for the Middle East and Asia, with the United States concerned that prolonged cross-border fighting would serve to destabilize the region, where Kurdish separatists pose challenges to power in Iran and Syria, as well as  Turkey » and  Iraq ».



The Turkish military for months has been conducting cross-border airstrikes and artillery fire in northern Iraq against members of the Kurdistan Workers' Party, or PKK -- militants who have been launching attacks against Turkey from bases in northern Iraq.



Turkish troops launched a ground offensive on the evening of Feb. 21 "to prevent the region from being used as a safe haven by the terrorists and to contribute to the internal peace and stability of Iraq in the long run."



It was the first significant Turkish ground offensive into Iraq since the 2003 overthrow of former Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein, and it ended after Iraqi and U.S. officials urged Turkey to make the foray as brief as possible.



A total of 240 rebels, 24 troops, and three village guards were killed, the Turkish military said.



The PKK has spent two decades fighting for autonomy for Kurds in southeastern Turkey, with some of its attacks launched from inside northern Iraq. Turks regard the PKK militants as terrorists and point to indiscriminate PKK attacks against civilians as well as police and military targets over the years.



The United States and the European Union also label the PKK a terrorist organization. U.S. officials have shared intelligence with Turkey.



The Iraqi government opposes the PKK presence, but it views the Turkish military incursion as a violation of its sovereignty. E-mail to a friend



CNN's Mohammed Tawfeeq in Baghdad and Talia Kayali in Atlanta contributed to this report

***

(CNN) -- Thai authorities are considering the construction of a super-express waterway through Bangkok to prevent future floods similar to the one that has crippled the Thai capital and brought manufacturing in other parts of the country to a standstill.





A team of disaster experts from Chulalongkorn University in Bangkok is now investigating permanent solutions to the disaster that has left hundreds dead.





"One of the urgent solutions is a super-express floodway," Thanawat Jarupongsakul, from the university's Unit for Disaster and Land Information Studies, told the Bangkok Post.





Under the plan, existing natural canals -- some of them more than 100 kilometers (62 miles) long -- would be linked in a 200-km "super-highway" that would divert the course of floodwaters from the north.





The super-canal would hold 1.6 billion cubic meters of water and drain run-off at a rate of 6,000 cubic meters per second -- the equivalent of two and a half Olympic-sized swimming pools a second.





"This idea is much cheaper than digging a new river as a floodway," Thanawat said.





He said the proposed scheme would involve the construction of a kilometer-wide exclusion zone next to the floodway to prevent properties from being inundated, and a raised highway on both side of the canal.





The super-express floodway would then drain upstream run-off directly into the sea.





The university team is also looking at other flood-prevention measures such as a better early-warning system, improved water resource management, a flood tax, the use of a flood-risk map for urban development and groundwater-use controls.





"Now, the government must stop [trying to] solve flood problems with political methods," Thanawat told the Bangkok Post. He said poor water management rather than excess rain had caused this year's severe flooding, adding that natural swamps in the west of Thailand's Central Plains, which once absorbed water flow, had been developed into industrial and residential areas, blocking the natural floodway.





While giant flood tunnels in the Bangkok metropolitan area could drain floodwater from the city, they could not cope with a massive inundation from the north.





"If there is no step forward, foreign investors will eventually disappear from the country and the next generation will be still worried whether flooding will happen or not," he said.

***

(CNN) -- Severe turbulence shook a Continental Airlines flight Monday, injuring dozens of passengers and forcing the aircraft to divert to Miami, Florida, according to the airline and a fire official.



Oxygen masks hang from a damaged part of the plane Monday, in a photo by passenger Camila Machado.



There were 168 passengers and 11 crew members on Flight 128, which was heading from Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, to Houston, Texas, according to a statement from Continental Airlines.



"I've never seen turbulence like that, so I really thought we wouldn't make it," passenger Giovani Loss told CNN affiliate WSVN-TV. Loss, who is originally from Brazil, said he is a lawyer in the United States and frequently travels between the two countries.



He said passengers were afraid the turbulence may have been the result of mechanical problems with the plane.



"People [were] screaming, then there was a huge silence for like 30 minutes," Loss said.



Ambulances and other vehicles were lined up on the runway to treat and transport the injured passengers when the plane landed at Miami International Airport at 5:35 a.m.  Watch passengers describe what happened »



"People that weren't seat belted in flew up and hit the ceilings," passenger John Norwood told WSVN. "So their faces, their heads hit the plastics and broke all the plastics up top."



Continental said seven passengers were transported to nearby hospitals, and approximately 28 other passengers were treated at the scene. Lt. Elkin Sierra of the Miami-Dade Fire Department said 26 passengers were injured, including four seriously.



The Boeing 767-200 hit turbulence about 50 miles north of the Dominican Republic at about 38,000 feet, according to an official with the Federal Aviation Administration. It landed in Miami an hour later with its seat belt signs illuminated, the airline said.



Many of the passengers said they did not hear any warning before the turbulence hit.



Injuries received included bumps, bruises, neck pain and back pain, Sierra said.



Passengers said they saw several people bleeding from their heads, including one woman who sustained a serious gash to her head.



The flight is scheduled to depart Miami for Houston later in the morning, according to Continental's Web site. It had been scheduled to arrive in Houston at 6 a.m. local time.

***

(PEOPLE.com) -- Don't mess with Gina!





That's the lesson Gina Carano's costars learned while they were filming Steven Soderbergh's "Haywire." After all, Carano isn't just another new face in a Hollywood action thriller. She's a former mixed martial arts star, who is making her movie debut in Soderbergh's latest flick, which opens Friday.





"I got to be physical with some of the hottest guys in Hollywood," Carano, who tussles with Channing Tatum, Ewan McGregor and Michael Fassbender in the film, told PEOPLE at the BlackBerry-sponsored Cinema Society screening this week.





Fassbender, in particular, was the recipient of a vase to the face when the two were filming a fight scene and he accidentally KO'd Carano.





"When Fassbender slammed my head into the wall, that's the only time I went black," Carano, 29, said about the shoot, during which she also reportedly knocked out a stuntman. "And then I slammed a vase right into his face when he wasn't expecting it."





"He didn't get cut," Carano clarified, before adding, "maybe a little bit."





McGregor, for his part, said he also emerged "sore" from his scenes with Carano but called the fight scenes "good fun."





But Tatum, whom she describes as "like a bro," is one actor Carano says she wouldn't want to fight in real life. "I'd probably want to choke him out real quick," she said. "Because he's actually very athletic."





Return to MMA?





Carano has officially retired from MMA but says she hasn't ruled out a return. To prepare for the role as a Black Ops agent in "Haywire," she worked with a Hollywood stunt crew and attended a two-month training camp with a former Israeli intelligence operative.





According to Soderbergh, it was his intention to have Carano -- who is a 5-feet 8-inches tall and 143 pounds. -- rather than one of her male costars, be the toughest character in the film.





"There was something transgressive about having the woman being the one who is attacked first," Soderbergh recently told Sports Illustrated.





"There's sort of, in movie terms, a popular conception that women are weaker than men and that the only way that they can triumph in a hand-to-hand situation is if they somehow have an advantage from the beginning. ... [Carano's character] is attacked in an unprovoked manner and has to work her way back into winning the fight. With someone like Gina, you can pull that off and have it be believable. She can really break you in half."





See the full article at PEOPLE.com.





© 2011 People and Time Inc. All rights reserved.

***

(CNN) -- Inter Milan coach Jose Mourinho has been accused of "physical and verbal aggression" towards a journalist after Sunday's 1-1 Serie A draw at Atalanta.



The Italian Sport Union of Journalists (USSI) condemned Mourinho's alleged actions against Corriere dello Sport's Andrea Ramazzotti.



A statement from the USSI urged Inter president Massimo Moratti, and the country's governing sporting bodies to investigate.



It read: "The physical and verbal aggression of Inter coach Jose Mourinho towards our colleague Andrea Ramazzotti marks one of the lowest and alarming moments in the relations between football and sporting press.



"Mourinho was already cited, prior to the Champions League game with Rubin Kazan, for his uneducated and disrespectful tone that he used towards certain colleagues.



"This aggression marks an irresponsible and unacceptable escalation. USSI expresses not only its indignation, but a strong concern for gestures and the unspeakable behavior that only increases tensions and controversies.



"It asks president Moratti to intervene energetically so that a member of his club (Mourinho) adapts to the great tradition of civility of the club and of the Moratti family.



"It asks as well of the FIGC (Italian Football Federation) that the sporting justice panel intervenes to examine the behavior of Mourinho for eventual sanctions."



Mourinho watched Sunday's game from the stands as he served a one-match touchline ban.



Reports in Italy have claimed a heated argument took place between Mourinho and Ramazzotti outside the team bus.



Mourinho has not commented on the incident but Moratti told the club's official Web site: "For the moment I don't want to comment as I still don't have all the facts, but I'm sorry.



"I will talk to the head of the union to find out what he means by energetic action."

***

(CNN)  -- The second-highest ranking official in Iraqi President Jalal Talabani's political party resigned Saturday, along with four other high-ranking Kurdish politicians, officials said.

Iraqi President Jalal Talabani could be jeopardized by the resignations of five key members of his party.

Khosrat Rasul, the vice president of the Kurdistan Regional Government, resigned, along with four other members of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK), according to Kurdish lawmakers.

Rasul is a battle-scarred veteran of Kurdish rebellions against former Iraqi President Saddam Hussein.

Kurdish members of the Iraqi Parliament say the resignations threaten the delicate balance of power in Iraqi Kurdistan, a semi-autonomous region in northern Iraq. It has been the most stable part of the country since the 2003 U.S.-led invasion.

"It looks very serious," said Ala Talabani, the president's niece and a PUK member, as well as a member of Parliament. She spoke by phone from the Iraqi Kurdish city of Sulaimaniya, long a stronghold of the PUK.

"It's about corruption," Ala Talabani said of the resignations. "They are asking about the resources and the money. Who is spending it. And who is in charge of the income of the party."

"It's not good," said Mahmoud Othman, a member of the Iraqi Parliament and an independent Kurdish politician. "The PUK is one of the main two [Kurdish] players," he added. "A problem like this will upset the whole situation."

Iraqi Kurdistan broke free from Baghdad's control after the 1991 Gulf War. Since then, the region has been divided between two rival Kurdish factions, Talabani's PUK and the Kurdistan Democratic Party, led by Massoud Barzani.

For several years throughout the 1990s, the groups battled each other in the mountains and valleys of northern Iraq.

Those historic divisions faded somewhat following the United States' overthrow of Hussein. For the past five years, the Kurds have worked together in Baghdad to enhance the Kurdish region's position in Iraq.

Kurdish politicians deftly took advantage of divisions between Sunni and Shi'a Arab factions. They successfully lobbied to maintain Kurdistan's militia of pesh merga fighters.

Demands to expand the Kurdish zone of control and win the right to exploit oil deposits in Kurdish territory have increased tensions between Kurdish and Arab politicians.

The resignation of Rasul and his allies threatens the power base of Talabani, the first Kurdish president in Iraqi history.

"If it is not fixed by Talabani by tomorrow, this could change the entire landscape of Kurdish politics," said Hiwa Osman, the Iraq country director of the Institute for War and Peace Reporting.

Iraq's three northern Kurdish provinces are scheduled to hold regional elections in May. Talabani is expected to travel to Kurdistan to hold emergency meetings with Rasul and his other former comrades-in-arms.

This is not the first time the stout Kurdish leader has faced a rebellion from within the ranks of his followers. Kurdish observers say these disputes usually stem from disagreements over money and power.

***

(CNN) -- Tiger Woods' popularity has plummeted -- but most Americans will still be rooting for him to win when he tees up at the Masters tournament in April, a new national poll suggests.





Nearly 60 percent of those who answered a CNN/Opinion Research Corporation survey said they wanted the embattled golfer to win the event at Georgia's Augusta National course, which would be his fifth victory there.





Twenty percent said they did not want him to win and another 20 percent said they did not care.





The Masters will be Woods' first time back in professional golf since his November car crash outside his home and the media frenzy about his extramarital affairs.





And even though Woods has taken a hiatus from playing, 52 percent of those polled said they think Woods will win the Masters, the first of the golf season's four major tournaments which runs from April 5-11.





An overwhelming majority of those polled, 75 percent, thought it was appropriate for Woods to return at the Masters and that he did not have to wait longer.





But still, a majority of those polled, 45 percent, had an unfavorable view of Woods. Forty-three percent had a favorable view.





These numbers are in striking contrast to 2005 when about 85 percent of those polled had a favorable view of Woods.





Woods' public woes began with an early-morning crash November 27 outside his Orlando-area home, when he suffered minor injuries after striking a fire hydrant and a tree with his Cadillac SUV.





Woods was not required to talk to police about the wreck and declined to talk with investigators on several occasions. Eventually, he was cited for careless driving.





The accident occurred days after the tabloid National Enquirer named Woods as having an affair with a New York nightclub hostess. The woman has denied the allegation, but several others have come forward to claim that they had sexual relationships with Woods, who has two children with his wife, former model Elin Nordegren.





In a carefully-managed March statement, delivered to a small, hand-picked crowd, Woods said he was in inpatient therapy for 45 days from the end of December to early February for "issues," which he did not explain.





The controversy prompted several major sponsors to suspend or drop their relationships with Woods, who also apologized to his business partners for his behavior.

***

(CNN) -- Swedish car manufacturer Saab, a fully owned subsidiary of General Motors, announced Friday that it will "file for reorganization ... to create a fully independent business entity."



The Swedish car maker says a formal reorganization is the best way to create an "entity that's ready for investment."



Under the Swedish court system, an independent administrator will be appointed to work closely with the Saab management team to formulate a reorganization proposal, which will be presented to creditors within three weeks of the filing.



Saab said it will continue to operate as usual and in accordance with the formal reorganization process, with the government providing some support during this period.



"We explored and will continue to explore all available options for funding and/or selling Saab and it was determined a formal reorganization would be the best way to create a truly independent entity that is ready for investment," said Jan Ake Jonsson, managing director for Saab Automobile.



"Saab has an excellent foundation for strong growth, assuming we can get the funding to complete engineering, tooling and manage launch costs. Reorganization will give us the time and means that help get these products to market, while minimizing the liquidity impact of Saab on GM."



General Motors said this week that it plans shed tens of thousands of employees, close factories, cut product lines and wants billions of dollars in government funding to stave off bankruptcy.



When all is said and done, GM said that by 2011 it could need a total of $30 billion, which includes the $13.4 billion in Treasury loans it has already received.



In the near term, GM will most certainly need $9.1 billion in additional loans and could require an additional $7.5 billion in the next two years if auto sales don't improve.

***

(CNN)  -- Two of the biggest stars in the NBA will be team-mates next season after a blockbuster trade which sees Shaquille O'Neal move from the Phoenix Suns to the Cleveland Cavaliers -- the home of league MVP LeBron James.



Shaquille O'Neal is hoping his arrival will put a smile on the faces of Cleveland fans.



The 37-year-old O'Neal is one of the all-time greats of basketball, winning four NBA championships, three straight with the Los Angeles Lakers and the other with Miami Heat.



James is widely recognized as the sport's current superstar, but the 24-year-old has been left frustrated by Cleveland's failure to win the title.



He stormed off the court after  their loss to the Orlando Magic in the Eastern Conference finals, not even shaking hands with 2008 Olympic teammate Dwight Howard.



The trade, which sees Phoenix get center Ben Wallace and guard Sasha Pavlovic, has been talked about since February but finalized on Thursday night.



"I was elated about the trade because I get to play with one of the greatest players to ever play the game in LeBron James," O'Neal was quoted on the NBA's official Web site www.nba.com.



O'Neal averaged 17.8 points and 8.4 rebounds in 75 games for the Suns last season and believes he still has much to offer the NBA.



"My numbers are not good enough to retire. Three more years left," O'Neal wrote on his Twitter blog.



His career averages are 24.7 points, 11.3 rebounds and 2.4 blocked shots, with his peak seasons coming as he led the Lakers to three straight titles from 2000-02.



The Lakers traded him to Miami where he spent three seasons, helping them to the NBA Championship three years ago.



He has played in Phoenix for the past two years, restricted by injuries in his first season.



The Cavs, powered by James, won 66 regular season games and their first eight in the playoffs before coming unstuck against the Magic.



They will be hoping that O'Neal will be the final piece in the jigsaw to land the first American sports championship for Cleveland in 45 years.

***

(CNN) -- Texas police on Friday released a composite sketch of a man they believe broke into the homes of four former members of the same sorority, then sexually assaulted them.





No name has been given for the suspect in the alleged break-ins and attacks, which took place between November 2010 and October 2011, according to a timeline from the Plano police.





Detectives, however, do have "a definite DNA profile on the suspect" after a crime lab report, the police statement noted.





Plano police in October released a video -- dated in April -- showing a man with a distinctive swagger who they believe is responsible. Snapshots from that video were distributed Friday.





The alleged assaults occurred in the cities of Plano, Coppell and Corinth, all suburbs of Dallas.





The alleged victims -- all females in their mid-50s to mid-60s -- were alumnae of the same predominantly African-American sorority: Delta Sigma Theta, according to police.





They offered similar descriptions of their assailant as being a black male in his late 30s to mid-40s, weighing from 275 to 300 pounds and standing between 5 feet 7 inches and 5 feet 9 inches tall.





"He made it obvious to our victims that he knew information ... about them personally," Plano police spokesman Andre Smith said this fall, adding that none of the women believes they knew their attacker in advance.





According to Corinth Police Capt. Greg Wilkerson, all the assaults occurred in "residential settings" between 9:15 p.m. and 4 a.m. when the victims were alone. The alleged attack in his city, 35 miles northwest of Dallas, took place on October 14.





The late-night setting, the fact the victims were often asleep and the alleged assailant's "attempts to conceal his identity" make it challenging to definitively identify the attacker, said Wilkerson.





Wilkerson said that the nature of the assaults suggest the alleged assailant was "possibly suspecting surveillance, spending some time around the areas ... prior to the attacks."





The police captain said authorities do not know how the suspect learned details of the victims, speculating it may have been over the Internet, by accessing an old directory or noticing would-be victims with Delta Sigma Theta jewelry, placards or other paraphernalia out in public.





Delta Sigma Theta President Cynthia M.A. Butler-McIntyre this fall issued a statement urging members in the Dallas area to take precautions.





"To think that our members are being targeted is disturbing and extremely disheartening," she said.

***

BAGHDAD, Iraq (CNN)  -- An Iraqi report on last month's shootings involving security contractor Blackwater USA called the incident "pre-meditated murder" and is calling for $8 million in compensation for each of the 17 Iraqis who died, a senior Iraqi government official said Monday.



Lawyer Hassan Jabbar lies in a hospital after being injured in a shooting involving Blackwater contractors.



The results of the Iraqi investigation into the shootings is complete and will be presented to Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki's government for review, the official said.



The report calls for the payments to go to the families of each of those killed in the shootings, he said.



Iraqi government spokesman Ali al-Dabbagh said Sunday that the Iraqi commission investigating the shootings has accused the company's guards of firing indiscriminately and without provocation on citizens and violating the rights of Iraqis.



Blackwater said its contractors "acted lawfully and appropriately in response to a hostile attack," and "the civilians reportedly fired upon by Blackwater professionals were, in fact, armed enemies, and Blackwater personnel returned defensive fire."



The September 16 shooting also left 27 other people wounded, al-Dabbagh said.



Seven vehicles were also destroyed in the incident, which occurred around Nusoor Square in western Baghdad.



Al-Dabbagh said the commission, formed September 22, determined there was no evidence the Blackwater convoy was under direct or indirect fire.



"Not even a stone was thrown at them," al-Dabbagh said.



He added the contractors violated the rules of conduct and regulations for private security firms operating in Iraq.



"They must be held accountable according to the law," he said.



However, security contractors have immunity from Iraqi law under a provision put into place in the early days of the U.S.-led occupation.  Watch how supervision has been tightened on contractors »



Blackwater security contractors were guarding a State Department convoy. The company is one of a number of private security contractors in Iraq.



Last month's shooting has sparked fury in both countries and led to a series of new steps reviewing the role of U.S. contractors in Iraq.



The Iraqi-American joint committee met for the first time Sunday to begin reviewing security operations. It plans to issue a report offering recommendations to the Iraqi and U.S. governments.



Border crossings reopen



Five border crossings between Iran and Iraq's Kurdish region have been reopened, an Iraqi Kurdish regional government spokesman said.



Iran closed its border with the Iraqi region nearly two weeks ago to protest the U.S. military's incarceration of an Iranian arrested September 20 in Sulaimaniya.



The U.S. military maintains that Mahmoud Farhadi was posing as a businessman with a trade delegation and was in charge of Zafar Command, one of three units of the Ramazan Corps of the Iranian Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps' Quds Force.



Iraqi President Jalal Talabani blasted the United States for the arrest, saying Farhadi is an Iranian civil servant who was on an official trade mission in the region.



The U.S. military has long accused Quds Force agents of training and equipping Iraqi insurgents, an allegation Iran vehemently denies.



Other developments



CNN's Jomana Karadsheh contributed to this report.

***

(CNN)  -- When Kellogg's dumped its endorsement of Michael Phelps after a photograph surfaced of the Olympic gold medalist using a bong, the company was stuck with thousands of boxes of cereal featuring the swimmer's image.



Kellogg's ended its Michael Phelps endorsement, so it sent two tons of cereal with his face on it to a food bank.



No problem. The company, based in Battle Creek, Michigan, made short order of the already-printed and filled boxes, donating two tons of cereal to the San Francisco Food Bank late last month.



With food banks across the country reporting shortages of food, the donation was a welcome one, said the food bank's director of development, Christopher Wiley. It took only two weeks for about 3,000 boxes to move through warehouse.



"Thousands of families benefited from the donation" Wiley said. "It was a surprise to us. We were lacking a lot of cereal. It is a great product many low-income families really need."



"The real story for us was not the box but what's inside the box. The food is so valuable for the community. It's making good from bad," Wiley said.



The food bank has seen a 6 percent increase in its customer base since the beginning of the year, he said.



Phelps, 23, won a record eight gold medals at the 2008 Olympic Games in Beijing, China.



He admitted "regrettable behavior" after a British newspaper published the controversial photograph in early February. The tabloid News of the World showed Phelps using the bong during what it said was a November party at the University of South Carolina in Columbia.



A bong is a device commonly used to smoke marijuana.



The Phelps box attracted considerable attention to the food bank. Administrators received several calls from people wanting to get the box as a novelty item. But, said Wiley, all the cereal went to food bank customers.



Kellogg's was the only one of Phelps sponsors to drop the athlete, although U.S.A. Swimming, the nation's governing body for competitive swimming, suspended him for three months, withdrew financial support and barred him from competition during the period of his "reprimand."



CNN's Jackie Castillo and Mayra Cuevas contributed to this report.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- The killer of "Harry Potter" actor Rob Knox has been given four life sentences and told he will be behind bars for at least 20 years.



The parents of Robert Knox read a statement outside the Old Bailey after Karl Bishop was found guilty of his murder.



A judge at the Old Bailey court in central London sentenced 22-year-old Karl Bishop on Thursday, the day after he was convicted of the attack on Rob Knox and four of his friends in southeast London last May.



Bishop stabbed them 10 times in less than two minutes, the court heard.



Knox, 18, had rushed out of the bar after he heard that Bishop had threatened his younger brother Jamie but he ended up being stabbed five times, once in a main artery. He died in hospital later that night.



The judge, Mr Justice Bean, told Bishop: "You are at present a highly dangerous man," the Press Association reported.



"There is plainly a very significant risk to the public of serious harm caused by your committing further offences of violence.



"Because you had threatened his younger brother, Rob Knox was among those who tried to disarm you. He paid for his bravery with his life.



"The truth is that you simply could not care less whether you killed him or not. When you learned that you had killed Rob your only response was to say 'Yeah, sweet.'"



Days before the attack, the actor had finished filming on "Harry Potter And The Half-Blood Prince," due for international release in July, in which he played the role of Marcus Belby. He was set to reprise the part in future "Harry Potter" films.



Knox's father Colin told mourners at his funeral, including co-star Rupert Grint, that his son had been "living the dream," PA said.



The Knox family left the court without commenting, but earlier Rob's mother Sally said of Bishop: "Once he's got his sentence and he's gone, I will not waste my time thinking about him.



"I just think maybe somebody like him may have some kind of disturbed mind, which may not be due to the life he's had, it just may be something in him."



Knife crime in Britain is a political hot topic due to a spate of recent killings of mainly young people in major cities. UK Prime Minister Gordon Brown has urged tougher sentences for those caught carrying knives. He told the Daily Telegraph last month: "By carrying a knife you are not only endangering the lives of others, but you are more likely to be killed, or end up in jail.



"We need to change the way young people think about knives, we need families and communities working together ... to get this message across and help stamp out knife crime and get weapons off our streets."

***

(CNN) -- Taliban militants, who implemented Islamic law in Pakistan's violence-plagued Swat Valley last week, have now taken control of a neighboring district.



Protests in Karachi against the creation of sharia courts in Swat Valley.



Here are some answers about the Swat Valley, its history and what's taking place there.



What is Swat Valley? Swat Valley is located in Pakistan's North West Frontier Province, near the border with Afghanistan and about 185 miles (300 kilometers) from the Pakistani capital of Islamabad.



The alpine region once was one of Pakistan's premier tourist destinations, boasting the nation's only ski resort until it was shut down after Taliban militants overran the area. It also was a draw for trout-fishing enthusiasts and those wishing to visit the ancient Buddhist ruins in the area.



What's happening in Swat Valley? In recent years Taliban militants unleashed a wave of violence that claimed hundreds of lives in the province. The militants wanted sharia law -- or Islamic law -- imposed in the region. They took over the valley in 2008.



The central government of Pakistan, which long exerted little control in the area, launched an intense military offensive in late July to flush out the militants. In retaliation, the Taliban carried out a series of deadly attacks and began gaining ground, setting up checkpoints in the area.



Has the government intervened? The militants and the Pakistani government reached a peace deal earlier this year, which was recently signed into law by Pakistani President Asif Ali Zardari.



Under the deal, sharia law was imposed in the region. While the peace deal drew criticism for the Pakistani government, some analysts and political observers say the government had little choice but to capitulate, as militants have terrorized the region with beheadings, kidnappings and the destruction of schools.



What's happening now? This week, the Taliban moved to seize control of the neighboring Buner district, bringing it closer to Islamabad than it has been since Taliban insurgency began.



What is sharia law? Sharia law is Islamic law. While there are different interpretations of it, the Taliban's strict interpretation forbids women from being seen in public without their husbands and fathers, requires veils for women and beards for men, and bans music and television.



Consequences are severe; during the Taliban struggle to impose sharia law, anyone found disobeying was pinned to the ground and lashed. Others were beheaded and hung from poles, with notices attached to their bodies that anyone daring to remove the corpse before 48 hours had passed would also be beheaded and hanged.

***

(CNN) -- To offset carbon dioxide, a Japanese airline is asking its passengers to go to the toilet before boarding.



All Nippon Airways is asking passengers to use the restroom before flying to reduce weight.



The unusual request by All Nippon Airways (ANA) is part of its "e-Flight" promotional program to reduce the amount of carbon expelled on 38 domestic routes and its twice daily international flights to Singapore.



"Asking passengers to go to the toilet (before boarding) is just a small part of the program," said spokeswoman Megumi Tezuka, which includes using recycled paper cups and plastic bottles instead of glass.



"We are making these items lighter -- and making the passengers lighter, a little bit," Tezuka said.



The airline estimates that if 50 percent of passengers relieved themselves before boarding, it would reduce carbon dioxide by 4.2 tons a month.



Flights will also show educational films on the environment.



The month-long trial program, which began October 1, will be evaluated and may be extended if successful, Tezuka said.



In true Japanese fashion, the encouragement to eliminate is more suggested than explicit. This is what is announced before boarding the flights: "This flight is a so-called 'eFlight.' The idea behind the operation is to think about the Earth in the sky above. Fuel reduction by lightening the weight of the aircraft will lead to restrain the carbon dioxide emission, which is one of the causes of global warming. Thank you for your understanding."



So no mother-like admonishments to use the toilet before leaving? "No, it's more subtle than that," Tezuka said. People are also encouraged to pack lighter for the flights, although no additional weight restrictions apply.



The program comes as the airline industry in Japan is struggling. The nation's largest carrier, Japan Airlines, is seeking a government bailout and forecasts $700 million in losses this year. This week, ANA's stock price hit a 52-week low in trading Wednesday.

***

(CNN) -- A British couple kidnapped by Somalian pirates in the Indian Ocean have issued another desperate plea, saying they are being badly treated and need urgent help.





Paul and Rachel Chandler, from Kent in southern England, were taken by pirates from their yacht, the Lynn Rival, on October 23, just days after setting sail from the Seychelles islands for Tanzania.





The couple was brought ashore and are being held in separate locations in central Somalia.





Their captors initially demanded a ransom of $7 million, but the British government -- in line with longstanding policy -- has refused to pay.





In a video filmed on Thursday in Somalia by the French news agency AFP, Rachel Chandler begged the British government to help secure the couple's release.





"Please help us, these people are not treating us well," she said. "I'm old, I'm 56 and my husband is 60 years old. We need to be together because we have not much time left."





A doctor was shown examining Paul Chandler, 60, who appeared to be in a better state than his wife. The medic found Rachel Chandler in poor mental health, calling out for her husband, AFP reported.





"She is sick, she is very anxious, she suffers from insomnia," Dr. Mohamed Helmi Hangul told the agency. "She's very confused, she's always asking about her husband -- 'Where's my husband, where's my husband?' -- and she seems completely disorientated."





Paul Chandler said his conditions were poor and also pleaded for help. "Please help us, we have nobody to help us, we have no children... We have been in captivity for 98 days and we are not in good condition," he said, also on Thursday.





Hangul said Paul Chandler "had a bad cough and seemed to have some fever."





A spokesman for the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office told CNN on Sunday: "We are monitoring the situation very closely and doing everything we can to help secure a release.





"We remain in regular contact with the family and are providing support. We call for the safe and swift release of Paul and Rachel."





Pirates have been very active off the east coast of Africa in the past several years, operating out of lawless Somalia.





Earlier this month, pirates attempted to hijack an Indian crude oil vessel 105 nautical miles from Somalia, the EU's anti-piracy naval force said. The pirates opened fire on the ship and were later arrested.





Piracy on the high-seas reached a six-year high in 2009, according to the International Maritime Bureau, which monitors shipping crimes.





CNN's Per Nyberg contributed to this report.

***

Leogane, Haiti (CNN)  -- More than three weeks after Haiti's devastating earthquake, many of the makeshift camps housing thousands are starting to function as mini cities.



Small markets have blossomed. Some camps have even designated mayors and security personnel.



But in others, life still looks as it did days after the January 12 quake. People have only what they dug out of the rubble with their bare hands or acquired somehow else for survival.



Recently seen along a row of tents in a camp in Leogane was this hodgepodge of life before and after:



Turquoise hand-crocheted lace



Mazola oil



Ceramic jar that says: "Fresh Cookies"



Propane stove



Barbie doll



A black rhinestone Bebe T-shirt



Boxes of "Gourmet" spaghetti



Bicycle chain



John McCain bumper sticker



NFL towel



Teddy bear



Set of disposable stacked plastic bowls



Amplifiers and scavenging pigs



Box of dog biscuits



Aluminum cooking utensil set



32-ounce cans of tomato sauce



Cotton squares



Peppermint green



Clarins makeup bag



Plastic baby bottle



Jeans turned inside out to dry



Yellow flip flops



Pen and ink drawing of a woman



USAID bag of rice



Evaporated milk



Red roll-aboard luggage



Blanket



Wood-framed photograph



Bausch and Lomb soft contact lens case



Compaq computer monitor



Frayed Haitian flag



Crayolas



Travel-size SPF 30 sunblock



Pillows



One dust-laden Converse hightop -- hard to tell what color

***

(CNN) -- The Republican National Convention is kicking off in full force Tuesday in the Twin Cities -- the first time the GOP has held a presidential convention there since 1892.



Laura Bush and Cindy McCain speak at a shortened first day of the Republican National Convention Monday.



The convention, delayed briefly when  Hurricane Gustav hit the Gulf Coast, is also being held later in the year than any nominating convention in history.



Check out these tidbits of convention history and political trivia.



Location



The Republican National Convention is being held in the Xcel Energy Center, the home of the National Hockey League team the Minnesota Wild.



To prepare the Xcel center for the GOP convention, workers removed 3,000 seats and installed more than 25 miles of cable



Sen. Barack Obama gave his first speech as the Democrats' presumptive 2008 presidential nominee at the Xcel Center on June 3.



The Twin Cities and Denver have each received $50 million each in federal funds for convention security.



No Republican since Richard Nixon has carried Minnesota in a presidential general election -- the longest Democratic streak of any state in the nation.



The Delegates



About 2,300 delegates and 2,200 alternates delegates are expected to journey to the twin cities for the event, and the Minneapolis/St. Paul economy is expected to benefit to the tune of $150 to $160 million.



The Candidates, past and present



John McCain turned 72 last week; if elected, he'll be the oldest president sworn in to a first term.



Two GOP presidential nominees were older than McCain; Ronald Reagan was 73 in 1984 when he was running for his second term and Bob Dole was 73 in 1996. Dole lost that election to Bill Clinton.



John McCain was a prisoner of war in Vietnam from 1967 to 1973; his service awards include the Silver Star, the Bronze Star, the Legion of Merit and a Purple Heart.



McCain's father and grandfather were both U.S. Navy admirals; they were the first father and son to achieve that rank.



McCain represented Arizona in the U.S. House of Representatives from 1983 to 1987; he has served in the U.S. Senate since 1987.



McCain was the presidential nominating speaker in 1996 for Sen. Robert Dole.



McCain clinched the Republican presidential nomination on March 4 after winning 26 primary season contests.



Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin is the second woman to serve on a major party ticket -- in 1984 Democratic vice presidential nominee Geraldine Ferraro was the first woman to serve on a major party ticket.



Palin is the first woman to serve as Alaska governor; she was elected in 2006, winning the election to the governorship as a maverick reformer willing to distance herself from the Republican Party.



McCain first met Palin at the National Governors Association meeting in Washington in February of 2008.



Conventions



National political conventions were covered on radio for the first time in 1924, and covered on television for the first time since 1948.



2008 marks the fourth time the parties have held back-to-back conventions; it also happened in 1912, 1916 and 1956.



The longest convention in history was the 1924 Democratic convention in New York -- It lasted 17 days. The shortest convention in history was the 1872 Democratic convention in Baltimore -- it only lasted six hours.

***

(CNN) -- Defending champion Alberto Contador has issued an apology after he took advantage of his rival Andy Schleck's mechanical failure to seize the yellow jersey in the Tour de France.





Schleck, who was leading Astana rider Contador by 31 seconds in the overall standings going into stage 15 on Monday, dropped his chain while launching an attack on the day's final climb and had to stop to repair the problem.





Rather than waiting for his rival -- in keeping with the Tour's sporting traditions -- Contador and a group including fellow contenders Denis Menchov and Samuel Sanchez stole a march to the finish, gaining 39 seconds on Schleck.





Contador now leads Saxo Bank's Schleck by eight seconds in the overall standings, with Spain's Sanchez two minutes behind the leader in third and Russia's Menchov two minutes, 13 seconds back.





See Contador's Youtube apology here





Spaniard Contador was booed by the French crowd as he was awarded the yellow jersey on the podium and was heavily criticized by Schleck.





But after reflecting on the stage, Contador issued a video on Youtube saying: "The race was in full gear and, well, maybe I made a mistake. I'm sorry.





"At a time like that all you think about is riding as fast as you can. I'm not happy, in the sense that, to me, fair play is very important.





"The kind of thing that happened today is not something I like, it's not my style and I hope my relationship with Andy will remain as good as before."





Luxembourg's Schleck, the runner-up to two-time champion Contador last year, was angered by what he saw as a lack of "fair play" and vowed to take "revenge" on his rival.





"In the same situation I would not have taken advantage," Schleck said, AFP reported. "I'm not the jury, but for sure those guys wouldn't get the fair play award from me today.





"I'm really disappointed. My stomach is full of anger, and I want to take my revenge. I will take my revenge in the coming days."





In a similar situation in 2003, Germany's Jan Ullrich was praised for his sportsmanship after he waited for Lance Armstrong to recover from a collision with a spectator in the Pyrenees.





Armstrong then surged forward to win the stage by 40 seconds en route to the fifth of his seven Tour victories.





The 187.5 kilometer stage from Pamiers to Bagneres-de-Luchon - the second of four stages in the Pyrenees - was won by French champion Thomas Voeckler after a fine solo ride, finishing nearly three minutes ahead of the race favorites.





Voeckler's triumph gave France their fifth victory in 15 stages.

***

Washington (CNN) -- The public may have seen the last video images of the failed blowout preventer from the BP oil well disaster, as authorities expressed possible security concerns.





The feed from a camera on board a salvage ship was discontinued Saturday after the apparatus was raised from the sea floor and placed on the vessel Q4000.





At his regular briefing with reporters Wednesday, National Incident Commander Thad Allen said additional questions about the unit would now have to go to the U.S. Justice Department and the Joint Investigation Team.





When pressed about the video feed, Allen said, "We'll have to refer that to the Department of Justice. There were some constraints put on that videotaping based on the people that are looking at the blowout preventer and their identities and so forth, and I think there's, there may be some security issues associated with it."





Allen said the ship will carry the unit to shore, but that the timetable and other questions will no longer be something he can address as part of the disaster operations that he heads.





As of Wednesday, he said, "the blowout preventer is already up on deck on the Q4000. The lower marine riser package has been separated, and they're putting it on latching skids getting ready to move it closer to shore."





He said "exactly when it arrives and what the disposition would be, I would refer you to the Department of Justice, or the Joint Investigation Team," since "from this point out it doesn't involve the spill itself."





Allen said after the ship moves off-scene, "this will cease to be part of the national response that I'm coordinating as the national incident commander."

***

(CNN) -- The government of earthquake-ravaged Haiti must become more visible now, even amid a global outpouring of aid as the impoverished island nation struggles to recover, Brazil's foreign minister said Monday.





"The government, in spite of all the difficulties, should appear more to the people," Brazilian Foreign Minister Celso Amorim said in an interview with CNN's Christiane Amanpour.





"I think it's important because after all, they are the ones who transmit the needs of the Haitian people to us, to the international community."





Amorim, speaking from an international conference on Haiti in Montreal, Canada, said it's important for the world to follow the priorities of the Haitian government.





"We cannot lose sight of the central role of the elected leaders of Haiti," he said. "Haiti is a country that has an elected government."





Amorim was among more than a dozen foreign ministers and leaders, including U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, attending the Montreal conference. Representatives of many international institutions such as the United Nations and the European Union were also there.





Find loved ones in Haiti | Full coverage





Speaking in Montreal, Clinton said, "As part of our multilateral efforts to assist Haiti, we should look at how we decentralize economic opportunity and work with the Haitian government and people to support resettlement, which they are doing on their own, as people leave Port-au-Prince and return to the countryside."





Haiti's Prime Minister Jean-Max Bellerive was also in Montreal. He said the international aid effort has only just begun.





"I can simply tell you that the population is in need of more and more and more to confront the massive task of reconstruction," Bellerive said.





The aim of the Montreal meeting is to develop a strategy for early recovery and longer-term reconstruction. Once the strategy is set, a donors' conference to secure funding for Haiti would take place.





Amorim told Amanpour he expected the donors' conference is likely to take place at the end of March, possibly in New York, though that was not confirmed at the time of the interview.





"We cannot endure, we cannot see a disaster of the size of Haiti, with the poverty that exists in Haiti, and not do anything," he added.





"If you don't act for development, for emergency now and development immediately, you'll be having an enormous security problem."





Interactive map: Where to find aid





Amorim told Amanpour that as part of his country's efforts to bolster security in Haiti, the Brazilian Congress Monday approved a plan to almost double the number of Brazilian troops in the U.N. force in Haiti, to as many as 2,600 soldiers.





The U.N. force there, known as MINUSTAH, has been led by a Brazilian general since 2004. It lost dozens of its civilian headquarters staff during the earthquake.





Amorim, who has just been to Haiti, said it was also vital to rebuild the country's national symbols.





"I think this is very important so that the Haitian people feel also not only that they are receiving food and water, but also they are recovering their self-esteem," he said.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- House Speaker Nancy Pelosi said Friday she is "praying" that President Bush has a change of heart and does not veto a bipartisan children's health insurance bill that he has labeled an unwarranted expansion of government-run health insurance.

House Speaker Nancy Pelosi applauds after signing the State Children's Health Insurance legislation Friday.

"The tide is going a different way than a presidential veto would reflect," Pelosi, a California Democrat, said. "It was with great friendship that I reached out to the president this morning to say that I was still praying that he would have a change of heart and sign this legislation."

"I think I have to pray a little harder, but I will not give up," Pelosi said.

Pelosi's comments came a day after the Senate voted 67-29 for the measure, which would expand the State Children's Health Insurance program by up to 4 million children.

White House spokeswoman Dana Perino on Friday said Bush still intends to veto the bill when it arrives at his desk. Perino also said the disagreement between Congress and the White House was a simple policy difference, not "about who cares about children more than the other."

"The president is saying, 'Let's take care of the neediest children first, let's not put scarce federal dollars toward a program that was meant for the poorest children and let it creep up to middle-income families with incomes up to $83,000 a year,' " Perino said.

Bush and many Republicans contend that the program's original intent -- to give parents who make too much to qualify for Medicaid but not enough to buy private insurance coverage for their children -- would be changed under the current bill, prompting parents to wind up dropping private coverage their children already have to get cheaper coverage under the bill.

Perino also objected that the rhetoric surrounding the SCHIP bill has become too heated.

"I think it is preposterous for people to suggest the president of the United States doesn't care about children, that he wants children to suffer," Perino said.

The bill enjoys bipartisan support. Eighteen Republican senators Thursday night joined all the Democrats in voting for expanding the popular program from its current annual budget of $5 billion to $12 billion for the next five years.

Four senators -- Republicans John McCain of Arizona and Sam Brownback of Kansas and Democrats Joseph Biden of Delaware and Barack Obama of Illinois -- did not vote.

With the current program scheduled to expire Saturday, the White House encouraged Congress to send the president a continuing resolution extending the program.

"We should take this time to arrive at a more rational, bipartisan SCHIP reauthorization bill that focuses on children in poor families who don't currently have insurance, rather than raising taxes to cover people who already have private insurance," Perino added.

Sen. Orrin Hatch of Utah was among those Republicans who split from the president. "It's very difficult for me to be against a man I care so much for," he told his colleagues on the Senate floor prior to the vote. "It's unfortunate that the president has chosen to be on what, to me, is clearly the wrong side of this issue."

Though 67 votes in the 100-person chamber would suffice to overturn a veto, the House version, which was approved Tuesday, fell short of the two-thirds majority needed to override a veto. E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- At one point in Jared Hutchins' young life, the Beatles were a big problem.

The rallies, which draw mostly teens, are one part concert, one part Christian revival.

"I had to stop listening to them for a while," said Hutchins, who lives in Cumming, Georgia, and plays the piano, guitar and harmonica. He said the group's world view "had a negative effect on me," and made him irritable and angry.

"God owns my life, not the Beatles," he said simply. Although Hutchins said he enjoys a wide range of music -- from Pink Floyd and Arcade Fire to Christian bands such as Hillsong United -- he said he has to be careful of what music he listens to, for the same reason he temporarily turned off the Beatles.

Hutchins, a 16-year-old graced with poise and thoughtfulness, is one of many teenagers who say that some part of popular culture, with its ubiquitous references to sex, drugs and violence, has harmed him.

Last year, Hutchins and his Christian youth group attended an Acquire the Fire rally in Atlanta, Georgia, he said. Acquire the Fire -- regional rallies held across the country -- and BattleCry -- the larger rallies held this year in only three cities -- are the products of the evangelical Christian organization Teen Mania.  Go behind-the-scenes with CNN's Christiane Amanpour at a BattleCry event »

One part concert, one part Christian revival, the rallies seek to "stage a reverse revolution" against secular popular culture. They have the pull of headlining rock concerts, drawing thousands of people regardless of the region of the country, the month of year or the day of the week. The audiences are nearly always predominantly teenagers and young adults.

From 2006 to 2007, a total of 127,830 people attended the 34 Acquire the Fire rallies, and 71,414 people attended the three BattleCry events held in San Francisco, California; Detroit, Michigan; and Bristow, Virginia, according to Teen Mania. Watch flags, fireworks and teens at rally

For Hutchins, who said he struggled in his early adolescence to fit in and be cool before having a personal experience with God about four years ago, the organization's message is exactly right.

"We don't have to be branded by the culture, we are branded by God," he said. "Be who God created you to be."

But the glossy, glamorous appeal of popular culture too often obscures that path to God, Teen Mania followers say.

And so, Ron Luce, the 46-year-old founder of the organization, has waged a modern-day crusade against "purveyors of popular culture," whom he has condemned as "the enemy." More than two decades old, Teen Mania estimates it has reached more than 2 million teens with its message "of living completely for Christ."

The organization is sprawling. In addition to its live stadium rallies, there are BattleCry shirts and hats, mobile screen savers, books and a television program. There are international mission trips -- Hutchins attended one in Tijuana, Mexico, this summer. There is even a Teen Mania internship, a one-year program called the Honor Academy, based in Lindale, Texas.

In the live events, Luce couples the earnest appeal of a young father with a preacher's ability to mobilize a crowd. He weaves disturbing statistics about teenagers amid his gospel.

Today's teenagers are in crisis, he says.

"We're fighting for those who don't know they have a voice, that are being manipulated by our pop culture indulging in things that, really, they're not mature enough to be thinking about yet," Luce told CNN.

"Kids are hurting," he said. And of those who he feels inflict these moral wounds, Luce said, "We call them terrorists, virtue terrorists, that are destroying our kids."

"They're raping virgin teenage America on the sidewalk, and everybody's walking by and acting like everything's OK. And it's

***

(CNN) -- It wasn't Tibet's subzero temperatures that nurse practitioner Arlene Samen found so chilling on a 1997 medical trip, but the haunting stories she was told about mothers and newborns on the brink of death after childbirth.



Arlene Samen, right, helps provide childbirth education and equipment to those in need through One H.E.A.R.T.



"When I came to Tibet I heard of so many tragic stories of women dying -- no access to care in remote areas, no history of trained birth attendants, and no knowledge about pregnancy and childbirth," Samen recalls.



It is a problem that stretches well beyond Tibet's borders. According to the World Health Organization, more than 500,000 women worldwide die each year as a result of complications during pregnancy and childbirth, and nearly 7 million babies are either born dead or die within 28 days of their life. Almost all these deaths occur in the developing world.



Upon her return from Tibet, and in association with the University of Utah Health Services Center, Samen, 54, created One H.E.A.R.T. (Health Education And Research in Tibet) to combat the high infant and maternal mortality rates in Tibet and around the world.



Through One H.E.A.R.T., Samen's mission is to reach remote areas where women have limited access to a safe delivery, distribute the organization's training model, and debunk any fears toward safe, sanitary birthing practices.



"It's not uncommon for babies to die from basic things like not cleaning their mouth out to breathe," says Samen. "In surveys we've done, more than 50 percent of babies that died were born alive. This is due to lack of education."  Watch Samen talk about the organization's work »



Since 1998, One H.E.A.R.T has worked to set up centers that teach and educate local nurse practitioners, villagers and expectant mothers on how to deliver and care for newborn babies. A huge part of the organization's instruction includes hands-on birthing demonstration and distribution of community-tailored birth kits.



"I witnessed deliveries where the infant did not even have a blanket," says Samen. "I put a kit together with very simple items and anyone, anywhere can use this kit to keep infants and mothers alive during and after childbirth."  Watch home video of Samen in Tibet, where she delivered a baby »



The birth kit typically includes a sterilized razor blade, a clean sheet, three towels for the baby, three fleece blankets, a string to tie around the umbilical cord, gloves for the person delivering the baby and soap for hand washing.



Over the last 10 years, Samen's team has supplied more than 3,400 safe birthing kits to pregnant women and has trained more than 1,000 people in life-saving techniques.



For 2008, One H.E.A.R.T.'s education outreach program has targeted Nayarit, Mexico, a mountainous terrain in Mesoamerica and the native land of more than 50,000 indigenous Cora and Huichol Indians.



This past February, accompanied by a team of doctors and translators, Samen spent three days embedded within Nayarit's Santa Theresa communities, using an instructional newborn doll for childbirth training sessions and discussing safe birthing techniques and procedures.



"The traditional birth attendants told us they don't like to bring the women to the hospital because there's a fear of C-section and complications. [The women] would rather die than to come in and get help," Samen says.  Watch Samen describe the rigors of bringing a child birthing center to a remote area of Mexico »



"I found that really astounding and would like to look into that further to see if there's ways that we can cross that barrier and really help them so that they don't have that kind of fear."



Samen lives in Salt Lake City, but currently spends several months of the year in Tibet. Future plans for One H.E.A.R.T. include training local partners on the ground in Nepal and Ecuador. E-mail to a friend

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- A 47-year-old charity worker who says she has never been kissed is now a YouTube sensation after a singing performance that wowed the notoriously harsh talent judge Simon Cowell.

The YouTube video of Susan Boyle's performance has had more than 5 million hits.

Susan Boyle, from West Lothian in Scotland, appeared on the television show "Britain's Got Talent" last weekend with an inauspicious start.

Slightly plump and with short brown curly hair, Boyle stood somewhat uncomfortably in the middle of the stage wearing a gold lace sheath. She told the judges and the audience of the show that she was single, she lived with her cat, Pebbles, and she had never been kissed.

"I'm trying to be a professional singer," Boyle asserted, as the audience laughed. "I'm going to make that audience rock."

When she added that she wanted to be as famous as Elaine Paige, who's been called the "first lady of British musical theater," some members of the audience snickered and rolled their eyes.

But after Boyle sang the first few notes of "I Dreamed a Dream" from the musical "Les Miserables," the audience erupted in wild cheers and applause, and two of the three judges' jaws dropped.

The applause lasted the length of her performance, which ended with the crowd on its feet.

Cowell, who also serves as a judge on "American Idol" and who's known for his stinging criticism of those he deems to have no talent, said Boyle's performance was fantastic.

"I knew the minute you walked out on that stage that we were going to hear something extraordinary," he proclaimed.

His fellow judge, Piers Morgan, said it was "the biggest surprise I have had in three years on this show."

"When you stood there, with that cheeky grin, and said, 'I want to be like Elaine Paige' everyone was laughing at you. No one is laughing now. That was stunning. An incredible performance," Morgan said, adding he was reeling from shock.

Amanda Holden, the third judge, had tears in her eyes and described Boyle's singing as "a privilege to hear."

A clip of her performance on YouTube.com has had more than 5 million hits, and many fans say they were moved to tears by the story.

Boyle said after the show that she felt "bloody fantastic."

Each of the three judges voted "yes" to Boyle's return to the actual competition round of the show. The performance this weekend came during the auditions.

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN) -- Financing for DreamWorks Studios' partnership with one of India's richest men was finalized Monday, giving Steven Spielberg and partner Stacey Snider money to resume making movies.



From left to right, Steven Spielberg, Anil Ambani, Stacey Snider and Amitahb Jhunjhunwala.



The deal with Anil Ambani, chairman of India's Reliance BIG Entertainment, provides Spielberg's DreamWorks Studios with $875 million, coming from Ambani, the Walt Disney Co. and loans made by a syndicate of banks.



Disney will distribute and market about six DreamWorks Studios films around the world each year, with the exception of India, where Reliance will have those rights.



Spielberg and Snider found themselves in need of financial partners last year when he cut ties with Paramount Pictures and began rebuilding DreamWorks into an independent studio.



Although the deal, which was announced last year, has been characterized in some reports as "Hollywood meets Bollywood," Spielberg and partner Stacey Snider will have creative control over productions.



"This will allow us to move ahead quickly into production with our first group of films," Snider and Spielberg said in a joint statement.



Reliance BIG Entertainment is part of the Reliance group controlled by billionaire Ambani.



"Our partnership with Stacey and Steven is the cornerstone of our Hollywood strategy as we grow our film interests across the globe," Ambani said. "Given our faith in the business plan that they presented to us and despite the current economic climate, we were always confident that this day would come. Now Stacey and Steven can focus on producing more of the great films for which they are renowned."



Ambani, whose company owns hundreds of theater screens across South Asia, has also invested development money this year with other Hollywood production companies, including those owned by actors Nicolas Cage, Tom Hanks, George Clooney and Jim Carrey.



A DreamWorks announcement said that J.P. Morgan brought together the syndicate of banks to provide about $325 million in funding. The banks include Bank of America, City National Bank, Wells Fargo, Comerica, Union Bank of California, SunTrust, California Bank & Trust, and Israel Discount Bank.



One of the first movies to go into production will be "Harvey," an adaptation of the play that won a Pulitzer for playwright Mary Chase. The tale about a man and his invisible bunny friend was first made into a movie, starring Jimmy Stewart, in 1950.



Spielberg's long career as a screenwriter, director and producer has included classic blockbusters "E.T.: The Extraterrestrial," the "Indiana Jones" series and "Saving Private Ryan."

***

(Entertainment Weekly) -- Score a personal best at the box office for Quentin Tarantino this weekend. "Inglourious Basterds," his revisionist take on WWII starring Brad Pitt, grossed an estimated $37.6 million, besting the reigning box office champ "District 9," and giving beleaguered studio The Weinstein Co. a little financial relief.





"Inglourious Basterds," a revisionist take on WWII starring Brad Pitt, grossed an estimated $37.6 million.





"Basterds'" opening far surpasses Tarantino's previous best opener, "Kill Bill Vol. 2," which brought in $25 million in April 2004. The critical question now is how "Basterds" will hold up during the next few weeks. Since Weinstein only has domestic rights to the movie -- Universal Pictures holds international -- a large overall gross stateside is mandatory for the company.





Warner Bros. had a much harder time with its release "Shorts" from auteur Robert Rodriguez. Opening to only $6.6 million, the PG-rated kid flick landed in a weak 6th place finish for its opening frame.





The only other new release to reach the top ten was Fox Searchlight's post-college flick "Post Grad" starring Alexis Bledel. Despite opening in 1,959 locations, the film grossed only an estimated $2.8 million for the three days.





Among holdovers, "District 9" did incredibly well considering Basterds was angling directly for its male audience. The $30 million sci-fi movie from newcomer Neil Blomkamp dropped a scant 49% to $18.9 million putting its total ten day gross at an impressive $73 million.





"G.I. Joe" also hung in for its third week in theaters. The high-octane actioner fell only 44 percent to $12.5 million. It's three-week cume now stands at $120 million. Female moviegoers helped keep "The Time Traveler's Wife" and "Julie & Julia" in the top five.





"Time Traveler" dropped only 46 percent to $10 million its second week putting its ten-day gross at $37.4 million while "Julie & Julia" fell only 25 percent, which is remarkable considering the movie is in its third week of release. Grossing $9 million for the three days, the Meryl Streep, Amy Adams two-hander has now earned $59 million total.





Thanks to the strong opening of "Basterds" and the solid hold of the incumbent films, the box office was up 26 percent compared to the same time last year. It's the third week in a row the box office was up after four weekends of unimpressive results. Next weekend's horror mash-up of "Halloween II" and "The Final Destination 3-D" should yield some positive results too.





CLICK HERE to Try 2 RISK FREE issues of Entertainment Weekly

***

NEW DELHI, India (CNN)  -- About 13,000 employees at state-run Air India walked off the job for two hours Friday after the airline failed to pay their monthly wage.



A man walks past the Air India building in Mumbai. Staff staged a strike to protest against unpaid wages.



The strike was the last resort for some employees who say management failed to keep a promise to pay them Friday, said J.B. Kadian, the general secretary of the Air Corporation Employees Union.



There have been strained talks between management and three unions -- that includes everyone from the cabin crew to sweepers -- after Air India told the bulk of its employees their pay would be delayed by two weeks.



The unions said 13,000 employees participated in the strike but Air India did not provide a number.



The walkout comes after management did not follow through on its latest verbal agreement to pay the lowest paid employees by July 3, employees say. Employees normally get paid on the last day of the month.



The lowest paid unionized employees make less than $100 a week.



Employees said they were angered that their pay was delayed at a time when the airline has continued to buy new planes.



Air India's spokesperson J. Bhargava told CNN: "We will not tolerate any strike. Striking employees will be subject to loss of wages and productive incentives."



Air India is in deep financial trouble. It lost about a billion dollars last year alone.



It says it is in a fight for survival due to lower volumes of passengers, the high cost of employing about 31,000 employees as well as the current world financial downturn.



Analyst Kapil Kaul from the Centre for Asia Pacific Aviation said Air India's problems may stem from bad business decisions rather than the global financial downturn.



"We have seen Air India continue to get planes when they have no money to pay salaries," Kaul said. "At the present time the airline does not have a well structure and realistic business case."



Air India has asked the government to bail it out. It also said it has avoided layoffs unlike other struggling airlines around the world.

***

Los Angeles, California (CNN) -- Demonstrators entered their third day of a building takeover at UC Santa Cruz on Saturday in protest of a tuition increase, an undertaking that a school spokesman called futile.



The occupation of Kerr Hall is just one of several demonstrations across University of California campuses this week after the regent's board approved a 32 percent increase in tuition Thursday.



University officials said the $505 million to be raised by the tuition increases is needed to prevent even deeper cuts than those already made due to California's persistent financial crisis.



Protesting students said the increase will hurt working and middle-class students who benefit from state-funded education.



On the Santa Cruz campus, where building occupations began last week with a library sit-in, about 100 students staged a sit-in in the second-floor lobby of Kerr Hall soon after hearing that the tuition increase had been approved, according to UC Santa Cruz Provost David Kliger.



The students made a list of 20 "demands" detailing how they want the administration to increase funding, spokesman Barry Shiller said. But the school has no plans to negotiate the demands with the student body, he said. The school just doesn't have the money, he added.



School officials hope the students realize that their demonstration is "not accomplishing anything" and is "just a disruption" to administrative duties on campus, he said.



The administration will continue to wait out the takeover, but Shiller said he is unsure of how long it will last. The school hopes the students will leave voluntarily, he said.



Are you there? Share your story, video



Meanwhile, uprisings on other campuses have quieted since earlier mass demonstrations.



At UC Berkeley on Friday night, 41 protesters occupying a building were arrested. Authorities decided to cite them for trespassing and release them rather than take them to jail, per an agreement with student leaders, school spokeswoman Claire Holmes said. Three students were arrested there Friday morning.



Fifty-two students were arrested at UC Davis late Thursday after they refused to vacate the school's administration building.



And UCLA's Campbell Hall was occupied for several hours Thursday evening.



The angry students are condemning a nearly $2,000 tuition increase.



The first change, which takes effect in January, will raise undergraduate tuition to $8,373. The second increase kicks in next fall, raising tuition to $10,302, university spokeswoman Leslie Sepuka said.



Students who live on campus could pay an estimated $17,200 in additional fees that include the annual cost of books and housing, according to the system's July 2008 finance guide.



The January increase of about 15 percent is more than double the average public university tuition increase last year.



On average, tuition and fees at four-year public universities nationwide increased 6.5 percent, or to $7,020, since the previous school year, according to data from College Board.



Students eligible for financial aid and whose families make less than $70,000 will have their tuition covered, the university said.

***

(CNN) -- The flu has forced an early end to Billy Bob Thornton's musical tour of Canada, his publicist said Saturday.

Thornton's publicist says Boxmasters band member, crew, have flu; will rejoin tour on Tuesday.

The news was reportedly greeted with loud applause at a Friday night show in Montreal after Thornton called Canadian concert-goers "mashed potatoes with no gravy" in a radio interview Wednesday.

The Boxmasters' final Canadian dates -- in Montreal and London, Ontario -- were canceled because "one of the band members and several of the crew have the flu," said Thornton publicist Arnold Robinson.

Thornton's electric hillbilly band will rejoin Willie Nelson's tour when it returns to the United States for a show in Stamford, Connecticut, on Tuesday, after they have "a few days off to recuperate," Robinson said.

The trio was the opening act for Nelson until they were loudly booed in Toronto, a day after the actor-musician's bizarre interview with a CBC radio host.

Ironically, the comments that offended Canadians included Thornton's assessment that they were "very reserved" and "it doesn't matter what you say to them."

"It's mashed potatoes with no gravy," Thornton told CBC host Jian Ghomeshi.

"We tend to play places where people throw things at each other and here they just sort of sit there," he said.  Watch Thornton's interview »

The audience at Thursday night's show in Toronto loudly booed the Boxmasters, with some shouts of "Here comes the gravy!" The Toronto Star newspaper reported.

Thornton's remarks about Canadians came near the end of his controversial interview with on the CBC's "Q" program, which began with the host's brief mention that, in addition to being the Boxmaster's lead singer and drummer, Thornton was an "Oscar-winning screenwriter-actor-director."

Thornton, apparently upset with any reference to his movie career, was unresponsive to Ghomeshi's questions until the men finally declared a truce to talk about music.  Watch more about the controversy »

He "simply elected not to engage with the interviewer because of the direction of the interview from the outset," Robinson told CNN.

Video of the interview, which has been viewed by millions online, may leave the audience wondering whether this was a controlled performance by Thornton or a public breakdown that revealed true anger over a perceived insult of his music.

Thornton promotes a mythology that his "cosmic cowboy" music came together years ago after a fight over coleslaw at a Los Angeles chicken restaurant.

His long and successful career as an actor, director and screenwriter does not fit with his struggling musician story he tells in interviews about the Boxmasters.

***

(CNN) -- A South Carolina sheriff's office is investigating whether Olympic gold medalist Michael Phelps smoked marijuana on the University of South Carolina campus.





Michael Phelps is facing a criminal investigation into whether he smoked marijuana on a college campus.





Authorities will file criminal charges if the investigation determines that they are warranted, a spokesman said Tuesday.





"If someone breaks the law in Richland County, we have an obligation as law enforcement to investigate and to bring charges," Sheriff Leon Lott said in a statement.





"The Richland County Sheriff's Department is making an effort to determine if Mr. Phelps broke the law. If he did, he will be charged in the same manner as anyone else. The sheriff has a responsibility to be fair, to enforce the law and to not turn a blind eye because someone is a celebrity."





Phelps admitted "regrettable behavior" on Sunday after a British newspaper published a photograph of him smoking through a bong. The tabloid News of the World showed Phelps using the bong during what it said was a November party at the University of South Carolina, in Richland County.





Both university police and Columbia, South Carolina, police have said they would not pursue charges, according to The State newspaper in Columbia. It was unclear where the party took place, the paper said, or whether it was on the USC campus.





"I engaged in behavior which was regrettable and demonstrated bad judgment," said Phelps, who won a record eight gold medals at the 2008 Olympic Games in Beijing, China, in a statement Sunday.  See the photo on the cover of Star magazine »





"I'm 23 years old, and despite the successes I have had in the pool, I acted in a youthful and inappropriate way, not in a manner that people have come to expect from me," he said. "For this, I am sorry. I promise my fans and the public -- it will not happen again."





The U.S. Olympic Committee also issued a statement that said in part, "Michael has acknowledged that he made a mistake and apologized for his actions. We are confident that, going forward, Michael will consistently set the kind of example we all expect from a great Olympic champion."





In 2004, Phelps was arrested on charges of driving under the influence in Salisbury, Maryland. He pleaded guilty and was sentenced to 18 months probation. He also issued an apology after that incident.





Phelps is one of 12 Olympic athletes who have signed on to "My Victory," an initiative launched last year by the U.S. Anti-Doping Agency aimed at keeping competitive sports clean.

***

(CNN)  -- Top Republican lawmakers Sunday called on President Obama to change his political strategy, arguing that the passage of a massive stimulus bill on a party-line vote showed he has failed to deliver the "change" he promised.

Sen. John McCain says the Obama administration is off to a "bad beginning."

"If this is going to be bipartisanship, the country's screwed," Sen. Lindsey Graham, R-South Carolina, told ABC's "This Week." "I know bipartisanship when I see it."

Sen. John McCain, R-Arizona, said Obama was off to "a bad beginning," out of step with the vow of bipartisanship both men made after Obama beat out the Republican presidential nominee for the White House in November.

"It was a bad beginning because it wasn't what we promised the American people, what President Obama promised the American people, that we would sit down together," McCain told CNN's "State of the Union With John King."

The $787 billion bill made it through Congress with the support of three Republicans -- Sens. Susan Collins and Olympia Snowe of Maine and Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania. Obama is expected to sign the bill Tuesday in Denver, Colorado.  Watch Democratic and GOP analysts debate bipartisanship Â»

"This is not 'change we can believe in,' " Graham, a member of the Senate Banking Committee, told ABC. He said Democrats "rammed it through the House" after starting out "with the idea, 'We won -- we write the bill.' "

But Obama's spokesman insisted the stimulus is a bipartisan success. Speaking to CBS' "Face the Nation," White House spokesman Robert Gibbs said, "We're happy that Congress, in a bipartisan way, took steps to make whatever happens in this recession easier to take for the American people." iReport.com: Share your thoughts on the stimulus plan

And on CNN's "State of the Union," Gibbs said, "I think what you saw from this president was an unprecedented effort to reach out to Republicans. Not just in meetings at the White House, but you had the president drive up to Capitol Hill to meet with Republicans where they work."

McCain fired back. "Look, I appreciate the fact that the president came over and talked to Republicans," he said. "That's not how you negotiate a result. You sit down together in a room with competing proposals. Almost all of our proposals went down on a party-line vote."

When the next major piece of legislation aimed at helping the economy recover reaches Congress, McCain said that he hopes "we will sit down together and conduct truly bipartisan negotiations. This was not a bipartisan bill." iReport.com: McCain's actions "totally reprehensible"

McCain added, "Republicans were guilty of this kind of behavior. I'm not saying that we did things different. But Americans want us to do things differently, and they want us to work together."

Gibbs described things differently. "This president has always worked in a bipartisan fashion," he told King. "He will continue to reach out to Republicans. John, we hope that Republicans will decide they want to reach back."

***

KATHMANDU, Nepal (CNN) -- Nepal's government ordered the country's army chief of staff fired Sunday, touching off street protests and a split in Nepal's Maoist-dominated ruling coalition.



General Rookmangud Katawal gestures after inspecting the guard of honour in New Delhi on December 12, 2007.



But Gen. Rookmangud Katawal has refused to accept his dismissal, and Nepalese President Ram Baran Yadav -- the constitutional commander-in-chief of the country's armed forces -- has told Katawal to remain in office, a presidential spokesman said.



Nepal's Cabinet voted to dismiss Katawal after the military refused the government's order to stop recruiting about 3,000 new soldiers to fill vacant positions when it has yet to take in former Maoist rebels, as a 2006 peace deal required.



The move prompted the Maoists' largest coalition partner to quit the government, the party's leader said.



"Without consensus, the ongoing peace process will not reach its logical conclusion and the drafting of the new constitution will not be possible," said Ishwor Pokharel, general secretary of the Communist Party of Nepal (Unified Marxist-Leninist). "The consensus that existed so far has come to standstill."



Supporters of both sides in the dispute took to the streets for demonstrations Sunday. Despite sporadic clashes between the two factions, there were no serious injuries reported.



The Maoists laid down their arms and won power in 2008 elections after an agreement that ended a decade-long insurgency. Under the deal, more than 19,000 former insurgents were to be integrated into the country's security forces.



But two weeks ago, the government asked Katawal to explain why he went to the Supreme Court to challenge the government's refusal to extend the tenure of eight brigadier generals in March. Government spokesman Krishna Bahadur Mahara said Sunday that the government was not satisfied with Katawal's explanation and fired him -- three months before his scheduled retirement -- in a meeting that the Maoists' coalition partners boycotted.



Pokharel said his party urged the Maoists not to fire Katawal without a consensus in the country's parliament. He said the Maoists, led by Prime Minister Pushpa Kamal Dahal, ignored that advice.



"We do not like the way the Maoists' way of functioning," Pokharel said.



The Maoists hold 238 of the 601 seats in parliament, while Pokharel's party has 109. The Maoists could continue to hold power with the support of smaller parties, but Pokharel said his party is working to form a new ruling coalition.



The Cabinet named an interim army chief, but presidential spokesman Rajendra Dahal told CNN that 18 parties in Nepal's parliament asked Yadav to keep Katawal on the job. There was no immediate reaction from the government on the president's decision.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- British police are reviewing the death of Rolling Stones founder Brian Jones, 40 years after the hard-living rocker was found dead in a swimming pool.



An autographed photo of Rolling Stones founder Brian Jones who was found dead in July 1969



Police in Sussex, in southern England, have confirmed they are examining documents given to them by an investigative journalist who has been researching events surrounding Jones' death.



Scott Jones, who is not related to the musician, has spent four years reviewing the evidence and speaking to key witnesses in the case.



In an article published in the Daily Mail in November 2008, Jones wrote, "I'm convinced Brian Jones' death was not fully investigated. The only question that remains is why?"



Brian Jones' body was found in the swimming pool after a party at his home in Cotchford Farm, East Sussex in July 1969. He was 27.



An inquest returned a verdict of death by misadventure, despite post mortem results showing he had not taken illegal drugs and had only consumed the alcoholic equivalent of three and a half pints of beer.



One of the most popular conspiracy theories that followed was that Jones was murdered by his builder, Frank Thorogood.



The theory gained credence after Thorogood allegedly confessed to the killing before his death in 1993. The storyline formed the basis of the 2005 film "Stoned."



Sussex police told CNN they could not say how long it would take to review the new material, nor whether it could lead to a full investigation.



There have been repeated calls for closer examination of the case since Jones' death, which came just three weeks after he left the Rolling Stones.



His drinking and drug-taking had taken a toll on his health and the band, and in 1969 Jones announced he was leaving.



In a statement he said, "I no longer see eye-to-eye with the others over the discs we are cutting."



Last year, Scott Jones published an article containing contents of an interview he conducted with one of the people present at Jones' home on the night of his death.



In the article, published in the Daily Mail, Jones' said Janet Lawson, the girlfriend of Rolling Stones tour manager Tom Keylock, gave him a version of events that contradicted her official police statement.



She is reported to have called her original statement, "a pack of lies... total rubbish."



Lawson's revised version of events is among the documents Jones has supplied to Sussex police. It is also believed to include previously unseen files released by the Public Records Office.



Lawson died of cancer soon after telling Scott Jones her new sworn testimony.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Some of the security officials at this weekend's Super Bowl will be scrutinizing the body language and demeanor of fans as part of the effort to spot suspicious and possibly dangerous people in the crowd.

Fans take in the sights Thursday at the NFL Experience at Raymond James Stadium in Tampa, Florida.

The Transportation Security Administration says it will have several teams of behavior-detection officers working with local police in Tampa, Florida, as an added security measure for the high-profile game.

TSA spokesman Christopher White said that the officers are being sent at the request of the local police and the FBI, and that it's the first time such officers are assisting with a major sports event.

"Unlike technology, the human detection officers can be anywhere," White said. "They can be completely unobtrusive."

The TSA officers will be wearing their uniforms and working in teams with police along the stadium's security perimeter but won't work inside the stadium as fans watch the game. They'll also be around key hotels associated with the Super Bowl, the airport and other transportation centers in Tampa.  Watch what goes on at Super Bowl media day »

According to White, if a TSA officer observes someone displaying unusual behavior, a local police officer will follow up by questioning the person.

This month, the TSA also held a four-hour training session on behavior detection for about 100 Tampa-area police. The TSA officers themselves undergo an initial seven days of training before being paired with experienced officers and having follow-up training.

Barry Steinhardt of the American Civil Liberties Union said such behavior screening is a bad idea.

"There is no scientific evidence behavior profiling works to pick out terrorists or criminals," Steinhardt said.

The TSA uses behavior screening daily at airports. White said officers also have helped out at such high-profile events as last week's presidential inauguration and the Republican and Democratic national conventions.

***

(CNN) -- Sebastian Vettel became the youngest-ever back-to-back Formula One world champion with his third place finish in Sunday's Japan Grand Prix and the German now has an unassailable lead with four races of the season still remaining.





Vettel finished behind Jenson Button and Fernando Alonso at Suzuka, a result more than enough to retain his crown following a dominant season which has seen him claim nine victories and four second places from the 15 races so far.





With just four races still remaining, Vettel has an unassailable lead of 114 points over Button and cannot now be overtaken, although the battle for the minor placings is still likely to go down to the final race of the season in Brazil.





In fact, there were no changes in the top nine of either the drivers' or constructors' championship after Suzuka with the Formula One circuit now moving onto next weekend's Korean Grand Prix at Yeongam, the 16th race of the season





Drivers' standings after round 15 in Japan:





1. Sebastian Vettel (Ger) Red Bull 324 points





2. Jenson Button (GB) McLaren 210





3. Fernando Alonso (Spa) Ferrari 202





4. Mark Webber (Aus) Red Bull 194





5. Lewis Hamilton (GB) McLaren 178





6. Felipe Massa (Bra) Ferrari 90





7. Nico Rosberg (Ger) Mercedes 63





8. Michael Schumacher (Ger) Mercedes 60





9. Vitaly Petrov (Rus) Renault 36





Constructors' standings:





1. Red Bull 518 points





2. McLaren 388





3. Ferrari 292





4. Mercedes 123





5. Lotus Renault 72





6. Force India 48





7. Sauber 40





8. Toro Rosso 29





9. Williams 5

***

ROME, Italy (CNN) -- Scientific tests prove bones housed in the Basilica of St. Paul in Rome are those of the apostle St. Paul himself, according to Pope Benedict XVI.



Pope Benedict XVI looks at the tomb of St. Paul at the Basilica of St. Paul in Rome in 2007.



"Tiny fragments of bone" in the sarcophagus were subjected to carbon dating, showing they "belong to someone who lived in the first or second century," the pope said in a homily carried on Italian television.



"This seems to confirm the unanimous and undisputed tradition that these are the mortal remains of the Apostle St. Paul," Benedict said in Sunday's announcement.



The tomb also holds "traces of a precious linen cloth, purple in color and laminated with pure gold, and a blue colored textile with linen filaments," the pope said.



The tests were carried out by inserting a probe into a small opening in the sarcophagus, "which had not been opened for many centuries," the pontiff said. The probe "also revealed the presence of grains of red incense and traces of protein and limestone."



Separately, archaeologists have uncovered an image of St. Paul which "could be considered the oldest icon of the apostle known to date," the Vatican's official newspaper reported Sunday.



The painting, in the St. Tecla Catacomb, is "among the oldest and best-defined figures from ancient Christianity," according to the Pontifical Commission for Sacred Archaeology, L'Osservatore Romano reported.



St. Paul is one of the most significant figures in Christianity. Originally a persecutor of early Christians, he became a follower of Jesus after seeing a vision on the road to Damascus, according to Christian tradition.



"Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?" the vision of Jesus asks Paul, using the apostle's birth name, in the Acts of the Apostles.



Saul then took the name Paul and became a missionary. His letters, or epistles, to early Christian communities around the Mediterranean form a significant portion of the New Testament.



Paul was beheaded by Roman authorities sometime between 65 and 67 A.D., according to the Catholic Church.



He was buried a few miles away, and when the Roman Empire stopped persecuting Christians some 250 years later, the Emperor Constantine had a basilica built over his grave.



It currently lies under a marble tombstone bearing the Latin inscription PAULO APOSTOLO MART (Apostle Paul, martyr), according to the Web site of the basilica. A papal altar stands over the tombstone, which is visible through a window-like opening, the Web site says.



Monday marks the end of a year of celebration in honor of the 2,000th anniversary of St. Paul's birth. It also happens to be the feast day of Saints Peter and Paul.



CNN's Hada Messia contributed to this report.

***

HARARE, Zimbabwe (CNN) -- Zimbabwean lawmakers on Monday narrowly voted for Lovemore Moyo as speaker of the parliament -- making him the first opposition lawmaker to hold the position in the country's history.



Morgan Tsvangirai's MDC faction has a slim majority following parliamentary elections.



"This is historic as it ceases to be a rubber-stamping house," Moyo said after winning the position. "It will ensure that progressive laws are passed. I promise to be professional."



Moyo -- the national chairman of the main Movement for Democratic Change (MDC) party -- received 110 votes while his only opponent, Paul Themba-Nyathi, received 98 votes. The speaker of the parliament is the fourth most powerful post in Zimbabwe.



Themba-Nyathi represented the splinter MDC faction led by Arthur Mutambara, but he had support of President Robert Mugabe's ZANU-PF party.



The vote took place hours after Mugabe swore in lawmakers, five months after they were elected.



Two members of the main MDC -- led by presidential candidate Morgan Tsvangirai -- were arrested as they arrived at the opening session, but they were released after a short time, according to a government spokesman.



An MDC official said the arrests were part of the "sinister agenda of this regime" to "tilt the balance of numbers in their favour during the voting for the speaker of parliament."



One of those detained -- Shuwa Mudiwa -- appeared back in parliament, but the other member -- Elia Jembere -- was not seen, according to sources.



Government spokesman Bright Matonga said Jembere had been accused of rape, but that he has been released from custody.



A third member -- Elton Mangoma -- escaped an arrest attempt when other party members came to his rescue, MDC officials said.



Attendance at the session of parliament is important since the membership is closely divided between the MDC and the Mugabe's ZANU-PF.



The ruling ZANU-PF party lost its majority in the 210-seat parliament in elections in March, but vote recounts and political violence have delayed the body from convening until now.



Final results gave 100 seats to an MDC faction led by Morgan Tsvangirai, the party's presidential candidate. President Robert Mugabe's ZANU-PF got 99 seats. An offshoot of the main MDC party, led by Arthur Mutambara, won 10 seats. An independent candidate won one seat.



Tsvangirai, who was locked in a bitter presidential contest with Mugabe, had objected to Mugabe's decision to convene parliament, saying it could "decapitate" power-sharing talks that have been on hold for the past two weeks.



Still, Tsvangirai said he would attend the swearing-in ceremony.



MDC party spokesman Nelson Chamisa said all MDC members elected to parliament were expected to attend "except those few MPs who are still in hiding."



CNN's Nkepile Mabuse in Johannesburg, South Africa contributed to this report.

***

Editor's Note: Former U.S. President Jimmy Carter is founder of The Carter Center, a not-for-profit organization that seeks to "prevent and resolve conflicts, enhance freedom and democracy, and improve health." Read more on human rights defenders: http://www.cartercenter.org/homepage.html

Jimmy Carter says closing Guantanamo Bay and ending torture would send a strong message.

ATLANTA, Georgia (CNN) -- It has been heartening to witness the outpouring of worldwide enthusiasm over the election of Barack Obama as the next president of the United States, a transformational moment for our country.

Our incoming president has huge challenges ahead of him, and he will undoubtedly reach out to other world leaders to help address the most difficult problems. A high priority will be the restoration of human rights, which have been badly eroded in recent years.

President-elect Obama has reiterated his decision to close GuantÃ¡namo Bay detention center and end U.S.-sponsored torture. Also under discussion is the establishment by the U.S. government of an independent commission to examine the actions that led to these shameful policies and practices.

Together, these steps would signal a renewed commitment to the cause of universal human rights long championed by the United States. As this year marks the 60th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the reassertion of these fundamental rights is necessary.

While the U.S. government has much work to do in this regard, there will have to be a concerted international effort to achieve meaningful protection of human rights, even as the issue of security continues to demand our attention.

The American people and our courts have rejected the proposition that some people's rights can be suspended arbitrarily; to do so violates the very core of our democracy. Hopefully, those working to establish democratic practices and institutions worldwide will seize upon this development and convince their own fellow citizens that democracy and human rights are worth the struggle.

The international community, including a newly energized United States, should move swiftly and decisively to support the local heroes who risk much to advance this cause.

Human rights defenders from throughout the world are participating in our annual conference at The Carter Center this week to share the challenges they face, and to decide how the international community can best support their efforts.

For years, these activists have told us that when the United States engaged in torture and indefinite detention, their decades of struggle for rights began to erode. Dictators who had felt pressure from the United States to improve rights were suddenly off the hook. With new leadership in Washington, a clear and principled message on the centrality of human rights can help set a new tone.

Too often, the international community has failed to respond to emerging crises, partly because voices of the oppressed are missing in policy discussions. Had the international community heeded the warning of human rights defenders in the former Yugoslavia, Rwanda, Darfur, and the Democratic Republic of Congo, more robust and coordinated diplomacy and even limited intervention may have averted these crises.

Catastrophic conditions exist in Congo, Zimbabwe, Sudan, Myanmar, Afghanistan and elsewhere and will require unprecedented cooperation to resolve. It is time to embrace the idea that when human beings are systematically abused, international peace and security are inherently threatened.

In such situations, the global community should spare no effort to help societies in distress. Crises like these can be assuaged before they escalate if there is determined global leadership and cooperation.

Human rights defenders are on the frontlines of this battle, and we must protect them when they face danger because of their work. We must do a better job of listening to their diagnoses of issues and be receptive to their proposed solutions.

And we must strengthen their voices and help to protect them in a collective, undeniable commitment to create the world of peace and freedom that many of us enjoy and we all desire.

The opinions expressed in this commentary are solely those of Jimmy Carter.

***

(CNN) -- Civilians are in hiding in the Yemeni capital as protesters and government forces struggle for control on the streets of Sanaa.





Residents in Sanaa are stranded in their homes, and some even fear looking out of their windows as they are left to wonder how long the violence will rage around them.





"We can't leave our houses to get food for our children. As soon as we walk on the street we are shot," says Rami al-Shaibani, a Sanaa resident.





Thousands protested in Sanaa's Change Square last week, but this week the square has been quiet, except for groups of youths carrying away the dead and helping the injured. Multiple witnesses and medics said dozens were killed in a violent government crackdown that started on Sunday.





Protesters have used Change Square for a seven-month sit-in demanding the resignation of President Ali Abdullah Saleh. He is recuperating in Saudi Arabia from a attack in June on his palace but has vowed to return to Yemen to finish his term.





Each wounded protester was carried by six or seven others -- sometimes friends of the casualty -- and taken to the medical camp in the square. Drops of blood created trails on the ground tracing the long, bloody route to a field hospital.





At the medical camp, hundreds of young people were covered in blood and screaming from pain. Thousands more volunteered and donated blood for those in need. It seemed that not a minute passed without another injured youth entering the medical camp.





The International Committee of the Red Cross has called for calm in Yemen, which, it said, is facing an "unprecedented level of violence."





With the limited-capacity field hospital full of patients, doctors made a desperate call for volunteers to try to help save the injured.





Dozens were killed and more than 700 were wounded -- many of them by gunshots -- over the last three days in clashes with the military, according to medical staff in Change Square.





Eyewitnesses said they had seen snipers on the rooftops of buildings surrounding the square firing almost continuously.





In one incident, an ambulance carrying three injured protesters flipped over when a rocket propelled grenade hit it, killing all five on board, the medical staff added.





Abdul Rahman Barman, the executive director of a local human rights organization, said Yemeni President Ali Abdullah Saleh's regime is attacking with no limits and does not differentiate between civilians, protesters or gunmen.





The Yemeni government has repeatedly denied accusations of excessive use of force, and said the government is committed to establishing a peaceful transfer of power. Yemeni officials have said forces cracked down on those committing acts of violence during protests. Vice President Abdu Rabu Hadi has called for a cease-fire from all sides, state-run Saba news agency reported.

***

(CNN) -- An ex-convict, a mobster, a serial killer -- after more than two decades in the movie business, Ray Liotta is still perhaps best known for these "bad guy" roles in such films as "Something Wild" and "GoodFellas."



Ray Liotta (right) co-stars with Seth Rogen in "Observe and Report," which opened Friday.



But in his most recent film, "Observe and Report" -- a dark comedy co-starring Seth Rogen as a bipolar mall security guard and Anna Faris as the vapid make-up counter clerk he's in love with -- Liotta inches away from his edgy persona to play a detective investigating a flashing incident at the mall.



"A flasher keeps flashing people at the mall, so they call in the 'real police,' which is me," Liotta told the Columbus Dispatch. "The last thing I want to do is investigate."



The film, which opened in theaters Friday and has earned rave reviews by critics, is not Liotta's first comedic undertaking. The 54-year-old actor also starred in 2007's "Wild Hogs," a comedy co-starring Tim Allen and John Travolta about a group of middle-aged suburban men who decide to become bikers. The film was one of that year's surprise hits, taking in more than $150 million at the domestic box office.  See some of the highlights of Liotta's career »



Liotta first made his mark on the film industry by playing a psychotic ex-husband determined to win back his ex-wife in "Something Wild." The role propelled Liotta to fame and earned him a Golden Globe nomination for best supporting actor.



From there, Liotta starred as mobster Henry Hill in the Martin Scorsese classic "Goodfellas" (1990), working alongside renowned actors Robert De Niro and Joe Pesci.



"Edgy guys stand out in people's minds," Liotta said of his famous "bad guy" roles, according to the Dispatch.



But, to avoid being typecast as the "bad guy" forever, Liotta decided to break from the mold in his next role as a caring father in the heartwarming film "Corrina, Corrina" (1994), co-starring Whoopi Goldberg.



Liotta soon proved that acting was not his only forte. He formed his own production company in 2002 and made his debut as a producer on the film "Narc," in which he also starred as a corrupt cop.



He's also earned plaudits for his television work. In 2004, Liotta starred in an episode of the hit NBC drama, "ER," winning an Emmy for his guest appearance. The actor got his start on daytime TV, playing the character Joey Perrini on the soap "Another World."



With several films currently in production, Liotta shows no signs of stopping. The actor told the Dispatch that he hopes to try his hand at romance in the future, joking that he'd like to "kiss the girl without having to choke her first."



CNN's David Daniel contributed to this story.

***

(CNN) -- Stars at the legendary Glastonbury, one of the world's largest music festivals, have begun to pay tribute to Michael Jackson, who died Thursday.



Glastonbury at Worthy Farm in Somerset is the world's largest music festival.



Singer Pharell Williams of U.S. group N.E.R.D  acknowledged the music icon's legacy as his band played on the English festival's main stage, the Pyramid Stage.



"The music was so incredible and what he and Quincy Jones did was change music and the way people looked at music," Williams was quoted as saying on the BBC's Glastonbury Web site.



Teenage Australian singer Gabriella Cilmi was the first artist at the festival to pay tribute to Jackson, Friday, singing a few bars of song "Billie Jean" during her set.



Organizer Emily Eavis wrote on her Twitter site: "So sad to hear the news about MJ. There will be tributes all over the site all weekend.



"A truly great artist."



Other artists are expected to honor the singer, who died of a cardiac arrest at the age of 50, throughout the 3-day festival weekend in southwestern England.



Festival-goers woke to an unexpectedly somber first day of Glastonbury, Friday, as the news of Jackson's death began to sink in.  See images of reactions to the star's death from around the world »



Rumors of the singer's death had circulated the isolated 900-acre site the previous evening, but many fans had dismissed them as the hearsay and misinformation that thrives each year in the site which has no TV or Internet-access.



Confusion quickly turned to shock for many, as Jackson's music played in festival bars and news of his demise spread by cell phone.



"It's totally weird," Sally Anne Aldous, 29, told CNN on Thursday night. "People are just getting text messages saying 'Michael Jackson is dead. Michael Jackson is dead.'"   With a laid-back focus on mainly alternative music, the  Glastonbury festival -- expected to attract as many as 137,000 music-lovers -- is not a venue where people would normally expect to hear Jackson's music.  Watch more reaction from Glastonbury »



But few here deny the singer's influence. An impromptu memorial was held by mourning fans late Thursday at the "Stone Circle," a neolithic monument in the festival's grounds.



Other headline acts such as Bruce Springsteen, Lady GaGa and Lily Allen,   performing at the festival, are expected to pay tribute to Jackson. iReport: Share your memories of Michael Jackson



Anouk Lorie contributed to this report

***

COLOMBO, Sri Lanka (CNN) -- Sri Lankan soldiers have seized a key rebel stronghold after launching a surprise attack early Sunday morning, the head of Sri Lanka's army announced.

Sri Lankan army chief Sarath Fonseka says a key Tamil town has been taken in a national TV broadcast Sunday.

Troops crossed a lagoon and entered the town of Mullaittivu before encountering heavy resistance from Tamil fighters, according to the government-run news agency.

"Our troops fought their way through a 40 km (25 mile) thick jungle track," Lt. Gen. Sarath Fonseka said in a televised address on Sunday.

"This is the long awaited victory and I am happy to say that our heroic forces today captured the Mullaittivu town after 12 years," the Sri Lanka Army chief said.

There is no confirmation from the rebels that the strategic garrison has been overtaken.

The Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) -- commonly known as the Tamil Tigers -- have fought for an independent homeland for the country's ethnic Tamil minority since 1983. The civil war has left more than 70,000 people dead.

The rebels gained control over Mullaittivu in 1996 and established a military garrison there, according to the government.

In recent days, the military has made significant progress in its campaign to recapture rebel strongholds.

Earlier this month, troops regained control of the northern town of Elephant Pass, the point at which mainland Sri Lanka links to the northern Jaffna peninsula.

It had been in rebel hands for more than nine years.

The re-capture enabled the government to use a highway linking the mainland to the peninsula to move troops and supplies. Previously, it was done by air and sea.

"The area that the LTTE has dominated has shrank phenomenally," Sri Lankan High Commissioner to India, C.R Jayasinghe, told CNN. "They lost... about 90 percent of what they had."

Despite major government gains, critics point to ongoing civilian casualties resultant from the conflict.

"This is an important strategic success for the army, but literally tens of thousands of people, children, are in the line of fire," United Nations spokesman James Elder said in a phone conversation Sunday.

"Some Sri Lankan U.N. staff are trapped there," he added. "Convoys are going to the area, delivering emergency supplies, but these are not sufficient for the number of people in need."

Sri Lankan authorities are barring journalists and humanitarian aid workers from areas where heavy fighting is taking place.

Amnesty International spokesman Shuransu Mishra estimated that "over a quarter of a million of the population, mostly Tamils, are trapped between the two sides."

The organization says greater access and protection for aid workers and journalists are needed as news agencies struggle to report an accurate picture of the conflict.

"The Sri Lankan authorities are doing little to ensure the safety of the country's media, or to prosecute those responsible for murdering or attacking them," Amnesty International spokeswoman Yolanda Foster said in a written statement on Friday.

"They (Sri Lankan authorities) are also directly responsible for subjecting journalists to harassment and interrogation," she said.

At least 14 journalists have been killed since the start of 2006, according to the statement.

Others have been driven from the country by death threats, or in fear of detention and torture by government authorities, it said.

***

(CNN) -- American sixth seed Andy Roddick denied Rafael Nadal a third final appearance at the Sony Ericsson Open in Miami after another sensational serving performance on Friday.





Roddick, the tournament's 2004 champion, will face Tomas Berdych in Sunday's title match after coming from behind to defeat Spanish fourth seed Nadal 4-6 6-3 6-3 in the semis at Key Biscayne.





He has won an incredible 62 of his last 64 service games, reaching the final of two successive Masters 1000 events for the first time since 2003, when he went on to win the U.S. Open.





Roddick, beaten in the Indian Wells title match by Ivan Ljubicic two weeks ago, broke Nadal's serve at 4-3 up in the second set with three forehand winners and then held to love to level the match.





He again broke his fellow former world No. 1 in the third game of the decider and held serve to claim his first win in the last four meetings between the two.





"I knew I had to be more aggressive. My heavy forehand doesn't work against him, so I had to hit it flatter, which is higher risk. I took really, really ridiculous cuts at a lot of forehands," Roddick told the ATP Tour Web site.





"I took a lot of risk there in the last two sets. My comfort zone of moving the ball around and maybe chipping it around a little bit doesn't work against Rafa. I had to try to come up with something that at least took him out of his comfort zone a little bit, and it paid off."





Nadal was not too disheartened, having reached the semifinals in his two outings since suffering a knee injury at the Australian Open in January.





"Two semifinals in a row, first two Masters 1000 of the season for me is positive," Nadal said. "Positive American hardcourt season, first part. So, yeah, happy for that."





Berdych continued his giantkilling run as he followed up his victories over world No. 1 Roger Federer and 10th seed Fernando Verdasco by crushing Swedish fifth seed Robin Soderling 6-2 6-2.





The Czech, seeded 16th, has gone one better than his last-four achievement in Miami last year as he qualified for only his second Masters final.





"In all my matches with Robin in the past I've been too defensive. If you give him time to hit the ball hard it's really tough," Berdych said. "I wanted to play more aggressive, but without making mistakes."

***

PARIS, France (CNN) -- The French Senate began debate Tuesday on a law that would mark a significant cultural shift -- allowing many more shops across the country to open on Sundays.



The law would permit shops, department stores, and shopping malls to open on Sundays in 20 zones.



The bill passed the lower house, the National Assembly, last Tuesday by a vote of 282 to 238, a partial victory for President Nicolas Sarkozy, who backs it.



What seems routine in much of the Western world has been fiercely resisted in France, where Sundays have officially been set aside as a day of rest for more than a century and where a 35-hour workweek remains the norm.



The new legislation, if approved by the Senate, would overturn a 1906 law that forbids Sunday trading in all but the largest cities. It is part of a raft of reforms Sarkozy has pushed for since becoming president.



While the change is significant, it is not as much as the government originally hoped because Sarkozy had to deal with opposition from both the left and the right.



Socialists filed thousands of amendments to the president's original version of the law. Leftists and unions said it would effectively introduce a seven-day working week and allow bosses to force employees to work Sundays.



Members of the president's own ruling conservative party opposed the law despite assurances it would boost economic activity, saying it would instead deprive families and church groups of their dedicated day.



The law would permit shops, department stores and shopping malls to open on Sundays in 20 zones of what are called "exceptional commercial" centers near three of the country's largest cities: Paris, Marseilles, and Lille.



Additionally, 29 areas involving about 500 cities and towns would be added to the list of tourist areas, which already allow some economic activity on Sundays.



The new law will, among other things, straighten out a somewhat chaotic situation in which some stores managed to obtain exceptions from the old law and others didn't, and where some stores found it made more sense financially to accept fines for breaking the old law because the income from Sunday sales more than made up for the penalties.



Opinion polls in France show that slightly more than half the population want shops to have the freedom to open on Sundays, according to Time magazine.



The Senate debate is scheduled to last three days, with a vote expected late on Thursday.



CNN's Jim Bittermann contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Last year's world champion Lewis Hamilton has claimed pole position for Sunday's inaugural Abu Dhabi Grand Prix while his successor as Formula One's top driver, Jenson Button, qualified fifth.



Hamilton will be looking to end a disappointing year for McLaren with victory in the season finale at the new Yas Marina circuit, but even with a win can do no better than hold onto his fifth overall placing in F1's first day-night event.



The 24-year-old will start a race from the front of the grid for the 17th time in his career, and the fourth in the last seven races, after setting the fastest time in all three sessions.



He clocked a best lap of one minute 40.948 seconds as the sun set on Saturday evening to head off the Red Bull duo of Sebastian Vettel and Mark Webber.



Vettel, whose bid to prevent Button clinching the world title ended last time out in Brazil, timed 1:41.615 while Webber recorded 1:41.726.



"The car is the best it has been all year. It was a smooth lap, and it just kept getting better and better," Hamilton told reporters.



"The place is just stunning. They all said it would be a great event, but it's mind-blowing. It's a great place to come to, a great country. The weather has been great and the people are so respectful and so welcoming. I hope we can put on a great show tomorrow."



Button's bid to ensure the first all-British front row since 1995 came to nothing as he was out-qualified by teammate Rubens Barrichello for the 10th time this season.



The Brazilian is expected to be making his final race outing for world champions Brawn, who are expected to sign Nico Rosberg from Williams.



The German, who announced during the week that he will be leaving the British team, qualified ninth as Toyota's Jarno Trulli and BMW Sauber duo Robert Kubica and Nick Heidfeld took sixth, seventh and eighth places.



Kimi Raikkonen, who will be making his final race appearance for Ferrari, finished outside the top-10 for only the third time this season, and will start in 11th behind Toro Rosso's Sebastien Buemi.



Heikki Kovalainen's chances of keeping his drive with McLaren took a blow as he finished 15th after suffering gearbox problems.



The Finn, fastest in Friday's practice sessions, was just ahead of two-time world champion Fernando Alonso, who along with Renault teammate Romain Grosjean failed to make it beyond the opening 20-minute session.



Alonso, at least, can look forward to joining Ferrari as Raikkonen's replacement, but Frenchman Grosjean faces an uncertain future as he has failed to take his chance since taking over from the sacked Nelson Piquet Jr.



Former world champions Ferrari will prop up the grid as veteran Giancarlo Fisichella again struggled ahead of what could be the final race of his career as he will be the team's reserve driver next year when the injured Felipe Massa returns.

***

(CNN) -- Peter Gathungu walks more than a mile to a shopping center, where he pays a sizable sum to charge his cell phone.



The solar phone is expected to be a great success in Kenya.



That's because electricity is nonexistent in Gathungu's hometown of Njoro, in northwest Kenya. Landlines and other forms of communication are not as efficient, so Gathungu and millions of others in emerging nations rely on mobile phones. Charging the phones can be a headache in towns and villages where electricity is scarce.



Gathungu's troubles may soon be over, though.



Kenya's biggest mobile phone company, Safaricom Ltd., launched the nation's first solar-charged phone this month. The handset comes with a regular electrical charger and a solar panel that charges the phone using the sun's rays, company CEO Michael Joseph told CNN by telephone.



Retailing at about $35, the phones were manufactured by Chinese telecommunications company ZTE Corp. Safaricom plans to make an initial supply of 100,000 phones available.



"People are excited about these phones," Joseph said. "I expect to be sold out in a week."



Eco-friendly phones have been touted by several companies at global trade shows, but most have not been launched yet.



Samsung unveiled a solar-powered phone at the Mobile World Congress in Barcelona, Spain, earlier this year and introduced its first sun-powered phone in India in mid-June. The company expects its Solar Guru model to perform well in India, another country where electrical supply can be erratic.



Unlike many technological innovations, the solar phone is making its big splash in developing nations, where the need is the greatest. After the Solar Guru is in circulation in India, Samsung said, it plans to launch similar phones in other Asian markets, Europe and Latin America.



For the time being, Kenyans are happy to serve as early adopters.



"The power crisis here has been going on for ages," Joseph said, adding that the Safaricom phone's solar panel is small and portable, unlike charging devices some Kenyans now use.



Only about 1.3 million of Kenya's 37 million people are connected to the national electrical grid, said Migwi Theuri, a spokesman for Kenya Power and Lighting Co. The east African nation, which gets most of its energy from hydro-generation, has been undergoing power rationing after a three-year drought.



Despite the limited availability of power, Kenya has one of the most vibrant cell phone markets in Africa, analysts say. An estimated 17 million Kenyans use mobile phones.



Some charge phones on bicycle-run generators, Joseph said. Or like, Gathungu, they pay businesses in major cities to charge their phones, sometimes waiting an entire day.



"There's an enormous need for a device like this," Joseph said of the solar phone, which can charge during talk time, as long as there are rays.



"They will continue to charge on natural light, even on cloudy days," he added.



Gathungu plans to buy one of the new environmentally friendly phones. For him, it's a matter of money and convenience. He earns 4,000 Kenya shillings ($53 dollars) a month as a waiter. Charging his phone for 50 shillings (70 cents) a week adds up. The solar phone would pay for itself, Gathungu said.



Until he buys one, he'll keep making the trek to the shopping center every Sunday afternoon after church. He wouldn't go into further detail about his mobile phone woes, not wanting to waste his battery charge on the call.

***

Washington (CNN) -- A Washington lawyer has filed a lawsuit in federal court, claiming he is the father of basketball star LeBron James.





Leicester Stovell alleges that the athlete and his family have been involved in a cover-up to deny paternity by committing fraud and misrepresentation. He told HLN's "Prime News" on Thursday that he wants "a carefully structured and secure DNA test" to prove he's the NBA all-star's father.





Stovell says he has been trying for three years to establish paternity and is seeking $4 million in damages. An earlier test ruled out the possibility, but he said the test could have been tampered with -- "and there are indications that there was a motivation."





Stovell said he had sex with James' mother, Gloria James, after meeting at a Washington bar while she was visiting from Ohio in 1984. A few months later, she told him she was pregnant, but did not say whether he was the father.





Stovell said his only request was that the child, if a boy, play basketball. He said his memory of the encounter resurfaced more than 20 years later, "after being asked whether I had a son, and I then systematically explored all of my past for that possibility."





"I came across this set of recollections and in focusing on them, they amplified," he said.





In the complaint, filed June 23, Stovell says, "I recently have concluded that a comprehensive, sophisticated and well-funded effort might well have been underway for quite some time, perhaps beginning in its present form as early as when defendant LeBron James was in high school, to frustrate identification of his real father, and that there is a likelihood that the father in question is me."





He stopped short of saying he is certain he is James' father. "I don't want to make such a definitive statement in the absence of corroborative evidence" such as DNA, he said.





Stovell said he filed the suit two weeks ago because a statute of limitations was about to expire. "I have some limitation considerations that caused me to want to file the suit before the end of June," he said.





He denied the timing had anything to do with the current LeBron mania.





James is scheduled to announce Thursday evening the team he has chosen to play for next season, a deal worth perhaps tens of millions of dollars or more. He currently plays for the Cleveland Cavaliers.





He says he was informed by Gloria James months later that she was pregnant. He claims she told him the child would be named LeBron, similar to Leicester Bryce, Stovell's first and middle names.





The lawsuit states Gloria James was 16 at the time of the alleged encounter, but Stovell said she told him she was in her early 20s.





Stovell is a solo legal practitioner in the District of Columbia, and filed the lawsuit on his own behalf. A call to LeBron James' attorney, Frederick Nance of Cleveland, Ohio, was not immediately returned.





The lawsuit had been filed without much initial publicity, but was reported by the TMZ celebrity website Wednesday.





Public records show Stovell is a former government attorney with the Securities and Exchange Commission. He filed a lawsuit in 2002 against the agency, alleging racial discrimination. Federal court records show the case was settled when the commission paid him $230,000, while not admitting fault.





CNN's Jason Kessler contributed to this report

***

(CNN)  -- Thousands of people around the globe may find the payoff Thursday for the countless hours they have spent perfecting the most ridiculous of feats.



Chefs in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, try in September to set a record with a tub of Quaker soup, made with Quaker oats.



More than 200,000 people in 18 countries hope to make it into the "Guinness World Records" book with a variety of rather odd achievements on this day.



Students at the University of Bournemouth in the United Kingdom plan to round up more than 100 participants to set a record for the Most People Dressed as Superheroes.



Several Germans will vie to set a record for the Most Juice Extracted from Grapes by Treading.



And in New Zealand, would-be record-holders will chase glory in a race to set the Fastest Time to Peel and Eat -- what else? -- a Kiwi Fruit.



The unusual pursuits unfold worldwide as part of Guinness World Records Day. The editors of "Guinness World Records" -- universally recognized as the foremost authority on record-breaking achievement -- began celebrating the day in 2004, a year after the book sold its 100 millionth copy.



"We are very happy to see that people are still passionate and eager to achieve their goals in the midst of the global market turmoil," Editor-in-Chief Craig Glenday said in a prepared statement.



Dubai, in the United Arab Emirates, shows its studious side Thursday in an effort to enter the record books for Most People Reading Simultaneously. Brazil will try to break the record for World's Largest Bread, and Japan hopes to clock the Fastest Time to Run 100 Meters On All Fours.



Various places in the United States are also getting in on the act.



New York will try for the Most Grains of Rice Eaten with Chopsticks in a Minute and Oak Park, Illinois, will host the Largest Dog Wedding. Sports network ESPN will televise attempts at the Fastest Egg and Spoon Mile and the Most Apples Cut in the Air with a Sword.



Roll your eyes if you must. But keep count of the rotations: You could be a contender next year.

***

(CNN) -- New Hampshire's Senate has approved a bill allowing same-sex couples to marry, but critics and supporters of the legislation say their work isn't over.





New Hampshire could become the fifth state to allow same-sex marriage if a bill becomes law.





"We were obviously disappointed," Kevin Smith, executive director of the conservative Cornerstone Policy Research Action group, said Thursday. "We don't think the voters are going to forget about it."





On the other side, members of the New Hampshire Freedom to Marry Coalition, a group that has worked since 2001 for same-sex marriage, were "absolutely thrilled," said Mo Baxley, its executive director.





But noting that the bill is returning to the House of Representatives for consideration of changes made by the Senate, Baxley added, "I think the work continues." Her organization will encourage supporters to contact their representatives ahead of the House vote, she said.





On Wednesday, the Senate voted 13-11 in favor of the bill, which differs from the House-approved version in that it distinguishes between civil and religious marriage. It allows each religion to decide whether to acknowledge same-sex marriage but extends the option of civil marriage to any two individuals, said state Senate spokeswoman Anne Saunders.





The House, which passed the earlier version last month by a margin of seven votes, 186-179, must approve the changed version before it can be sent to Gov. John Lynch, a Democrat who has questioned the need for the bill.





After the Senate vote, Lynch released a statement saying he believes that "the fundamental issue is about providing the same rights and protections to same-sex couples as are available to heterosexual couples. This was accomplished through the passage of the civil unions law two years ago."





Lynch signed the state's civil unions law in May 2007.





"To achieve further real progress," he added, "the federal government would need to take action to recognize New Hampshire civil unions."





Earlier this month, the governor said he believes the word "marriage" should be used only to describe a marriage between a man and a woman, the New Hampshire Union Leader in Manchester reported.





"I think the word 'marriage' is reserved for a marriage between a man and a woman, and I think the real issues really are rights and protections for gay and lesbian couples," he told reporters on April 15, according to the newspaper.





Smith said his organization, which was established in 2000, would "lobby hard" to get the governor to veto the bill. He said he expected it to pass the House.





"Look, this is a matter of holding the governor accountable," he said. "He's been very public with his views on same-sex marriage in the state. ... We'll see if he was misleading the voters of New Hampshire or if he'll stand by his word and actually veto it."





Were the bill to become law, New Hampshire would become the fifth state allowing same-sex marriage, joining Connecticut, Vermont, Massachusetts and Iowa.





Only Vermont has established the practice legislatively.





CNN's Taylor Gandossy contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- People with a stable mood and better capacity to handle stressful situations without anxiety have a reduced risk of developing dementia, according to a study published this week in the journal Neurology.



Stress can increase the risk of dementia in older people, a study has found.



This finding was particularly strong in highly extroverted people, the study said. Subjects who were both socially active and not easily stressed had the lowest risk for dementia. But even socially isolated individuals who were more calm and self-satisfied showed a reduced likelihood of dementia, the study said.



Extroverted people usually have more optimistic outlooks on life, and "may be better equipped to cope with stressful events and therefore less prone to depression," said Hui-Xin Wang of the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm, Sweden, and lead author of the study.



The study looked at 506 older people from the Kungsholmen Project in Stockholm who did not have dementia at the first examination. These people then filled out questionnaires that determined their personality types and level of social activity. Those who said they were easily distressed were classified as having high neuroticism.



Researchers followed these participants for six years, during which time 144 of them developed dementia.



Although it is not easy to change someone's personality, "The good news of our finding is that an active lifestyle -- having a rich social network and participating in physical, mental and social activities -- may buffer the negative effect of high neuroticism on dementia risk," Wang said.



One in seven Americans age 71 and older, or about 3.4 million, have dementia, according to the National Institutes of Health. In this age-group, 2.4 million people have Alzheimer's disease, NIH research has shown. Alzheimer's disease is the most common cause of dementia, according to the Mayo Clinic.



Previous research has documented that personality factors may play a role in how people cope with dementia. This study is unique in that it looks at a combination of different lifestyle and personality traits, said Dr. Yaakov Stern, professor of clinical neurology at Columbia University Medical Center, who was not involved with the study.



Stern and colleagues have found that people with higher educational or occupational attainment, or who engage in leisure activities, appear less demented. They call this concept "cognitive reserve," because these lifestyle factors seem to allow them to cope with the pathology of the disease better. That is, as the disease progresses in the brain, those who have a greater "reserve" do not show symptoms of Alzheimer's -- memory loss and impairment of day-to-day functions -- as quickly.



Mounting evidence suggests that lifestyle factors also directly influence brain changes, he said. The Swedish study builds off the established idea in the field that stress actually harms the brain.



The pathology of dementia appears about 10 to 15 years before a person actually develops Alzheimer's disease, Stern said. That means, just like a man with prostate cancer may not have any symptoms, a person's brain may have undergone changes that lead to Alzheimer's without visibly affecting a person's day-to-day life.



Doctors can look for indications of the disease using positron emission tomography (PET) scans. A chemical called Pittsburgh Compound B is used in the imaging of brain tissues to find signatures of Alzheimer's -- namely, beta-amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles.



"The working idea is that if we can detect it before it's clinically expressed and stop it then, we can prevent people from developing the disease," Stern said.

***

Sanaa, Yemen (CNN)  -- Umar Farouk AbdulMutallab disappeared in Yemen for more than two months before he allegedly tried to bring down a Northwest Airlines jet with explosives concealed in his underwear.





Investigators want to know if, during that time, he heeded the call to prayer coming from the hills above Yemen's capital, where an Islamic university headed by a fiery cleric has helped the country earn its reputation as an incubator of extremism.





The students who pray at Al-Iman University now, two weeks after that failed Christmas Day attack, say the school has been made a scapegoat, and that what AbdulMutallab is accused of having done is wrong.





"It's against Islam," one says.





"The thoughts in their heads go against Islam," says another.





AbdulMutallab's alleged attempt to ignite explosives as the jet approached Detroit, Michigan, resulted in a fire on his lap -- and serious burns -- before passengers and flight crew subdued him and put out the flames.





Al-Imam's leader is Sheikh Abdel Majid al-Zindani, a provocative cleric with a flaming red beard. The United States considers him a terrorist, accused in 2004 of supplying weapons to al Qaeda.





But in Yemen, al-Zindani is a free and influential man.





Al-Zindani denied CNN's request for an interview but allowed the network to tape at the school he's built from the ground up since the early 1990s.





Every year, thousands of Islamic students from Yemen, Africa and around the world are cocooned in al-Zindani's compound, where they study their faith and are instilled with a strident defense of that faith.





Last year, al-Zindani made a public plea to recruit millions of young men to fight jihad against Israel.





But the students say they don't think AbdulMutallab was ever at the school, and investigators don't appear to have come to ask. Yemeni authorities, it seems, have taken a hands-off approach to the university.





"To my knowledge, no security, no investigation teams came here," political science professor Ismail al-Suhaili said. "Nobody thought that AbdulMutallab was here."





In Yemen, Al-Iman University is highly respected and its leader admired, making it difficult for investigators to find out for sure if the Christmas Day bombing suspect was ever there.

***

Washington (CNN) -- A year and a half after deploying National Guard troops to counter illegal immigration on the Southwest border, the Department of Homeland Security and Pentagon told Congress Tuesday they are cutting the number of troops and changing their mission.





The drawdown, which the department characterized as a "transition," will begin in January and should be completed by March. Several lawmakers told CNN the number of National Guard troops on the border will be cut from 1,200 with responsibilities mainly on the ground to 300 who will support the border mission in the air.





The Department of Homeland Security said the change is possible because of a jump in the number of Border Patrol officers in the region, an increase in technology and a drop in apprehensions at the border.





But several lawmakers criticized the move, saying conditions on the Southwest border merit more troops, not fewer.





A deployment of 1,200 troops was "not enough to begin with, although they are doing as good a job as they can," Rep. Ted Poe, R-Texas, told CNN. Poe said the United States has "operational control" of only 44 percent of the Southwestern border.





"That's not success," Poe said.





Rep. Lamar Smith, R-Texas, agreed.





"If the Obama administration's goal is border security, their actions undermine their objective," he said in a written statement. "We should keep guardsmen on the ground until the Border Patrol can gain operational control of the majority of the U.S.-Mexico border."





But Rep. Silvestre Reyes, D-Texas, supported the drawdown. "While I appreciate the service of our National Guard forces, requiring them to engage in border law enforcement activity is not cost effective," he said in a statement.





The Homeland Security Department said that in the fiscal year ending October 1, Border Patrol apprehensions of illegal immigrants -- a key indicator of the amount of illegal immigration -- decreased to 340,252, down 53 percent since fiscal year 2008. Since 2004, the size of the Border Patrol has doubled to 21,444.





In a news release announcing the change, the Department of Homeland Security and the Pentagon did not cite exactly how many troops would be pulled from the border, but said the "new strategic approach" will increase border security. That approach includes "adding a number of new multi-purpose aerial assets" equipped with the "latest surveillance and reconnaissance capabilities."





In addition, the National Guard will provide helicopters and planes to the Border Patrol, "allowing for faster response capabilities," the news release said.





"I did not understand or get the impression they are going to add any equipment; they're going to use what they have," said Poe, who was briefed on the changes.





The Defense Department budget for the border would drop by half, from $120 million to $60 million, congressional staffers said they were told. Specifics about the ramped-up aerial surveillance are still being worked out, the staffers said.





Poe said he plans to fight the change. "I'll ask the president to reconsider and then try to figure a way, bipartisan, to show that this is not a wise move," he said.

***

(CNN) -- The world's wildlife has declined by 27 percent since 1970 because of the human impact on the environment, the World Wildlife Fund said Friday.



These two adult frilled-neck lizards are threatened species and are bred in captivity in Australia.



The WWF's latest Living Planet Index shows terrestrial, freshwater and marine species all suffered declines in their populations between 1970 and 2005, with freshwater species experiencing the biggest drop.



The index is included in a report called "2010 and Beyond: Rising to the Biodiversity Challenge," which the WWF prepared for an international biodiversity conference in Germany later this month.



"No one can escape the impact of biodiversity loss because reduced global diversity translates quite clearly into fewer new medicines, greater vulnerability to natural disasters, and greater effects from global warming," said James Leape, director-general of WWF International.



The Living Planet Index measured 4,000 populations of 1,477 vertebrate species, which the WWF says is a good indicator of overall biodiversity trends.



Terrestrial species in both temperate and tropical areas fell by an average of 25 percent during the 35-year period, the WWF said.



Marine species fell by 28 percent in the same period, with a dramatic decline between 1995 and 2005, the WWF said.



"Many marine ecosystems are changing rapidly under human influence, and one recent study estimates that more than 40 percent of the world's ocean area is strongly affected by human activities while few areas remain untouched," the WWF report said.



Freshwater species in both temperate and tropical regions fell by 29 percent between 1970 and 2003. The WWF said that is especially significant because despite covering only about 1 percent of the total land surface of the planet, inland waters are home to more than 40,000 vertebrate species.



In tropical regions, freshwater species were especially hard-hit; the index shows they suffered a 35-percent drop between 1970 and 2000.



The WWF said it had insufficient data to chart tropical freshwater species beyond 2000 and temperate freshwater species beyond 2003.



The causes of the declines are varied but ultimately stem from human demands on the biosphere, such as consumption of natural resources or the displacement of ecosystems, the WWF said.



The dominant threat to marine life is overexploitation -- harvesting or killing animals or plants beyond the species' capacity to replace itself, the WWF said. Overfishing is one example.



Overexploitation is also a threat to terrestrial species, according to the report, which cites the hunting of tropical forest mammals. Overharvesting of timber is also a major factor, it said.



Invasive species, whether introduced deliberately or not, are another threat, especially in freshwater ecosystems, where they are thought to be the main cause of extinction among endemic species, the WWF said.



Pollution and overall climate change are other factors causing a loss of biodiversity, it said.



The WWF called on governments attending this month's conference to take urgent action to reduce the rate of loss by 2010.



It wants governments to establish protected areas, particularly those areas important for food security, water supply, medicine, and disaster mitigation, and to commit to zero deforestation by 2020.

***

(CNN) -- Philippines President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo declared martial law beginning Friday night in the southern province of Maguindanao, where 57 people were killed last week, an army spokesman told CNN Saturday.



Army spokesman Lt. Col. Romeo Brawner Jr. said martial law -- under which police can make arrests without a warrant -- went into effect at 9 p.m. Congress would have to approve any extension beyond 60 days.



Brawner said the measure was invoked to impose peace on the region after the unrest, which led to troops being mobilized.



"Life is to resume normally and martial law is established to prevent new violence, with troops on the ground monitoring any possible violence breakout," he said. "But the civilian government will be running the affairs of the province, not a military governor."



Military police have detained three brothers and their father on suspicion of involvement in the unrest: Akmad Ampatuan, the vice governor of Maguindanao; Anwar Ampatuan, the mayor of Sherif Auguak, Maguindanao's capital; and Zaldy Ampatuan, governor of the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao.



Andal Ampatuan Sr., the patriarch, became ill and was hospitalized after he too was taken in.



"Local government will function, it will prevent armed groups from wreaking havoc ... and it will allow the officials to search and find the guilty parties," Brawner said.



Security forces on Friday searched the home of Andal Ampatuan Jr., mayor of Datu Unsay and son of the provincial governor of Maguindanao, according to Brawner.



Authorities say Andal Ampatuan Jr. directed the November 23 politically motivated killings. Weapons were found in the house, Brawner said.



On Tuesday, Philippine authorities charged Ampatuan and other suspects with 25 counts of murder in the killings. Still more suspects were taken into custody Friday.



The Philippine military is investigating its own forces in connection with the case as well, Brawner said.



The National Bureau of Investigation has moved a third witness to Manila for questioning, the Philippines News Agency reported Thursday.



"At the moment, we are interviewing the witness, so that we would know what he knows about the incident in Maguindanao," NBI Director Nestor Mantaring said. The witness claimed to have been at the site during the massacre.



"He is very vital," Mantaring said. "From what I know ... he knows a lot of information regarding the incident."



Among the victims in the massacre were the wife and sister of political candidate Ismael "Toto" Mangudadatu, who had sent the women to file paperwork allowing him to run for governor of Maguindanao. He said he had received threats from allies of Gov. Andal Ampatuan, the father of the accused mayor, saying he would be kidnapped if he filed the papers himself.



Witnesses and local officials have blamed the younger Ampatuan, a longtime ally of the Philippines president and a known warlord. They said the killings were an attempt to block Mangudadatu from challenging him in the May gubernatorial election.



Also killed were a dozen journalists who had accompanied the women.



Violence in the run-up to elections is not uncommon in the Philippines. The Maguindanao massacre, however, is the worst politically motivated violence in recent Philippine history, according to state media.



Maguindanao is part of an autonomous region in predominantly Muslim Mindanao, which was set up in the 1990s to quell armed uprisings by people seeking an independent Muslim homeland in the predominantly Christian Asian nation.



Suspicion fell on Ampatuan after a government construction vehicle was found at the hastily dug mass grave that held the bodies of the massacre victims.



CNN's Talia Kayali contributed to this report.

***

(CNN Student News) -- May 15, 2009



Where in the World? You've heard many different places mentioned this week on CNN Student News. Show you know your news by identifying the location described in each clue. Write your answers in the space provided.



Click here for a PDF version of this Newsquiz.



1. This country, whose general election lasts for a month, is considered the world's largest democracy.



*



*



2. Russia celebrated its defeat of Nazi Germany with Victory Day parades in this city.



*



*



3. Journalist Roxana Saberi was freed from imprisonment in this country.



*



*



4. Pope Benedict XVI became the first pope to visit this country in nine years.



*



*



5. This is the location on the earth's surface directly above where an earthquake begins.



*



*



6. A small team from Operation Blessing helped this earthquake-ravaged town in China's Sichuan Province rebuild.



*



*



7. Graduating seniors at Dillard University, Xavier University and other colleges in this U.S. city were displaced as freshmen due to Hurricane Katrina.



*



*



8. This Afghan capital's only college for music has reopened.



*



*



9. Controversy surrounds a scheduled commencement speech by President Barack Obama at this Catholic university.



*



*



10. According to a report by RealtyTrac, this state led the U.S. in foreclosures in April.



*



*

***

(CNN) -- Nearly a decade has passed since Bill Clinton left the White House, but despite becoming a private citizen, the former president never left the public eye.



Former President Clinton receives flowers from a girl Tuesday upon landing in Pyongyang, North Korea.



While much of his time has been devoted to global philanthropic interests and speeches, Clinton has never strayed too far from the campaign trail and remains one of the world's most recognizable statesmen.



Clinton, 62, jumped back onto the world stage Tuesday with an unannounced trip to North Korea on a mission to negotiate the release of two imprisoned American journalists.



North Korean President Kim Jong Il later pardoned and released the journalists. They were traveling back to the United States with Clinton on Tuesday night.



The United States has no diplomatic relations with North Korea.



Clinton arrived to a warm welcome in Pyongyang.  Watch more on Clinton's North Korea trip »



There is a lot of nostalgia in Pyongyang for his administration, when relations between North Korea and the U.S. were stronger, said John Glionna, the Seoul, South Korea, bureau chief for the Los Angeles Times.



"Well, I think most of the people that I talked to in Washington earlier today were of the opinion that Bill Clinton is a big enough personality that would not risk the loss of face of him showing up in Pyongyang and returning empty-handed," Glionna said.



Clinton's high profile has led critics to accuse him of upstaging his wife, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, especially when he was making headlines while campaigning for her unsuccessful 2008 presidential bid.



His first major verbal stumble during that campaign came in the run-up to the New Hampshire primary when he told a crowd that then-candidate Obama's claim to have been an early and consistent opponent of the Iraq war was "the biggest fairy tale I've ever seen."



In the ensuing media uproar, many Democratic activists -- African-Americans in particular -- came to believe that the former president had belittled Obama's entire campaign effort.



And while stumping for his wife in heavily black South Carolina, he seemed to try to minimize the impact of an Obama win by noting that the Rev. Jesse Jackson also won the state in 1984 and 1988 but went on to lose both nominations by wide margins. Critics accused the former president of trying to peel off Obama's white supporters by marginalizing him as the black candidate.



Clinton's hesitancy to back Obama once he locked in the Democratic nomination also fueled the storyline of the Clinton-Obama riffs. But in a high-drama moment last year at the Democratic National Convention, both Clintons announced their wholehearted support for their party's nominee.



Bill Clinton's name was tossed around as a possible pick to fill his wife's vacant Senate seat after she was selected as secretary of state. His name comes up in discussions of possible Supreme Court picks that Obama might have the opportunity to make.



Before his wife's presidential campaign, Clinton focused most of his efforts on the William J. Clinton Foundation.



The foundation's projects include the Clinton Global Initiative, which seeks to combat poverty and climate change and promote health and education programs worldwide as well as separate initiatives directed at childhood obesity, global warming, HIV/AIDS and malaria, inner-city entrepreneurship and economic growth in Latin America. It also funded the construction of the Clinton Presidential Library in Little Rock, Arkansas.



The foundation boasts more than 800 staff and volunteers around the world.



In his post-presidency, Clinton also has shared the stage with former President George H.W. Bush on numerous occasions. The two teamed up to establish the Bush-Clinton Katrina Fund and Bush-Clinton Tsunami Fund. They toured the tsunami-ravaged areas following the 2004 disaster, and they teamed up again the following year to lead relief efforts in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina.



Clinton also has taken time to author a couple of best-selling books. His 2004 memoir, "My Life," sold more than 400,000 copies the first day it was available.



Later that year, Clinton underwent heart

***

(CNN) -- Nearly four months after a P-51 Mustang veered out of control and slammed into spectators at the Reno, Nevada, air races -- killing 11 people, injuring scores of others and jeopardizing the future of the event -- race organizers Wednesday said the show will go on.





The head of the Reno Air Racing Association said the association will seek permits for the full schedule of races to take place September 12-16 and is confident that it will get them. If not, he said, organizers will stage a one-time-only memorial event to commemorate those killed and injured last year, and will bring an end to the 49-year-old tradition.





"Many of the victims, their families, air race teams and fans have told us they're coming to Reno this September no matter what," said Mike Houghton, president and CEO of the Reno Air Racing Association, at a Reno press conference. "And we feel it's our obligation to give them something, no matter what."





Houghton said the association is doing everything possible to assure that all features of the races will continue, including the unlimited class race, which featuring planes flying at low altitudes in excess of 500 mph.





It was unclear how close spectators would be allowed and whether that would include areas in which they were killed or hurt in the September crash.





The event relies on the races to attract its 200,000 fans, who contribute an estimated $85 million to the local economy, Houghton said, and it would not be economically viable as a more traditional air show.





In an apparent effort to win government support for the races, the association created a "blue ribbon review panel" that included two well-known former government officials, former National Transportation Safety Board chairman Jim Hall and former Federal Aviation Administration official Nick Sabatini. The panel will review changes that can be made to ensure the races' safety, Houghton said.





The September 15, 2011, crash came when noted pilot James Leeward's Mustang flew off course, pitching upward briefly before flying into a spectator area. Leeward and 10 spectators died, and about 60 people were injured.





The NTSB is investigating the cause of the crash and is examining video that shows a piece of trim tab, an aerodynamic surface on the tail of the plane, separating from the plane at the time the pilot lost control.





The crash also has prompted the NTSB to hold a one-day hearing on air show safety. That hearing will be held Tuesday in Washington.





Houghton said the race sponsors, vendors and pilots he has met have "universally" expressed support for continuing the races, and that fan support has been "overwhelming." Fewer then 20% of the fans asked for refunds from the races canceled after last year's crash, he said.





Houghton said the association needs permits or waivers from the FAA, the local airport authority and the city of Reno. He expressed optimism that all three entities would permit the races, but said his biggest concern is any unknown obstacle that could interfere with race plans.





The crash is expected to bring a flurry of lawsuits. In a lawsuit filed by the family of deceased spectator Craig Salerno of Friendswood, Texas, lawyers argued the crash was not a "freak accident," but was "the predictable result of a reckless drive for speed by a risk-taking pilot and crew, coupled with an insatiable drive for profit" by race organizers.





The FAA said it has revised its air race policy to require all air racing organizations to go through a standardized accreditation process to ensure all air race organizations are subjected to the same review and authorization standards.





The FAA said it has invited the Reno Air Racing Association to contact it when it is ready to begin the accreditation process. Once the FAA receives that notification, the FAA will select a team that will conduct a top-to-bottom review of the organization's operations, the agency said.





In the 49 years of racing at Reno, 19 pilots have died in crashes. Last year's crash is believed to be the first to kill

***

(CNN) -- Britain's Prince Harry apologized through a spokesman Saturday after videos surfaced showing him using offensive language to describe people in his military unit.



Prince Harry apologized for videos of him making offensive comments while on military duty in 2006.



In one clip, a voice said to be Harry's calls a soldier a "Paki." In another clip, the voice tells a soldier wearing a cloth on his head that he looks "like a raghead."



The British newspaper News of the World posted the videos on its Web site Saturday. It did not say how it obtained them.



A spokesman for Prince Harry apologized in a statement released by St. James's Palace Saturday. The spokesman said the prince -- who is third in line to the British throne -- "understands how offensive this term can be, and is extremely sorry for any offense his words might cause."



It is not the first apology for offensive behavior by Prince Harry.



In 2005, he was photographed wearing a Nazi uniform to a party. He said he was sorry for that incident. "It was a very stupid thing to do and I've learned my lesson, simple as that really," he said in a September 2005 interview with Britain's Press Association, marking his 21st birthday. "I'd like to put it in the past now. What's done is done. I regret it."



The videos that surfaced Saturday were filmed by the prince himself during his military service in 2006, according to the News of the World Web site.



"Ahh, our little Paki friend... Ahmed," a voice says as the camera zooms in on a soldier from across the room. The video does not show Prince Harry's face.



The soldiers were waiting for their flight to Cyprus for a mission, according to the Web site.



The Royal family said the 'Paki' term was a nickname for a friend in his platoon.



"There is no question that Prince Harry was in any way seeking to insult his friend," the St. James's Palace statement said.



The second video was filmed after arriving in Cyprus, according to News of the World, and shows a British soldier with a cloth over his head.



A voice, which the News of the World claims to be Harry's, is heard saying, "(expletive) me, you look like a raghead."



St. James's Palace said, "Prince Harry used the term 'raghead' to mean Taliban or Iraqi insurgent."



Dickie Arbiter, a former press secretary to Queen Elizabeth II, Prince Harry's grandmother, urged people to take the prince's words in context.



"Harry is not the same man as he was three years ago," Arbiter told Britain's ITN network. "You don't think when you are shooting a video."



And he pointed out that Harry was serving in the army, where language is not always delicate.



"It is quite common for names to be used in the military.... He's a serviceman first and foremost, but people see him as a prince first and he has to be careful of what he says."



The British Ministry of Defense said it was not aware of any complaints against Prince Harry and would investigate the allegations of inappropriate behavior, according to a written statement released Saturday.



"Bullying and racism are not endemic in the Armed Forces," it said.



David Cameron, the leader of Britain's opposition Conservative Party, said Prince Harry's remark was "obviously a completely unacceptable thing to say."



But he told the BBC's Andrew Marr program that he saw no need for the prince to be disciplined. "No, he has made an apology... and I think that's enough."



--CNN's Katy Byron and Per Nyberg contributed to this report.

***

(CNN)  -- Iceland's voters overwhelmingly rejected a deal to pay billions of dollars it owes to the United Kingdom and the Netherlands, the Foreign Ministry said Sunday.





With around 90 percent of votes counted, just over 93 percent said no and just under 2 percent said yes. Not enough votes remain to be counted to change the result. Some 62.5 percent of Iceland's roughly 200,000 register voters cast ballots, the ministry said.





The referendum was on a law about repaying the Netherlands and UK, which helped savers in their own countries who lost money in a failed Icelandic Internet bank.





The British and Dutch governments came up with more than $5 billion for bailing out people who lost money in Icesave -- an online retail bank branch of Landsbanki. That Icelandic bank failed in October 2008, along with two other banks in the country.





Under a European Union directive, Iceland now owes compensation to Britain and the Netherlands. The Icelandic government has said it will honor its international obligations.





Iceland's parliament passed a bill authorizing a state guarantee for repayment of the funds, but President Olafur Ragnar Grimsson declined to sign it in January. He cited public disapproval, and in particular, an Internet petition signed by up to one-quarter of the electorate, as a reason for not signing the bill. He said there needed to be a national consensus in addressing the issue.





That prompted Saturday's national referendum on the law.





The Icelandic public widely disapproved of the deal, the government said in a fact sheet on the deal. "There is widespread frustration over the claim on ordinary citizens in Iceland to pay the price for the irresponsible behavior of reckless bankers," it said.





Magnus Arni Skulason, who campaigned against the bill, called the terms of the loan repayment unacceptable.





"Of course we feel empathy for those people that lost money," he said Saturday while voting was going on. "We just want to get a more reasonable agreement," he told CNN.





It is not clear what happens now that voters have said no to the loan guarantees.





The International Monetary Fund loaned Iceland $2.1 billion in November, and said repaying the money to the British and Dutch governments was a requirement of the loan.





Iceland has begun moves toward applying for European Union membership, which Britain and the Netherlands could block.





Britain spent £2.3 billion ($3.69 billion) last year to cover the losses that British savers incurred when Icelandic banks collapsed.





The Dutch government spent €1.3 billion ($1.87 billion) to cover bank losses in the country.





The Icelandic government said it has "clearly stated its intention to honor its international obligations and remains fully committed to implementing the bilateral loan agreements with the UK and the Netherlands."

***

London, England (CNN)  -- Protesters called on the worldwide community to take action against Uganda Thursday as the African nation considers stricter laws against homosexuality.





They compared Ugandan President Yoweri Museveni to some of the world's most notorious dictators.





"In the last five years we have seen Idi Amin return to Uganda and his name is Yoweri Museveni," Ugandan human rights campaigner Michael Senyonjo told CNN.





"He... is bringing in a bill in an attempt to criminalize being gay," the activist said.





"That is not right. We cannot allow fascism to return to Uganda. He should leave power and go because he is not taking the country anywhere but to disaster," he added.





Under proposed new laws currently being considered by the Ugandan parliament, those who test positive for HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, could face the death penalty.





In addition, those convicted of having gay sex would be sentenced to life in prison, while anyone found guilty of engaging in homosexual relations on more than one occasion would be executed.





The proposals could become law before the end of the year.





Museveni has not publicly stated his support for the bill.





Homosexuality is already illegal in Uganda under laws passed in the colonial era, but the new legislation is intended to provide prosecutors with more power.





It has the blessing of various religious leaders, with one leading Muslim cleric -- Sheikh Ramathan Shaban Mubajje -- calling for all known homosexuals in the country to be rounded up and left on an island until they die.





Thursday's protest at the Ugandan High Commission -- or embassy -- in London is one of several planned demonstrations around the world, and OutRage, another gay rights organization, is backing the calls for action to be taken.





"President Museveni is fast becoming the Robert Mugabe of Uganda and that's a threat to the civil rights of every Ugandan person -- gay or straight," OutRage spokesman Peter Tatchell told CNN, referring to the authoritarian president of Zimbabwe.





"There's a huge ground swell of public opinion that this bill goes way too far. Even people who say they're against homosexuality say this bill is excessive and a threat to the human rights of all Ugandans.





"Uganda should drop this law and abide by international human rights legislation," Tatchell said.

***

LOS ANGELES, California (AP) -- The shoe phone on TV's "Get Smart" wasn't just a sneaky spy gadget, it was a technological marvel: a wireless, portable telephone that could be used anywhere -- though it did require a dime to make a call.



Today, almost everyone has a pocket-sized version that also takes photos, shoots video, sends e-mail and surfs the Internet. About the only thing it doesn't do is protect your feet.



"Get Smart" comes to the big screen next week, along with a spate of new spy gadgets to help Maxwell Smart, Agent 99 and the other spies at CONTROL.



The gadgets are just as goofy as they were in the original TV series, but because technology has caught up with the writers' imaginations, there's a big difference: many of the movie's doo-dads actually exist.



"Our favorite thing is to take something that does sort of exist and just exaggerate it a little bit," said Matt Ember, who co-wrote the script.



The film shows a tiny iPod alongside spy-worthy stuff such as a two-way tooth radio and a digital "spy fly" -- all of which are available now.



"It's pushed to a level of success that perhaps it hasn't achieved in the real world, but it's real, it's out there, so that's fun" added co-writer Tom J. Astle, a self-described science nut.



Director Peter Segal said he originally couldn't believe such devices were real.



"I said, `That's too silly. I don't think people will buy it,"' he recalled telling the writers. "Then they Googled it and it came up as an actual thing."



Astle and Ember saw the tooth radio in a magazine and thought it was a perfect fit for the film.



"That's an example of taking inspiration from the old series in spirit," Astle said. "The inherent comedy of having a microphone in your mouth -- it's really close to your voice and it's easy to yell and be too loud."



The inextricable link between gadgets and spy movies began with James Bond in 1962, said TV historian Tim Brooks, author of "The Complete Directory to Prime Time Network and Cable TV Shows." The often-preposterous devices Bond used added levity to a genre that "had always been deadly serious" during the early years of the Cold War, Brooks said.



Back in the day, "Get Smart" ratcheted up the goofiness level with bulletproof pajamas, a Bunsen-burner phone and other wacky gadgets that often didn't work. When the show debuted in 1965, the nation was future-focused and obsessed with the promise of technology.



The show played on that obsession, Brooks said, introducing dozens of covert gadgets and props designed to make life easier for Cold War-era secret agents. A cigarette lighter doubled as a .22-caliber gun. A lipstick could record conversations or release poisonous gas. Then there was the famous shoe phone and the always-dysfunctional "cone of silence" that could (theoretically) keep conversations private, even in a crowded room.



"It's nothing that you would expect to find or would even make sense in real life, and that's the gag," Brooks said. "It was part of what the show was about. You'd watch wondering what's next, where's the phone going to be next time. ... It was like a satire of our fixation with gadgets."



The movie also takes liberties with some familiar devices, such as portable lasers, retinal scanners and a tricked-out Swiss Army Knife equipped with a flame-thrower and a mini crossbow.



Despite living in a high-tech world, movie fans still love spy gadgets, the filmmakers said: Just look at the success of the Bond franchise, which will soon introduce its 22nd installment, and spy spoofs such as "Austin Powers."



Part of it is the undercover element,

***

Tehran, Iran (CNN) -- Iran's Bushehr nuclear power plant is just weeks from operating at full capacity, the country's top nuclear official said Saturday.





Feireidoun Abbasi, the head of Iran's Atomic Energy Organization, also said Tehran has shown its new Iranian-made centrifuges to a representative of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).





The Bushehr plant, located along the Persian Gulf coast, will reach its full capacity of 1,000 megawatts by February 1, Abbasi said, according to the country's official news agency, IRNA.





The plant was connected to the country's electric grid in September with a capacity of 60 megawatts. At 1,000 megawatts, Bushehr will be able to provide 2.5% of Iran's current electricity consumption, the IAEA said.





Abbasi made the announcement about Bushehr while attending a meeting on Iran's nuclear achievements held in the southern port city of Bandar Abbas.





He told the meeting that Tehran had shown the new generation of its homemade centrifuge machines to the IAEA "in a bid to demonstrate the ability of Iranian scientists," he said.





Abbasi said the centrifuges, which are used to enrich uranium, were shown to the deputy of IAEA, Director-General Yukiya Amano, but he did not say when.





It was not immediately clear whether an IAEA representative had in fact been to Iran and seen the centrifuges.





The new centrifuges will enable Iran to enrich uranium over the current purity level of 5%, according to experts cited by the news agency.





Uranium enriched to between 3% and 5% is necessary to make fuel for reactors. Uranium enriched to 93.5% is considered weapons-grade.





The construction of Bushehr -- a civilian, not military, plant -- started in 1975 when Germany signed a contract with Iran. Germany, however, pulled out of the project following the 1979 revolution that created the current Islamic republic.





Iran then signed a deal with Russia in 1995, under which the plant was originally scheduled to be completed in 1999, but the project was delayed repeatedly. Bushehr finally opened in August 2010.





The United States and other Western nations have expressed concerns that Iran's development of missile and nuclear fuel technology mean it is developing a nuclear program for military purposes.





The IAEA said in a November report that it has "serious concerns regarding possible military dimensions" to Iran's nuclear program. The agency said it has information indicating Iran has carried out "activities relevant to the development of a nuclear explosive device."





Iran has denied such allegations, saying the Bushehr plant will be used only to generate electricity and operates under IAEA supervision.





U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has said the concern is not the Bushehr plant, but other nuclear facilities like Natanz, in the middle of the country; a facility at Qom, south of Tehran; "and other places where we believe they are conducting their weapons program."

***

(CNN) -- At 31, Sean Parker has a lot more going for him than Justin Timberlake.





As the co-founder of music-sharing service Napster and the former president of Facebook, he's an Internet pioneer. He's a billionaire. And he throws a hell of a party.





Last week, during Facebook's f8 conference in San Francisco, Parker transformed an empty warehouse into one big VIP room, complete with a lavish buffet and celebrity guests. Despite having only two days to plan the event, he somehow managed to get Snoop Dogg, the Killers and Jane's Addiction to perform for a few hundred invited guests. Estimates put the party tab at $1 million or more.





The purpose of the shindig was to celebrate the U.S. arrival of Spotify, the music-streaming service in which Parker is a major investor. Spotify also is partnering with Facebook to let users play and share music within the social network.





The event featured an onstage chat between Parker and Spotify CEO Daniel Ek. Beside every chair in the media's seating section sat a bottle of high-end tequila. Of the hundreds of media events I've attended over the years, this is the first time I've seen that.





Not in attendance was Timberlake, the singer-turned-actor who portrayed Parker as a backstabbing opportunist in last year's "The Social Network." In past interviews, Parker has called the movie "a complete work of fiction."





After the Killers played, I sat down with Parker for a few minutes in a private area upstairs. The first thing we talked about was Napster. I mentioned that I would never forget that feeling of downloading free music, that it felt like you had won one of those contests where you could fill up your shopping cart for free.





"I still hear that a lot," he told me.





Here are a few excerpts from our talk, edited for clarity:





On his affinity with Napster co-founder Shawn Fanning:





"Fanning and I immediately realized that we had an interest in more than just computers and software and hacking and security, that we actually had an interest in doing something with a broader cultural importance. One of those ideas was Napster."





On being a billionaire





"I definitely wanted to earn my freedom. But the primary motivation wasn't making money, but making an impact. I think the perception of wealth and power is that things just become easier and easier when in reality as you raise the stakes things become more stressful. You just keep pushing yourself harder and harder to achieve more and more -- I don't think it's ever quite as glamorous as it appears on the outside."





On Apple's Steve Jobs





"Steve is one the greatest business artists in history and has had more impact through his product design in Apple than any other CEO."





On Timberlake's unflattering depiction of him





"It's a blessing and a curse in the sense it definitely raised my profile somewhat -- that character in the film played by Justin Timberlake represents a set of values that I just don't agree with. It's difficult watching a character using your name and interacting with people [while] supposedly [doing] a portrayal of you."





On his business role





"Early on I wanted to run a company, but I quickly realized there was this other model available. Maybe I'm blazing a new path with this model because you don't typically see this. You see investors who have portfolio companies but aren't very active, or entrepreneurs who typically run one company for their entire life, or occasionally, serial entrepreneurs who do a series of small companies. But they typically run them for a fairly long period of time. I've been doing a hybrid of investing and entrepreneurship, which I think initially I wasn't set out to do. But I realized it fit my personality."

***

ISLAMABAD, Pakistan (CNN) -- The chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff arrived in Pakistan on Tuesday amid tensions between the two countries about U.S. military incursions into Pakistan's tribal areas.



Adm. Michael Mullen will meet with Pakistan's new prime minister and its military chief.



Adm. Michael Mullen will meet with Pakistan's newly elected prime minister, Yousaf Raza Gilani, and Pakistan's military chief, Gen. Parvez Kayani, Mullen's office said.



Relations between the United States and Pakistan have been tense since the U.S. military sent ground forces into Pakistan's tribal regions earlier this month without Islamabad's permission.



The incident prompted the Pakistani government to summon the U.S. ambassador to voice its disapproval, as well as deliver a "demarche" (a diplomatic petition or protest) through its ambassador in Washington.



Last week, Kayani announced no foreign forces will be allowed to conduct operations inside Pakistan in light of the "reckless" U.S. military ground operation.



Kayani said Pakistan's "territorial integrity ... will be defended at all cost and no external force is allowed to conduct operations ... inside Pakistan."



His announcement came amid media reports that several months ago, President Bush authorized U.S. special forces to carry out ground assaults inside Pakistan without first seeking Islamabad's permission.



Meanwhile, a suicide attack late Tuesday evening in the restive area of Swat killed three soldiers and wounded six others, the Pakistani military told CNN.



Pakistan army spokesman Major Murad Khan said the driver of the suicide car bomb tried to ram the gate of a military checkpoint at a school in the Swat District.



Troops shot from the check-post before the attacker reached his target, Khan said. The car exploded, and militants shot back as they ran away.



The incident happened at a time when Muslims break their fasts in the month of Ramadhan.



Swat militants loyal to banned religious leader Maulana Fazlullah have claimed responsibility for the attack, according to the military. The suicide attacker in the car was killed. A few others were also believed to have been killed or injured, but Khan said there were no confirmed numbers because it was dark and the militants removed the bodies of their dead and wounded.



The explosion occurred at the Tutano Bandai school of Tehsil Kabal in Swat District in the North West Frontier Province.



A military spokesman offer no additional details.



CNN's Jamie McIntyre and Zein Basravi contributed to this report.

***

Washington (CNN) -- Even as he charges into his re-election battle, President Barack Obama has a festering weakness on a flank that, by all accounts, ought to be rock solid: the one held by African-American Democrats. Their support for his programs, belief in his leadership and enthusiasm for another term is softening just as he needs it most.





In the past few weeks, the president has been chastised by the Congressional Black Caucus for avoiding troubled inner-city districts, peppered with tough questions on BET, and suffered plummeting poll numbers among black voters.





That last item is critical. During the 2008 election, their turnout was massive and their support almost unanimous. Now, however, a Washington Post/ABC News poll finds that black voters with a "strongly favorable" view of Obama dropped from 86% to 58% in just five months.





"Patience is running out," says Reginald Daniel, a professor of sociology at the University of California Santa Barbara. Daniel has written extensively about race and politics. "People are disappointed because I think their expectations were way too high to begin with."





Many political analysts sum up those "expectations run amok" this way: White voters heralded the election of a black president as a sign that long-standing racial gaps were closing, and they expected Obama to play a post-racial role; a president for everyone, who just happened to be black.





Meanwhile, many African-American voters just as clearly saw his election as a great leap forward and hoped the presence of a black president in the Oval Office would bring a new level of understanding, acknowledgment, and relief for their community's problems.





"Finding a middle ground is almost an impossibility," Daniels says. "It's just the worst position to be in."





The driving problem, however, is neither black nor white -- it is green. Joblessness, bad for everyone, is much worse in African-American communities, where unemployment is pushing 17%, the worst since the 1980s. That is what triggered the revolt in the CBC and those stinging questions during that TV interview.





The president is pushing back, pointing out that his initiatives, such as health care reform and the recent jobs bill, especially help lower-income families, many of whom are black. On BET, he quickly dismissed talk about a dearth of specific programs for minorities.





"What people are saying all across the country is we are hurting and we've been hurting for a long time," the president said. "The question is: How can we make sure the economy is working for every single person?"





He also insisted that even if black leaders are grousing, it's not really about him or his policies. "There's always going to be somebody who is critical of the president of the United States." And at a CBC fundraising dinner he raised eyebrows by telling members to quit complaining and start "marching" with him for change.





But if the reaction of Rep. Maxine Waters, D-California, is any gauge, he'll have to do a lot more selling. She summed up his comments in a word: "Curious."





To be sure, most African-Americans still support Obama. Political analysts do not expect a massive shift of their votes to the Republicans; and even the president's most adamant black critics often follow their barbs with a quick salve, saying African-American voters ultimately will not oppose him.





Still, the danger for the White House is not that black citizens will vote against Obama, but that they won't vote at all.





A lackluster turnout in just a few key states could tip the electoral balance against him. What's more, every moment he spends making sure black Democrats come to the polls increases his risk of alienating white voters, and is time lost winning over independents, whom he also must have.





Politically, it is hard for a candidate to tiptoe through such a black-and-white minefield. For a president, it is even tougher

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Former ABC News chief national security correspondent John McWethy died from injuries in a Colorado skiing accident, a coroner said Thursday.



John McWethy, right, shares a laugh in 2002 with former Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld in Washington.



A witness said McWethy, 61, was skiing fast on an intermediate trail Wednesday at Keystone Ski Resort when he lost control and slammed into a tree, said Joanne L. Richardson, the Summit County, Colorado, coroner.



McWethy died while being treated for blunt-force injuries at Summit Medical Center, Richardson said.



"He just missed a turn and slid sideways is what we're surmising," she told CNN.



McWethy was wearing a helmet at the time of the accident, she said.



With his wife, Laurie, McWethy recently had moved to Boulder after nearly 30 years as an ABC News correspondent, so he could enjoy Colorado's ski trails, according to a statement from ABC News President David Westin.



"He was doing something that he truly loved," Weston said. "But he deserved many more years doing it than he was given."



Friends and former colleagues described McWethy as an outstanding reporter who also cherished life outside work.



"He always knew without exception what so many in the powerful business of TV news fail to learn until it's too late: In the end, all we have is our families and our friends and our self-respect as news reporters," said CNN Pentagon correspondent Barbara Starr, who worked as a producer with McWethy for three years.



Both Starr and former CNN producer Chris Plante admired McWethy's coolheaded reporting from the Pentagon on September 11, 2001, when a hijacked airliner punched a huge, fiery hole in the building's massive facade.



"He was unflappable even in the most extreme situations because he was always centered by his love for his family and the knowledge that the television news business and all of this Washington hoo-ha was not 'real life,' " Plante said. "Unlike so many, he really did have a handle on what life was for. And the last moments of his life are proof of that."



College classmate Bob Steele wrote about McWethy's "mighty" skepticism of authority in an article published online for the Poynter Institute.



While they attended Depauw University in Greencastle, Indiana, Steele said McWethy "challenged the University President and his policies. He protested against the Vietnam War." Steele wrote that McWethy considered "why" to be "the most powerful word in the English language."



Len Ackland of the University of Colorado's Center for Environmental Journalism told The Denver Post that his longtime friend "was a very humble guy."



Ackland told the paper that McWethy "didn't talk about himself much. He was the kind of journalist who didn't want to be out front. It was always about the story, not about him. He was the kind of guy you enjoyed sitting down to have a beer with."



McWethy left behind two sons, Adam, 28, and Ian, 24, according to the Post.



His wife, who was with McWethy at the time of the accident, told the Post her husband was a good skier who enjoyed living in Colorado.



"He loved it here," she told the paper. "I think he loved the beauty of its nature, the open spaces, the wildlife, everything."



In his statement, Westin said, "He was one of those very rare reporters who knew his beat better than anyone, and had developed more sources than anyone, and yet, kept his objectivity."



After working as a reporter for U.S. News & World Report, McWethy joined ABC News in 1979, going on to cover conflicts in Bosnia, Kosovo and Liberia, according to the ABC News Web site.



McWethy was the network's primary reporter assigned to Secretaries of State James Baker, George Shultz, Warren Christopher and Lawrence Eagleburger, ABC said, and he had traveled to more than 50 countries.



McWethy was honored with at least five

***

Seoul, South Korea (CNN) -- President Obama wrapped up an eight-day tour of Asia on Thursday, holding talks with South Korean President Lee Myung-bak and speaking to American troops at Osan Air Base.





Nuclear negotiations involving North Korea and Iran highlighted a news conference held by the leaders.





Obama announced that he will send American envoy Stephen Bosworth to North Korea on December 8 for bilateral talks on dismantling Pyongyang's nuclear program.





"If North Korea is prepared to take concrete and irreversible steps to fulfill its obligations and eliminate its nuclear weapons program, the United States will support economic assistance and help promote its full integration into the community of nations," Obama said. "That opportunity and respect will not come with threats. North Korea must live up to its obligations."





Obama also said the United States and its allies were working on steps to take against Iran after its apparent rejection of a nuclear deal.





"We have begun discussions with international partners about the importance of having consequences," Obama said. "Our expectation is that, over the next several weeks, we will be developing a package of potential steps we could take that will indicate our seriousness to Iran. I continue to hold out the prospect that they may decide to walk through this door. I hope they do."





Iran rejected a key plank of a deal Wednesday designed to ease international fears that Tehran aims to build nuclear weapons.





Iranian Foreign Minister Manouchehr Mottaki said his country will not send its partly enriched uranium abroad to be turned into material for medical research, but added that Tehran might allow its nuclear material to be reprocessed inside Iran, the semiofficial ISNA news agency reported.





The deal hammered out in November with the help of the U.N. watchdog agency aimed to reduce the amount of raw material Iran has to build a nuclear bomb.





Tehran denies that it wants to do so, saying its nuclear program is to produce civilian nuclear energy and do medical work.





During their news conference, Obama and Lee also expressed support for a stalled U.S.-South Korea free trade agreement. The deal was signed in 2007, but has yet to be ratified by the legislatures of either country.





South Korea was the final stop on Obama's four-nation tour of Asia.





Obama began his trip in Japan before traveling to Singapore, where he attended the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations economic forum, meeting on the sidelines with world leaders including Russian President Dmitry Medvedev.





Obama then traveled to China, where he met with leaders including President Hu Jintao. After their talks, the two spoke of a common vision of shared responsibilities and economic opportunities.





Trade, nuclear proliferation, climate change and the sticky issue of human rights were part of their discussions.





Obama, whose flight will stop for refueling in Alaska, is due back in the United States on Thursday.

***

(CNN) -- Don Shows was a computer geek until he lost his job and took a road trip.



JetBlue promises to refund some tickets purchased before a traveler is laid off from a job.



While the 56-year-old from Dayton, Ohio, was away on his eight-day post-layoff adventure, he decided he really wanted to be a photojournalist.



"I ran into some interesting situations when I was out touring around the backcountry" of the Midwest, he said. "The road map is handy, but sometimes the road you're looking for is not there."



Stories like Shows' are more common these days. The unemployment rate was at 7.6 percent in January, and, strange as it may seem, at least one travel company, an airline and a travel-bag maker are now catering to the layoff crowd -- both the recently let go and the future unemployed.



For those who buy a plane ticket before they get the ax, JetBlue is offering to refund fares. The JetBlue Promise promotion is good for customers laid off on or after February 17 and applies to ticket purchases made between February 1 and June 1.



The program is designed to appeal to people who haven't been downsized but worry they might be, said Alison Croyle, a spokeswoman for the airline.



"It's something that we felt would provide an advantage to customers who otherwise might be too stressed to book future travel plans," she said.



Then there's the already-laid-off demographic.



On some packages, Intrepid Travel is giving a 15 percent discount to people who've recently been let go.



The deal, with the tongue-in-cheek title, "Laid off? How about taking off?" has gotten a few dozen takers in the two months it's been offered, said Leslie Cohen, spokeswoman for the travel company.



Cohen said the discount is designed to give people a chance to clear their heads during a tough transition. Some of the deals start at less than $1,000, she said.



The company is "not suggesting you use your life savings," she said. "It's really just a chance to catch your breath and see something else and come back in a little bit of a different frame of mind."



For those looking to hit the skies on the job hunt rather than escape it, SkyRoll, maker of a $149.99 garment bag, says it's giving a discount.



"If you recently lost your job and need to travel for an interview, we will take 50 percent off the price of a SkyRoll to help you arrive looking your best," the company says on its Web site. To get the discount, SkyRoll requires customers to e-mail the company a layoff notice.



Travel discounts like the one from Intrepid may be great for unemployed people who have hefty savings accounts or large severance packages, but the program also could prey on the unemployed, said Madeline Hughes, who runs a consulting and outplacement group in Denver, Colorado.



The cost of a big trip "could be lunch money for somebody for the next six months," she said.



Hughes tells her clients who are laid off they need to come up with a career plan -- and quickly -- because the job market is so competitive.



If a person truly has a thick enough checkbook to afford a post-layoff vacation, Hughes said she would tell the person to send out plenty of resumes before hitting the beach.



"If you really do want to get away, then at least get somewhat of a plan so when you're on vacation you're not fretting about what you're going to do when you get back," she said. "People can't relax if they're afraid and they don't have a plan and they're sort of panicked."



Daphne Domingo, a life coach in Seattle, Washington, said people who've been laid off should take vacations so they have time to reassess their lives -- but they should gauge the scope of their travel on their savings account.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Edwin van der Sar claimed the all-time British record for minutes without conceding a goal during Manchester United's 1-0 win over West Ham on Sunday.

Triumphant: Edwin van der Sar holds the British goalkeeping record for most time without conceding.

The Dutch veteran also took the 30-year-old English record from Steve Death last week. Death's name, with all due respect to the former Reading custodian, is not up there with the game's greats.

So who is in Van der Sar's league as football's finest shot-stoppers, the men who rarely get the credit but often cop the flak?

Here, Football Fanzone presents a run down of the best goalkeepers in history.

Read through our picks and tell us if you disagree or if we've missed anyone in the Sound Off box below. What do you think of van der Sar's inclusion?

Lev Yashin (USSR)

Yahsin is the only goalkeeper ever to be named European Footballer of the Year, in 1963. Dubbed the Black Spider for his all-black outfit and what seemed like eight limbs, the Russian even invented the concept of the keeper as sweeper. In the days when keepers were not protected by referees as they are today, Yashin's bravery and acrobatics were legendary and 207 clean sheets and 150 penalties saves he made in a 22-year career tell their own story. The best keeper at each World Cup is presented with the Yashin Award.

Dino Zoff (Italy)

Zoff is one of just two goalkeepers to lift the World Cup having captained Italy to their third crown in 1982. He was already 40 then, making him the oldest World Cup-winning captain too. But the unflappable Zoff's achievements don't end there: he holds the record for the longest playing time without conceding in international tournaments (1,142 minutes) set between 1972 and 1974. And with 112 caps, he ranks third in the Azzurri's all-time list. A true great.

Gordon Banks (England)

"What a save," so the commentary runs to the finest piece of goalkeeping ever and one of football's most memorable moments. Pele was certain he'd scored after meeting Jairzinho's center, heading powerfully down into the left-hand corner of the net in Brazil's 1-0 1970 World Cup group win over England. But somehow Banks scrambled across, miraculously diving to push the ball up over the bar. Banks might have been immortalized by that stop, but his absence through illness from England's subsequent quarter-final against West Germany was perhaps more telling when his replacement Peter Bonetti was made a scapegoat for the defending champions' defeat.

Peter Schmeichel (Denmark)

Schmeichel will go down as Sir Alex Ferguson's best signing for Manchester United, certainly pound-for-pound. Bought for just $750,000 in 1991, the imposing Schmeichel would provide United everything a world-class goalkeeper requires -- including the ability to launch a swift counter-attack. He won Euro 92 with Denmark and the Treble with United in 1999, while 13 career goals are not to be sniffed at either. He played on a season too long, maybe, but on his day there were few better.

Edwin van der Sar (Holland)

At 38, the rangy Van der Sar is in the very twilight of his career -- but what a career it's been. The man from Voorhout holds the record number of caps for Holland, he's won the Champions League twice and is on course to win a third Premier League title in a row with Manchester United this season. All of which makes you wonder how come he spent so long at Fulham? United fans would love to have had Van der Sar way before 2005; he has proved to be the definitive Schmeichel replacement.

Iker Casillas (Spain)

It's easy to take Casillas' brilliance for granted, but stand back and look at his career and it's clear he's already one of the greats. Real Madrid have always been able to lure the best, yet they've had the agile Casillas as

***

(CNN) -- The girlfriend of former NFL quarterback Steve McNair had grown frustrated with their relationship and was struggling with financial difficulties in the days before she killed him and herself in July.



Steve McNair, former NFL quarterback, was a married father of four when he was killed last summer.



Details of their relationship were revealed in a case summary released by Nashville police Monday.



McNair, 36, and Sahel Kazemi, 20, were found fatally shot in a condominium in downtown Nashville on July 4. Police have since ruled their deaths a murder-suicide.



"My life is just s--- and I should end it," Kazemi said the night before the couple were found dead, according to Sonya New, her shift manager at a Dave & Busters restaurant. New also said Kazemi was not her usual self and seemed down.



Though McNair was a married father of four, he was seeing Kazemi and at least one other woman, Leah Ignagni, according to Nashville police. McNair had spent the night at Ignagni's apartment on July 2, two nights before he was killed, Ignagni told police.



On the morning of July 4, Kazemi texted McNair, saying she was stressed and needed money to pay bills.



"Baby I might have a break down im so stressed," Kazemi said in one text message. "baby i might need to go to the hospital. baby whats wrong w(ith) me i can hardly breath(e)."



Chris Wall, who provided security for McNair and his family, told police he knew about McNair's relationship with Kazemi. McNair was tired of her calling when he was with his family, Wall said.



Kazemi continued to text McNair throughout the day, asking for money and when she could see him next.



"baby what are u doing," Kazemi asked.



"At the pool with the kids. I got the guy transferring the money," McNair replied.



At 4:04 p.m. on July 3, Kazemi said, "baby I have to be w(ith) u 2nite. I dnt care where." The messages continued for more than eight hours before McNair said he was on his way to the condo. He had told Kazemi earlier that he wouldn't leave the house "til the kids fall asleep."



McNair and Kazemi exchanged a final series of messages early July 4, when he asked her to leave the front door to the condo open for him.



A final message, sent at 1:14 a.m., simply said, "its open."



About 12 hours later, a friend of McNair's found their bodies.

***

Rio de Janeiro, Brazil (CNN) -- Electricity returned early Wednesday to a large swath of central and southern Brazil that was plunged into darkness when power from a major hydroelectric dam was lost.



Up to 18 of Brazil's 26 states were left without power when electricity from the Itaipu dam was interrupted around 10:15 p.m. (7:15 p.m. ET) Tuesday, leaving Sao Paulo, Rio de Janeiro and other cities in darkened chaos.



Hundreds of people were trapped in elevators. Subways, trains and buses stopped running their routes. Video showed long snaking lines of cars at a near standstill on the roads, their headlights the only illumination.



The outage also led to medical emergencies, with a report in Sao Paulo of neighbors having to rescue someone who breathes with the help of a ventilator but the back-up battery was running low.



Police also reported increased robberies and looting related to the blackout. Authorities in Rio de Janeiro and other cities stepped up enforcement.



Officials said up to 60 million of Brazil's nearly 200 million residents were pitched into darkness.



"I thought, 'How is this happening?' " said Rio de Janeiro resident Wesley Ferreira. "All of Copacabana is black."



Power was restored to most of Brazil by 6 a.m. (3 a.m. ET), the government-run Agencia Brasil news agency said.



But some water-treatment plants remained affected Wednesday. Authorities in Sao Paulo reported that 3 million residents in the metropolitan area remained without water, down from a previous 6.7 million. Sao Paulo is the largest municipality in South America, with about 11 million inhabitants in the city and nearly 20 million in the metro area.



The Itaipu dam, one of the world's largest hydroelectric facilities, is shared by Brazil and Paraguay, which also lost power. Neighboring Uruguay also reported outages. Itaipu provides more than 19 percent of Brazil's energy and 87 percent of Paraguay's, Agencia Brasil said.



The outage affected 18 states, the UOL Noticias news outlet said, citing Brazil's minister of mines and energy, Edison Lobao.



The states of Sao Paulo, Mato Grosso do Sul, Rio de Janeiro and Espirito Santo went totally dark, while Minas Gerais, Mato Grosso, Goias, Rio Grande do Sul, Santa Catarina, Parana, Acre, Rondonia, Bahia, Sergipe, Paraiba, Alagoas, Pernambuco and Rio Grande do Norte were partially affected. The Federal District in which Brasilia, the nation's capital, is located also had outages.



As a point of reference as to how widespread the blackout was, it is about 2,000 miles from the southern tip of Santa Catarina to the northern tip of Pernambuco.



Jorge Samek, the director general of the agency that runs the dam, said the blackouts were caused by a failure in the Brazilian power delivery system, not the hydroelectric plant at the dam. Officials said three transmission lines went out.



Officials said they had not determined an official cause for the power failure, but pointed at the weather. They discounted any type of sabotage.



"Apparently, according to information that we have, it was because of meteorological conditions that were pretty adverse, with strong winds and strong rain at the same time," Lobao said.



Some experts agreed that the electric system should not collapse because of a storm.



"There is a problem," said Luiz Pinguelli, director of the Post-Graduate Engineering Center at the Rio de Janeiro Federal University. "And you can't say under any circumstances that this is due to nature. There is a transmission problem, and the worst part of it is the dimension it takes. That is to say, an accident that can tumble one line is always possible. But for the power to go out in so many cities for such a long time, that shouldn't happen."



Some residents blamed a sudden surge in electricity use as Brazil, which is in the Southern Hemisphere, enters spring and the weather gets warmer.



"Those responsible for the energy supply do not perceive that the weather is changing and that there's a lot of hot weather in the spring

***

ROME, Italy -- Cristiano Ronaldo and Wayne Rooney scored a goal in each half as Manchester United won 2-0 in Roma's Olympic Stadium to virtually assure the Premier League leaders a place in the Champions League semifinals.



Cristiano Ronaldo rises above the Roma defense to power home a superb header.



United proved they can still dominate the Italian side, following last season's 8-3 aggregate triumph at the same stage of the competition, with a stylish display.



The visitors enjoyed a lot of the ball in the first period as Roma -- missing talismanic striker Francesco Totti -- sat back, seemingly intent on not giving anything away.



On 12 minutes, United opened up the Roma defense but after Park Ji-Sung took the ball down on his chest he was crowded out.



Christian Panucci headed over the bar from a David Pizarro corner and Mirko Vucinic shot over as he was falling backwards, after Rio Ferdinand had slipped, as Roma briefly threatened.



United then suffered a blow as defender Nemanja Vidic was stretchered off with a leg injury, to be replaced by John O'Shea.



Chances were few and far between but on 39 minutes United produced a move of majestic quality to take the lead.



United switched the ball around the edge of the Roma box before Paul Scholes eventually crossed for Ronaldo to come steaming in to out-jump Marco Cassetti and thump home a header.



Just three minutes later Roma had their best chance of the half after a mistake from Ferdinand, but Vucinic dragged his shot from the left just beyond the far post.



Roma came out after the break with more purpose and Vucinic played in Max Tonetto, but he lashed his shot wide of the near post, failing even to force Edwin van der Sar into making a save.



From a quick throw Panucci had great chance but skied his volley from five meters. Substitute Ludovic Giuly then got behind the United defense but Van der Sar cut out his cross.



And the big Dutch keeper then made a stunning one-handed save on 62 minutes from a Vucinic header to keep the scores level.



Four minutes later, United scored a crucial second as Park headed a deep cross from Wes Brown back across goal and Rooney mopped up the loose ball after goalkeeper Doni and Panucci impeded each other.



Moments later Ronaldo had a shot deflected onto the outside of the post as United threatened to run riot.



Rooney had two glorious chances to heap more misery on Roma late on but had one shot blocked and sent the other wide.



Ronaldo then almost scored with a stunning late volley from substitute Carlos Tevez's cross but the ball flew over the bar.



With Barcelona taking a 1-0 lead over Schalke in the other semifinal, it looks increasingly likely that United will face the Catalan giants for a place in the Moscow final mext month.



Ronaldo played down his goal, simply saying his 36th of the season was "a good header" and preferred to comment on the team's overall performance.



"That was a very good performance in what was a top game," he said. "We created a few chances,scored twice and deserved the victory.



"The defense were terrific and they played their part. It was a good job overall but we must remember that the Champions League is a different style to the Premier League and this match is not over yet," added the Portuguese winger. E-mail to a friend

***

NAIROBI, Kenya (CNN) -- Gangs of young men armed with machetes are roaming the streets in Kenya as post-election violence threatens to engulf the country. Horrific attacks are being reported, including the torching of a church where people who had sought refuge were burned alive.



At least 148 people have been killed and about 75,000 have fled their homes since President Mwai Kibaki won a narrow victory, according to Kenyan government officials. The Associated Press reported a higher number -- about 275 -- have died since Saturday.



Much of the violence is between supporters of Kibaki from the majority Kikuyu tribe and backers of opposition leader Raila Odinga, who is from the Luo tribe.



The ethnic violence, previously rare in Kenya, is reminiscent of the strife that led to the Rwanda genocide.  In a particularly disturbing incident, a mob appears to have burned a church filled with Kenyans seeking refuge from the violence.



The Red Cross told The Associated Press that at least 50 were burned to death at the church, some of them children.   As many as 200 people were at the church, about 185 miles northwest of Nairobi, KTN reporter Tony Biwott told CNN. Watch as machete-wielding looters haul away goods »



Biwott said he counted at least 15 charred bodies, including children, in the burned church and an adjacent field.



"I'm sure there were more than 15 but I couldn't count the ones who were ashes," he said in a phone interview.



The wounded sustained gunshot wounds, burns and cuts from a panga, a machete-like weapon, the Red Cross said. Watch smoke darken skies near a burned church



The national police commissioner has said in Kenyan society, churches are considered sacred and no one would expect such violence there.



He said an investigation into the incident is under way.



About 120 people are reported dead and over 1,000 injured countrywide, according to The Red Cross.



Police and political backers of opposition leader Raila Odinga began clashing about four days ago as Odinga, of the Luo tribe, narrowly lost Kenya's presidential election to Mwai Kibaki.



Kibaki is a member of Kikuyu, Kenya's largest tribe.



Violence broke out in several cities as frustration mounted during the slow hand-count of the ballots. Kibaki was re-elected with 51.3 percent of the vote, to 48.7 percent for Odinga.



"What we now witness is a cold and calculated plan to organize and engage in massacres," government spokesman Alfred Mutua said.



Bringing in the New Year, Kibaki -- who rarely speaks to the press -- urged calm to the nation.



"It now is a time for healing and reconciliation amongst all Kenyans," he said.



Foreign Minister Raphael Tuju said the government is committed to taking control.



"If the tear gas doesn't work then unfortunately they have to use live bullets," he told CNN. "The president has been sworn in, the elections are over, the Kenyans have to accept the results, the opposition has to accept the results."



Tuesday, international observers said the balloting fell short of international standards for democratic elections.



Alexander Lambsdorff, the head of the EU Election Observation Mission in Kenya, cited discrepancies in vote counts, election observers being turned away from polling places and observers being refused entrance to the electoral commission vote-counting room.



The violence also has displaced some 75,000 Kenyans inside the country, Mutua said.



The government said Tuesday it will not allow any political rallies in the aftermath of the controversial election outcome.



Odinga's opposition Orange Democratic Movement had scheduled rallies for Tuesday, raising fears of more violence.



Mutua said there was no intention to impose a state of emergency or curfew at this point, and said police are handling the violence well and with "extreme restraint."



However, he warned that police restraint would not last forever. The violence is rare for Kenya, which has enjoyed relative calm even as war and chronic political violence wracked neighboring countries, such as Ethiopia, Sudan and Uganda.



The United States has withheld congratulations for Kibaki, citing concerns

***

(CNN) -- Ben Cahan wishes he hadn't damaged his old snapshot of a person in a prosthetic alien suit sitting with his Macintosh. Luckily, he still has a late-1980s picture of actor Kurt Russell with his boxy Mac desktop.



Ben Cahan worked with Hollywood films and spotted Kurt Russell sitting with his Mac in the 1980s.



Rubbing elbows with big-name celebrities was not unusual for Cahan, who is a software developer. He used his Mac to create Hollywood screenwriting software that formed the basis for programs still in use today.



Cahan never expected his old computers to become museum pieces, and he didn't think much about saving funny photos of them at the time. He almost wants to kick himself when he thinks about the lost photo of extraterrestrial attire.



"Who would have thought that would be an interesting picture?" he mused.



But as the Macintosh computer celebrates its 25th birthday Saturday, Cahan and other iReporters are seeking to preserve memories and the history of what they consider to be simple, classic and timeless designs. At the same time, they ponder the purpose of preserving such a short legacy.



Gil Poulsen of Franklin Park, New Jersey, says he can understand confusion from people who see the meticulously curated collection in his basement. iReport.com: Go behind the museum's velvet rope



"Computers almost become like antiques or dinosaurs very quickly. It does seem like a contradiction in terms to have a computer as a museum piece."  Watch Poulsen talk about his museum »



Poulsen keeps an elaborate stash of vintage Macs, portable devices, accessories and artwork. Two of his favorite pieces are a special vertical flat-screen unit made for Apple's 20th anniversary and a chassis cover designed to deflect radiation.



Small placards explain the details of each item in the collection, and a velvet rope gives the space a real museum feel.



He remembers the days when the computers ran exclusively on floppy disks, necessitating frequent disk switching whenever the onboard memory filled up. As storage innovations cropped up, users sought to purchase additional floppy drives and, later, units with hard drives. His collection chronicles many of these changes.



Upstairs, he keeps a couple "Macquariums" on display. Among Mac enthusiasts, a popular form of artwork is the conversion of an old Mac case into a shell for a fish tank. The resulting aquarium setup mimics a popular screen saver on the units that featured swimming fish. iReport.com: See iReporter Bob Mushchitz's Macquarium



Building inspectors and plumbers who visit are sometimes taken aback at the little computer museum.



"I often get very strange reactions from contractors visiting the house because they don't quite know what to make of it when they see it," Poulsen said.



Blake Patterson of Alexandria, Virginia, can certainly relate. His family is in awe of the computer room downstairs, which he calls the "Byte Cellar." He maintains a blog by the same name that chronicles his experiences with vintage computing. iReport.com: Get a peek inside the Byte Cellar



"My wife is quite amazed and sort of frightened by that. She stays out of the computer room. It's a little bit scary."



He purchased an original 128K Macintosh in 1985 and has owned several more machines. Much of his collection was built in the past eight years or so. Patterson, who operates Web sites, currently uses a three-screened Mac Pro for high-end tasks.  See both old and new photos of vintage Macs »



The legacy of the Mac, now 25 years old, is one of innovation, he says.



"It was quite a notable achievement 25 years ago when the Mac first came out. It was a big, new thing. People were a little bit baffled by the innovations."



Classic Macs were some of the first commercially successful home computers to incorporate a graphical user interface, mouse and streamlined chassis. This new form of design allowed flexibility for manipulating graphics and page layouts onscreen.



Mike Tuohy of Seattle, Washington, acknowledges that artists and the Mac seem especially well-suited for one another.

***

ATLANTA, Georgia (CNN) -- An 18-year-old Guatemalan man who doctors say faces almost certain death unless he receives a transplanted heart is surrounded by family as he waits, thanks to the kindness of strangers.



Juan Gonzalez was earning $250 a week as a dishwasher when his heart trouble began.



Juan Gonzalez, now lying in a hospital in Atlanta, hopes to learn Friday whether he will be added to the list of people eligible to receive transplants. Doctors at St. Joseph's Hospital said Gonzalez appears to be a good candidate. Without a transplant, they said, he could die in six months.



The teen traveled alone to Rome, Georgia, to earn enough money to help support his family back home. The undocumented worker took a job as a dishwasher for $250 a week.



That's when heart trouble stepped in.



Dr. Frank Stegall, a cardiologist at Redmond Regional Medical Center in Rome, told Gonzalez he had a chronically weak heart, or dilated cardiomyopathy. The organ pumps only 20 percent of the blood a healthy heart would, Stegall said.



As his heart failed, Gonzalez's plight moved the hospital staff to try to reunite him with his parents. They contacted U.S. Rep. Phil Gingrey -- himself a doctor. Gingrey persuaded the State Department to expedite travel visas for Pascual and Maria Gonzalez, and Delta Air Lines provided a free ride.



Last month, CNN aired a story on Juan Gonzalez. Afterward, the Larry King Cardiac Foundation -- founded by the CNN talk show host 21 years ago to pay for life-saving cardiac care for patients without insurance who don't qualify for state or federal assistance -- helped get Gonzalez transferred to St. Joseph's Hospital in Atlanta for evaluation.



Many of the people who saw the story on CNN were moved to offer help. It was then that the possibility of a heart transplant became real, thanks to a large donation from one of those people. The donor has asked that details of the gift not be revealed, other than his name, Sam Shapiro.



Gonzalez and his parents say they are grateful for the overwhelming support.



St. Joseph's has provided housing for the parents at a nearby hotel. Although it is not clear where Gonzalez will go once the evaluation at St. Joseph is completed, staff members at Redmond in Rome, about 60 miles northwest of Atlanta, indicated they might provide a place for the parents to say.



The parents' visas will run out in about two and a half months.



CNN's Anna Armas contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Mansour Daou is known as the "Black Box" of Moammar Gadhafi's regime -- like an aircraft's data recorder, he knows some of Libya's darkest secrets.





And as one of Gadhafi's top security officials, who remained at his side until the final hours, Daou has a unique insight into the astonishing downfall of Africa's longest-serving leader.





Now in an interview with CNN he describes how the dictator, who was once of the world's most feared leaders, was forced to scavenge for food and hide in abandoned houses in the coastal city of Sirte.





"He was very worried and erratic -- this could be because he was afraid," Daou said.





According to Daou, Gadhafi became desperate to travel to his birthplace, the village of Jaref, 20 kilometers west of Sirte, a journey that Daou feared was "suicide."





"He wanted to go to his village, maybe he wanted to die there or spend his last moments there," he said.





Finally, after NATO jets attacked his convoy, Gadhafi tried to escape on foot through drainage pipes, but was caught. He was later killed in circumstances that are still far from clear.





Gadhafi's autopsy reveals he was shot in head





Daou spoke as he awaited trial at a detention facility in the city of Misrata, which bore the brunt of the regime's most brutal assault during the conflict. The most significant charges he faces relate to his alleged role in the Abu Salim prison massacre in 1996, and his role in the alleged hiring of African mercenaries by the regime during the conflict. He told CNN he had no role in those events.





The interview was initially delayed by a few hours -- officials said Daou was being interrogated and asked CNN to return in the evening to speak to him.





The CNN crew was taken to the bottom floor of the building and led into a conference room where Daou sat at a long table with his interrogator -- a tall, tough-looking Libyan man.





Daou, in his late 50s, wore a traditional Arabic gray dishdasha robe and seemed to be in good health.





During the hour-long interview, Daou described how he had been in the same car as Gadhafi as they made their chaotic escape from the former leader's hometown of Sirte.





Gadhafi left Tripoli for Sirte on August 18, according to Daou -- just two days before fighters seeking to oust him entered the capital.





Daou said he remained in Tripoli until it became clear the city was no longer safe for the regime's top tier.





He then fled to the city of Bani Walid on August 22, along with Gadhafi's son, Saif al-Islam and intelligence chief Abdullah al-Senussi. He stayed with them for four days before joining the former dictator in Sirte.





Daou said their living conditions went from bad to worse as the rebels tightened their siege of the city. They moved around abandoned houses every three to four days, he said, surviving on the little food they could find. Towards the end, they had no power, water or communication with the outside world. "Our lives had turned by about 180 degrees."





Gadhafi spent his final days writing and reading books he had stacked in suitcases, Daou said, but his behavior became more unpredictable. As fighters surrounded Sirte, Gadhafi's group wanted to leave the city.





Daou said he and others knew that if they did not leave before the siege there would be no way out. But Gadhafi refused to leave -- until October 20 -- when he and his son Mutassem decided to make the move to the former dictator's birthplace.





Their group of about 350 men had dropped to fewer than 200, according to Daou. "It started dropping daily with some killed, others wounded and those who had left with their families," he said.





Daou described their force as a mostly undisciplined civilian one under the command of Mutassem. They had no plan -- not for fleeing and certainly not for fighting.





Their convoy of more than 40 vehicles was supposed to head out

***

(CNN) -- Eunice Kennedy Shriver, the sister of President John F. Kennedy and a champion of the disabled who founded the Special Olympics, died Tuesday, the Special Olympics said. She was 88.



Eunice Kennedy Shriver speaks at a dinner in honor of the Special Olympics in July 2006.



Born on July 10, 1921, in Brookline, Massachusetts, Shriver was the fifth of nine children to Joseph P. and Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy. She emerged from the long shadow of siblings John F. Kennedy, Robert F. Kennedy and Sen. Edward M. Kennedy as the founder of the Special Olympics, which started as a summer day camp in her backyard in 1962.



Today, 3.1 million people with mental disabilities participate in 228 programs in 170 nations, according to the Special Olympics.



"She was the light of our lives, a mother, wife, grandmother, sister and aunt who taught us by example and with passion what it means to live a faith-driven life of love and service to others," the Shriver family said Tuesday in a statement.



"For each of us, she often seemed to stop time itself -- to run another Special Olympics Games, to visit us in our homes, to attend to her own mother, her sisters and brothers, and to sail, tell stories, and laugh and serve her friends."



No final decision has been made on funeral arrangements, a source close to the family said.



Shriver's husband, R. Sargent Shriver, and her five children and their spouses and all of her 19 grandchildren were with her when she died, the Special Olympics said in a statement.  Watch a look at Eunice Kennedy Shriver's life »



"We are tremendously grateful for the extreme outpouring of support and prayer from the public as we honor our beloved founder," Brady Lum, Special Olympics president and chief operating officer, said in a statement Tuesday.



"Today we celebrate the life of a woman who had the vision to create our movement. It is an enormous loss, but I know we can rest assured that her legacy will live on through her family, friends, and the millions of people around the world who she touched and transformed."



Even before launching the Special Olympics in 1968, Shriver had established a reputation as an advocate for the disenfranchised and a trailblazer for the rights of the disabled through a variety of roles in the private and public sector.



She also persuaded the Kennedy family to go public with one of its most guarded secrets. In September 1962, Shriver wrote an article about her mentally disabled sister, Rosemary, which was published in The Saturday Evening Post.



At an event honoring her in 2007, Shriver spoke of her life: "Most people believe I spent my whole life really interested in only one thing and that one thing is working to make the world a better place for people with intellectual disabilities.



"As important as it has been, it is not the whole story of my life. My life is about being lucky as a child to be raised by parents who loved me and made me believe in possibilities. It is also about being lucky to have had these extraordinary children. ... It is also about being especially lucky to have a wonderful husband."  Watch Shriver reflect on her life »



At the same event, Edward Kennedy paid tribute to his sister, saying she had inherited the best qualities from his parents, including compassion.



"She had that sense no one should be left out or left behind. She picked this up, obviously, at a very early age. All of us could see that special relationship that Eunice had with Rosemary."



After receiving a degree in sociology from Stanford University in Palo Alto, California, Shriver worked for the U.S. State Department in the Special War Problems Division from 1943 to 1945, helping former prisoners of war readjust to civilian life.



From 1947 to 1948, she worked for $1 at the Department of Justice as executive secretary for the National Conference on Prevention and Control of Juvenile Delinquency.  See highlights of Shriver's public and private life »

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Forty seven-year-old Australian "adrenaline junkie" Sean Langman will attempt to break the 50-knot sailing speed barrier with his half sailboat, half plane, after a serious crash last summer.



The half sailboat, half plane uses technology known as supercavitation -- sailing just above the water's edge.



Langman, a shipyard owner and yachtsman, is intent on beating the French-set record within the next few weeks, with the "Wot Rocket," a canoe-style pod with a nine meter-long  rigid sail.



The Wot Rocket is waiting for confirmation from the World Sailing Speed Record Council to attempt, once again, an unprecedented technology known as "supercavitation" -- sailing just above the water in a gas bubble created by the deflection of water. This is to to reduce the drag which is around 1,000 times greater in the water than in the air.



"Wot Rocket is so exciting as we push to sail up to three times the speed of the wind," Langman told CNN.



In October last year Langman and his co-pilot crashed when they lost control of the vessel at 42 knots -- over 60 miles per hour.



But after re-building and perfecting the vessel at a cost of half a million dollars, Langman is ready to try again. "The exhilaration of sailing/flying is so big, you don't think about danger," he told CNN.



Langman is certain that this time around he will beat the record. "My only concern is we won't be able to keep control of the craft."



In case the pilots crash again, Langman says the most thing is to remain calm.  "Last time I felt a mild panic as we were underwater. I just hoped the paramedics would get there in time.



"But really I feel very safe doing anything on water as that what I've done my whole life. I feel most 'in tune' when I'm on water," he added.



The idea for Wot Rocket was conceived four years ago by Langman after he was inspired by the story of Burt Munro, the New Zealander who set a world land speed record on his modified Indian Scout motorcycle in 1967 -- played by Antony Hopkins in the 2005 Hollywood movie "The World's Fastest Indian."



Do you think the wotrocket can beat the record?



"I came up with the idea in the shower. So I presented it to a group of engineers and said 'this is what I believe.'  Most said I'm a lunatic but one said 'I want to work with you'."



Langman joined forces with leading Australian designer Andy Dovell and sought input from Boeing 747 pilots for their aeronautical knowledge. He then had the "Wot Rocket" built using the staff and facilities at his various Shipyards. Finally, he teamed up with Wotif.com founder Graeme Wood who invested in the project because, as he explained,  he "likes leftfield ideas."



"My family think I'm crazy, but every time I've had an idea it's taken me somewhere. It's really about ideas versus science and trying to make it work," Langman explained.



"And no one remembers the second man to walk on the moon."

***

(CNN) -- Champions League newcomers Manchester City are still waiting for their first win in the competition as a double from Mario Gomez gave in-form Bayern Munich a 2-0 Group A victory at the Allianz Arena.





Bayern went into the match on the back of nine successive victories and they always looked dangerous in the first half, with Bastian Schweinsteiger volleying over the crossbar from close range in the 36th minute.





However, the home side took the lead just two minutes later when goalkeeper Joe Hart did superbly to keep out shots from Frank Ribery and Thomas Mueller, but Gomez was on hand to stab home from three meters out.





And the same player added a second goal on the stroke of half-time when Daniel Van Buyten's header was wonderfully saved by Hart, only for Gomez to be on hand again from close range.





City could find no response after the break, and a bad night for them was made worse when manager Roberto Mancini later confirmed that former captain Carlos Tevez refused to come onto the pitch in the second half after being named only as a substitute.





An angry Mancini told reporters: "I asked him to go on and help the team. We have 11 players -- maybe he was disappointed because he didn't play from the start. If I have my way he will be out of the club."





The result leaves Bayern top of the table with a maximum six points from their two games, with Napoli second on four points after the Italian side beat Villarreal 2-0 in Naples.





They opened the scoring in the 14th minute when Marek Hamsik chested down Ezequiel Lavezzi's cross at the back post, before firing home with his left foot.





And Edinson Cavani added a second from the penalty spot just three minutes later after Lavezzi was fouled by Gonzalo Rodriguez in the area.





Big-spending City, who are joint top of the English Premier League with five wins and a draw from their six games so far, are back in third with just a single point following their opening home draw against Napoli, while Spanish side Villarreal are bottom of the group without a point, or a goal, so far.





Meanwhile, 2010 champions Inter Milan made it two wins out of two under new coach Claudio Ranieri with a thrilling 3-2 Group B victory at CSKA Moscow.





Ranieri replaced Gian Piero Gasperini last week, and began his San Siro tenure with a 3-1 Serie A win at Bologna over the weekend.





And Inter showed they had got their shock opening 1-0 defeat by Trabzonspor out of their system, by repelling a CSKA fightback to secure their first victory in the tournament.





Brazilian defender Lucio fired Inter ahead from the edge of the box after just six minutes and the Italian side doubled their lead midway through the half, when Giampaolo Pazzini netted from close range after fine work from Yuto Nagatomo.





However, the Russian side pulled a goal back on the stroke of half-time with a well-placed Alan Dzagoev free-kick and Brazilian Vagner Love levelled with 13 minutes remaining with a low drive.





But, just a minute later, Mauro Zarate converted from Esteban Cambiasso's pass to give Inter a vital victory.





The other group match saw Trabzonspor and Lille share a 1-1 draw in Turkey.





Moussa Sow opened the scoring for the French side when he converted Eden Hazard's pass from a tight angle, but the home side earned a draw in the 75th minute when Gustavo Colman scored from the penalty spot after Mathieu Debuchy handled in the area.





The result sees Trabzonspor top the group with four points, ahead of Inter on three, Lille on two and CSKA Moscow on a single point.





Premier League leaders Manchester United needed a last-gasp Ashley Young goal to rescue a 3-3 Group C draw at home to Swiss side Basel, in a thrilling match that saw United squander a comfortable two-goal lead.





United took a 16th minute lead when Danny Welbeck, in for the injured Wayne Rooney, was left unmarked in the area to score off the post, and the young England

***

TEGUCIGALPA, Honduras (CNN) -- He's no Julia Child, but Honduran President Manuel Zelaya showed Tuesday he can attack a cantaloupe and U.S. government claims in a single motion.



President Manuel Zelaya chews on a slice of Honduran melon to demonstrate its safety.



"It's not in our fruit," he said about last week's report by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration that some Honduran cantaloupes may be contaminated with salmonella. "It's not true what they are saying. Logically, we believe it is an error."



Then, the 55-year-old father of four asked the viewers of CNN en Español to indulge him as he engaged in a show-and-tell demonstration. "Permit me a second," he said as he stretched his left arm across the tabletop and outside the view of the camera, then pulled into view a box of fruit.



"Here I have the box of melons that we are exporting to the United States; here are the protective bags," he said.



Zelaya lifted a cantaloupe from the box, placed it in front of him, then grabbed a knife and a fork.



"Permit me to make a demonstration," he said, then cut open the fruit, sliced off a chunk, put it in his mouth and chewed vigorously.



"I eat this fruit without any fear," he said with his mouth full. "It's a delicious fruit. Nothing happens to me!"



Though the symptoms of salmonella infection -- nausea, vomiting, fever, diarrhea and abdominal cramps -- typically do not occur for several hours after eating tainted food, the point was made.



The demonstration came three days after the FDA said it had linked 50 cases of salmonella in 16 states and nine in Canada to melons from Agropecuaria Montelibana, a grower and packer in San Lorenzo, Honduras.



Though there have been no reports of fatalities, 14 people have been hospitalized in Arizona, California, Colorado, Georgia, Illinois, Missouri, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, Ohio, Oklahoma, Oregon, Tennessee, Utah, Washington and Wisconsin, the FDA said.



While the company has continued exporting to Europe and Central America and has received no reports of illness, the daily export of 45 containers of melon to the United States has halted, a company official said Monday.



As a result, some 1,500 workers have been laid off, most of them single mothers, and company losses have exceeded $3 million, company officials said.



The FDA alert advised U.S. grocers, food-service operators and produce processors to remove from their stock any cantaloupes from the company.



The agency also recommended consumers throw away any cantaloupes determined to be from the company. E-mail to a friend



CNN's Elvin Sandoval contributed to this story.

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN) -- Listening to writer Brian K. Vaughan summarize the plot of his comic book, "Y: The Last Man," makes it sound like just another pulp title.



Brian K. Vaughan says he's "depressed" about the end of "Y: The Last Man," but he's got other projects to work on.



"A plague of mysterious origin destroys every male mammal, human being and animal on the planet," he says, "except for one boy and his monkey. And wackiness ensues."



Well, that's the story boiled down to its basics. But the tale of amateur escapist Yorick Brown, the last man alive on an Earth now home to only women, and his monkey, Ampersand, is actually far more complex than Vaughan's description reveals, involving long journeys, the value of memory and the politics of gender roles. The title, which has had a very successful five-year run, is coming to an end this week with the release of issue No. 60.



It is a finale that is equally emotional for both fans and its creator.



"I guess I've moved into acceptance but that doesn't mean that I'm not still depressed about it," says Vaughan, 31, a soft-spoken Cleveland, Ohio, native who now makes his home in Los Angeles.  Gallery: The worlds of Brian K. Vaughan »



"It's been weird because it's a gradual [form of] saying good-bye," he says. "First, you finish the script, but then it still has to be penciled and inked, and there's so many stages in comics that it's sort of been like the stages of death."



Vaughan's career in comics dates back more than a decade, but his love for the medium stretches back to his adolescence. Already an avid fan of comic books, he discovered Alan Moore's seminal graphic novel "Watchmen" on a family vacation. It would be the spark that inspired him to give life to his own stories.  Watch Vaughan pick out some of his influences »



When Vaughan first pitched his concept for "Y: The Last Man" to Vertigo, an imprint of DC Comics, he was focused on a specific ending, without knowing whether the series would last long enough to reach it.



"We had a long-term idea [of doing] five years but realistically, I knew I had just gotten 'Swamp Thing' canceled at Vertigo and most people hadn't heard of Pia [Guerra], the artist," he says.



"It's not like we were destined for a long and successful run," he adds, smiling.



Almost immediately following its debut in 2002, the series found success, earning critical praise as well as five Eisner Awards, the comic-book Oscars, along the way.



Yorick's quest to find his girlfriend, lost somewhere in a world forever changed by this mysterious plague, was just as much an international adventure story as it was the tale of the women in his life: his bodyguard, the enigmatic Agent 355; medical researcher Alison Mann; even his sister, Hero, and his mother. Their experiences can be read as parables on humanity in a world where gender has been all but eliminated from the equation.



Now, as their stories come to a close, Vaughan likens it to ending a relationship.



"It'll be a drag not to get to spend more time with these characters," observes Vaughan.



He adds he will also miss his collaborating with Guerra, who has provided the art for the entire series run.



"It's hard to not think about working with Pia, just because I think she is the best 'actor' in comics," he says. "[That's] a weird thing to say, but she captures emotions better than anyone. I'm very hopeful we'll work together again."



Meanwhile, Vaughan's other work in comics, including "Ex Machina" (Wildstorm) and

***

(CNN) -- Children were among the victims of a plane crash that killed as many as 17 people Sunday in Butte, Montana, according to authorities in Oroville, California, where the aircraft stopped for fuel.



Martha Guidoni said this photo was taken after she and her husband saw the plane "nosedive" in Butte, Montana.



The single-engine plane stopped at the Oroville airport at about 11 a.m. PT, refueled and departed about half an hour later, Police Chief Kirk Trostle said.



"There were some adults and children on board," he told reporters Sunday evening, adding the passengers got out briefly to stretch while the pilot refueled the plane.



Federal Aviation Administration spokesman Mike Fergus said based on preliminary reports, 17 people died in the crash. The Pilatus PC-12 was headed to Bozeman, Montana, but rerouted to Butte instead and crashed 500 feet short of the runway at Butte's Bert Mooney Airport, Fergus said.



The flight plan originated in Redlands, California, according to flight-tracking site FBOweb.com. Stops were made in Vacaville, California, then Oroville, before the plane headed for Montana.



Preliminary information indicates the pilot did not declare an emergency aboard the plane before the crash, Fergus said.



The National Transportation Safety Board is sending an investigation team to the scene, Kristi Dunks, an aerosafety investigator with the agency, told reporters in Butte on Sunday evening.



Dunks said the plane crashed at the Holy Cross Cemetery, located just south of the airport's Runway 3. She said there were no survivors, though she wouldn't confirm the number of people on board the plane.



No one on the ground was injured, Sheriff John Walsh said.



Eric Teitelman, Oroville's director of community development and public works, said the small airport has no control tower but because it has a "wide-open runway" and a self-service fuel system, it is a frequent stop for private aircraft.



Teitelman said at least one person -- an aircraft owner doing servicing work -- was at the airport Sunday when the Pilatus stopped for refueling.



The aircraft owner "met the pilot, saw the children running around," Teitelman said.



The plane, manufactured in 2001, was registered to Eagle Cap Leasing in Enterprise, Oregon, according to the FAA.



Martha Guidoni told CNN she and her husband witnessed the plane crash. She photographed one of the first images of the scene, which showed the cemetery in the foreground of a huge blaze.  See a map of Butte, Montana »



"We were just taking a ride, and all of a sudden, we watched this plane just take a nosedive," she told CNN. "We drove into the cemetery to see if there was any way my husband could help someone, and we were too late. There was nothing to help."



Her husband, Steve Guidoni, who went to the scene of the crash, said the plane "went into the ground" and caught a tree on fire.  Watch footage from scene and hear witness recount what he saw »



"I looked ... to see if I could see anybody I could pull out or anything, but there wasn't anything there, I couldn't see anything," he told CNN. "Some luggage [was] strewn around. ... [There were] some plane parts."

***

London, England (CNN) -- The future of English Premier League club Portsmouth was in doubt Friday after it was forced to go into administration with debts of around $90 million.





The south coast side are the first Premier League side to call in administrators since the division was formed 18 years ago, fueling a financial boom in English football on the back of lucrative TV rights.





"At 10:20am today Portsmouth Football Club was placed into administration following the filing of a notice of appointment at the High Court by the chargeholder, Portpin Limited," the club said in a statement on its Web site.





Explainer: What next for Portsmouth?





Being placed in administration means an insolvent company is run by a court-appointed administrator with a view to saving it from liquidation. The administrator will assess the assets held by the company and attempt to reach agreement with creditors.





Portsmouth, managed by former Chelsea boss Avram Grant, are already bottom of the table and facing relegation after raising around $100 million in player sales before the current season in a bid to reduce their debts.





They will now be docked a further nine points, virtually sealing their relegation to English football's second tier at the end of the season.





The club has passed through a succession of owners this season but efforts to find a fifth broke down Tuesday when present owner Balram Chainrai confirmed the club would opt for administration to avert a winding up order from the UK government.





At a press conference on Friday the club's administrator, Andrew Andronikou, confirmed that Portsmouth's debts were around $100 million, but he said he was confident they would not go bust.





He also said the Premier League had indicated that Portsmouth may be permitted to sell players outside the transfer window. "There will be no firesale. We will have to sell one or two players and that is why we are talking to the Premier League," he said.





"The restructuring starts today and there will be significant cost cutting at all levels. I will be cutting to the bone."





Andronikou also confirmed that Grant had vowed to stay at the club until the end of the season.





Portsmouth's Chief Executive Peter Storrie said it was an "extremely sad day" but admitted going into administration had "kept the club alive and given someone an exceptional opportunity to take this great club on with fresh investment."





He also confirmed his intention to step down when a new buyer for the club had been found.





Portsmouth's financial collapse completes a remarkable fall from grace for a side which won the FA Cup in 2008, the club's first major honor since winning back-to-back English league titles in 1949 and 1950.





Portsmouth are not the first football club to run into financial problems as a consequence of debts wracked up in pursuit of success on the field.





Leeds United went into administration in 2007, three years after their relegation from the Premier League and six years after the club had reached the semifinals of the Champions League.





Leicester City and Portsmouth's south coast rivals Southampton also went into administration after losing their places in the top division.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN)  -- Shortly before President Obama departs for a trip to the Middle East, a new national poll suggests that one in five Americans has a favorable view of Muslim countries.



President Obama and Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan visit an Istanbul mosque in April.



That view compares with 46 percent of the people questioned in a CNN/Opinion Research Corp. survey who say they have an unfavorable opinion of Muslim countries. That's up 5 percentage points from 2002, when 41 percent indicated that they had an unfavorable view.



Meanwhile, three in 10 say they have a neutral opinion of Muslim countries.



The poll also suggests that most Americans suspect people in Muslim countries don't think highly of the United States. Nearly eight in 10 questioned say people in Muslim countries have a unfavorable opinion of the United States, with 14 percent saying Muslims hold a favorable view. iReport.com: Your perspectives on the Muslim world



But the poll indicates Americans seem to be split on whether such negative opinions by Muslims matter. Fifty-three percent of those questioned say they think Muslim views of the United States matter greatly or moderately, with 47 percent saying that Muslim opinions of the United States don't matter very much or at all.



The poll's release comes hours before the president flies to Saudi Arabia for meetings with King Abdullah. Following the stop in Saudi Arabia, Obama will head to Egypt, where he'll deliver a long-awaited speech Thursday on relations between the United States and the Muslim world.  Watch the challenges Obama faces with the speech »



At a town hall in Turkey earlier this year, the president declared that "the United States is not, and will never be, at war with Islam."



Many Americans seem to agree with the president: Sixty-two percent of those surveyed say they don't think the United States is at war with the Muslim world, with 36 percent indicating that the country is at war with Muslim countries. Those numbers have remained stable since CNN's 2002 poll.



But the poll suggests that six out of 10 think that the Muslim world considers itself at war with the United States.



"The feeling seems to be mutual. We distrust Muslims. They distrust Americans. Views of Americans have not changed very much over the past seven years. There are some indications that Muslims' views of Americans have improved a bit since Barack Obama took office, but they are still not positive," said Bill Schneider, CNN senior political analyst.



The CNN/Opinion Research poll was conducted May 14-17, with 1,010 adult Americans questioned by telephone. The survey's sampling error is plus or minus 3 percentage points.