(CNN) -- Bayern Munich have agreed a deal to sign Croatian international striker Ivica Olic from Bundesliga rivals Hamburg, the German champions have revealed on their official Web site fcbayern.de.



Olic will join Bayern Munich at the end of the season after proving a success in his time at Hamburg.



"We've struck an agreement to sign Olic at the end of the season. All we need now are the signatures under the contract," said Bayern general manager Uli Hoeness following the team's arrival at a winter training camp in Dubai.



Olic will complete his move on a free transfer on July 1 and will sign a three-year contract binding him to the club until 2012.



"I'll do everything I can to mark my departure from Hamburg with a trophy," the 29-year-old Olic vowed on Friday, as he and his team-mates prepared for a winter training camp almost exactly parallel to Bayern's in Dubai.



The two teams will meet on January 30 in Hamburg in a match marking the official start of the second half of the Bundesliga season.



Olic joined Hamburg from CSKA Moscow in January 2007 having won three league titles and the UEFA Cup in Russia. He has already scored 12 goals this season and has netted 11 times in 61 internationals for Croatia.



"We're certain Ivica will be a perfect compliment to our strikers Luca Toni and Miroslav Klose. One pleasing aspect is that he is out of contract at the end of the season," said Bayern chairman Karl-Heinz Rummenigge last month.

***

(CNN) -- Hazardous materials teams are still cleaning up a toxic chemical spill from a  train derailment in Lafayette, Louisiana, on Saturday that forced 3,000 people from their homes.



Lafayette Police Sgt. Billy Soileau carries Ke'Iveion Solomon 2, as he helps evacuate children Saturday.



"Hazmat says that clean up is moving quickly and on track," Lafayette police said Sunday in a statement.



Two train cars leaked highly corrosive hydrochloric acid after the six-car train jumped the tracks Saturday about 2:30 a.m. CT (3:30 a.m. ET), according to police.



The chemical spill caused a toxic cloud to form above the site. Lafayette authorities evacuated about 3,500 homes and businesses -- including a nursing home -- within a mile of the derailment location.  Watch traffic detoured from cloud »



The Red Cross opened a shelter at Carencro High School for residents to stay Saturday night, while another 40 to 50 families were put up at hotel rooms, police said.



Residents will be allowed to return home once the spill is contained and no longer dangerous, said Joe Faust, a spokesman for BNSF Railway, which operates the train cars.



Hydrochloric acid is a clear, colorless solution of hydrogen chloride in water often used in metal cleaning and electroplating. Exposure to it can irritate the skin, said Lt. Craig Stansbury of the Lafayette Parish Sheriff's Office. People exposed to the substance are urged to seek medical attention.



Residents outside the evacuation area were advised to close windows and doors and turn off air conditioning to avoid any contamination.



Lafayette is about three hours west of New Orleans.

***

(CNN) -- Armored cars patrolled the streets of Zimbabwe's capital and residents flocked to banks Thursday after limits on cash withdrawals were lifted in the inflation-ravaged African nation.

With prices rising even more than once a day, shopping is a mathematical proficiency test for Zimbabweans.

The Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe had capped maximum daily withdrawals at 500,000 Zimbabwean dollars -- about 25 U.S. cents, and about a quarter of the price of a loaf of bread. But faced with mounting chaos in a country already in economic free fall, the bank decided last week to raise that limit to 100 million dollars ($50 U.S.) per week.

Soldiers were deployed to all banks in anticipation of throngs of people lining up to withdraw money Thursday, when the increase took effect. Wednesday, police chased depositors away and arrested union leaders who planned to protest the limits.

Zimbabwe's inflation rate of 231 million percent is the world's highest. In addition, the country is faced with a growing outbreak of cholera that its government declared a national emergency Thursday.

The outbreak has killed at least 565 people and sickened more than 11,000, the U.N. Humanitarian Affairs Office said. Medical professionals blame the resurgence of the water-borne disease on the lack of safe water in many parts of the country.

The Zimbabwe Congress of Trade Unions said 69 people were arrested across the country during Wednesday's demonstrations. Amnesty International has demanded to know the whereabouts of human rights activist Jestina Mukoko, whom it said was abducted at dawn Wednesday by armed men in plainclothes posing as police.

And angry, unpaid soldiers clashed with foreign currency exchangers and some civilians Monday, three days after troops who had failed to get cash from their banks looted shops they suspected to be illegally dealing in foreign currency.

***

(CNN) -- Four of O.J. Simpson's accomplices in the 2007 robbery at a Las Vegas hotel were given suspended sentences Tuesday by Nevada District Judge Jackie Glass.

District Court Judge Jackie Glass sentenced four O.J. Simpson codefendants to probation on Tuesday.

The four -- Charles Cashmore, Charles Erlich, Michael McClinton and Walter Alexander -- all turned on Simpson and cooperated in the case against him.

Simpson was sentenced last week to at least nine and as many as 33 years in prison in the case. Glass called him "arrogant" and "ignorant."

Before announcing the suspended sentences Tuesday, Glass said the actions of Cashmore, Erlich, McClinton and Alexander were "stupid but also criminal" when they accompanied the former football star to the Palace Station Hotel and Casino on September 13, 2007.

But she praised them for taking responsibility for their actions and for cooperating with the state's case against Simpson.

Should they violate the terms of their probation, the four could face prison time ranging from 12 months to 84 months, depending on the specific charges against them.

The four apologized to the state and the victims in the case before their sentences were read in court Tuesday.

Simpson, a former Heisman Trophy winner and record-setting NFL running back, had enlisted the help of Cashmore, Erlich, McClinton and Alexander, along with Clarence "C.J." Stewart, in an effort to get sports memorabilia items that Simpson claimed belong to him from dealers Bruce Fromong and Al Beardsley.

The six men confronted the dealers in a hotel room, brandishing weapons but not firing them.

Stewart received a sentence similar to Simpson's but will be eligible for parole in 7Â½ years.  Watch how Simpson's conviction came down Â»

Glass ordered Fromong removed from the courtroom Tuesday after he made a comment during the sentencing of McClinton, who admitted brandishing a gun in the hotel room.

Glass still has to decide restitution in the case a schedule a hearing on that for Friday morning.

The four men sentenced Tuesday walked meekly from the courtroom to report to law enforcement officials and get details on their probation.

On Friday, Simpson was led from the courtroom in shackles. He'll remain jailed while an appeal is pending.

***

(CNN) -- Two men died Saturday morning when their pickup collided head-on with one of Trace Adkins' tour buses north of Shreveport, Louisiana.





Adkins was not on the bus, but five members of his band and crew suffered minor injuries, the country music singer's Web site said.





The bus was en route to Bossier City for a show at the CenturyTel Center. Adkins had already arrived at the venue when he heard the news, according to his Web site.





"This is a real tragedy," Adkins said in a statement. "Two people have been killed and I don't even know their names. So out of respect for their families, I prefer not to comment too much at this time."





Adkins said he would perform a scaled-down acoustic set at Saturday's show, which also featured singer Martina McBride. He will sit out a show in Pensacola, Florida, on Sunday.





Adkins began his music career more than a decade ago with a platinum-selling debut, and has released nine albums since then.





In 2008, he appeared on NBC's "The Celebrity Apprentice," and last year, ventured into the world of comic books with the launch of the four-part "Luke McBain," based on his likeness and persona.





He is also the author of a book, "A Personal Stand: Observations and Opinions from a Freethinking Roughneck."

***

(CNN) -- Two international journalists, along with their Somali colleague and a driver, were kidnapped Saturday, a journalists' organization in Somalia said.



A young fighter mans a gun on the beach of Kismayo. The photographer asked not be identified.



Amanda Lindhout, a Canadian journalist, and Nigel Brenan, an Australian photojournalist, had been in the country just three days when militia men snatched them outside the capital city of Mogadishu, the National Union of Somali Journalists said Sunday.



The kidnappers also took Abdifatah Mohammed Elmi, a Somalian photojournalist who was acting as the pair's translator, and their driver, the journalists' union said.



The four were on their way back after conducting interviews at a refugee camp.



Officials do not know if the journalists are being held for ransom and who is behind the abductions.



"No formal claim of responsibility was made," the journalists' group said. "As well, there have been no demands."



Somalia has been mired in chaos since 1991, when warlords overthrew dictator Mohamed Siad Barre and sparked brutal clan infighting. Somalia's current transitional government is trying to maintain control of the capital, with the help of Ethiopian forces.



On Friday, fighters from the Islamic group Al Shabab took control of the southern port town of Kismayo after three days of clashes. The fighting left at least 89 people dead, 207 wounded and displaced some 5,500 people, triggering a humanitarian crisis.



Ethiopia invaded Somalia in December 2006 to install the transitional government in Mogadishu after a decade and a half of near-anarchy. The invasion had the blessing of the United States, which accused Islamists of harboring fugitives from the al Qaeda terrorist movement.



But the Ethiopian troops quickly became embroiled in an insurgency led by the Islamists. And as guerrilla attacks mounted, efforts to replace the Ethiopians with an African Union-led peacekeeping mission faltered.



The conflict displaced hundreds of thousands of Somalis, further worsening a humanitarian crisis that dates back to the collapse of the country's last government in 1991.



The situation has been exacerbated by drought, continual armed conflicts in central and southern Somalia, and high inflation on food and fuel prices.

***

(CNN) -- German billionaire Adolf Merckle, one of the richest men in the world, committed suicide Monday after his business empire got into trouble in the wake of the international financial crisis, Merckle's family said Tuesday in a statement.

Merckle, 74, was hit by a train in the southwestern town of Ulm, police said.

His family said the economic crisis had "broken" Merckle.

He was number 94 on the Forbes list of the world's richest people. He had fallen from number 44 on the Forbes 2007 rich list as his fortune declined from $12.8 billion to $9.2 billion in 2008.

Merckle's business empire included interests as diverse as cement-maker HeidelbergCement and generic drug-maker Ratiopharm. But he lost hundreds of millions of dollars, including company capital, betting against Volkswagen stock last year.

The state government of Baden-Wuerttemberg rejected his petition for financial assistance, and he entered bailout talks with several German banks.

"The financial troubles of his companies, induced by the international financial crisis and the uncertainty and powerlessness to act independently which the financial problems brought about, broke the passionate family business man, and he took his own life," his family wrote in the news release.

An employee of Germany's railroad company found the body on the tracks at about 7 p.m. Monday and notified authorities. Merckle's family had already reported him missing earlier in the day after he walked out of the house and did not return. Authorities are currently conducting DNA tests to confirm his identity.

CNN's Frederik Pleitgen in Germany and Alysen Miller in London, England, contributed to this report.

***

(CNN)  -- Sea The Stars showed a blistering turn of pace to win the Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe and confirm his status as one of the greatest race horses in history.



Sea The Stars finishes clear of the field to win Europe's top horse race.



It was the fifth consecutive win for the three-year-old colt, including the 2,000 Guineas and English Derby, as he claimed Europe's premier flat race on Sunday.



Trained in Ireland by John Oxx, Sea The Stars was boxed in approaching the final furlong, but jockey Mick Kinane found a gap before bursting clear of the field.



He relegated Youmzain, ridden by the returning Kieren Fallon, into second place with seven-time Arc winning trainer Andre Fabre's Cavalryman, under Frankie Dettori, in third.



Breeders Cup Turf champion Conduit was finishing fast but could do no better than fourth.



Sea The Stars started as a 4-6 favorite and was supported by a huge following, being cheered to the rafters in the ring even prior to the race.



But the Aidan O'Brien-trained Set Sail and Grand Ducal set a blistering pace with the former leading by 15 lengths entering the home straight of the mile and a half (2,400 meters) race.



Unbeaten French filly Stacelita then hit the front before 50-year-old Kinane and the superstar Sea The Stars worked their magic to emulate his dam (mother) Urban Sea who won the race in 1993.

***

Madrid, Spain (CNN) -- A Spanish fishing boat repelled an attack by suspected pirates Sunday morning in the Indian Ocean off the African coast, Spain's ministry of defense said.





The Spanish Ortube Berria fishing vessel was in waters southwest of the Seychelles when pirates aboard two skiffs opened fire on the ship with light arms and a grenade shot from a launcher, according to a defense ministry news release. The Seychelles are a group of islands located north of Madagascar and southeast of Somalia, whose coastal waters have become known for piracy.





The attack happened at about 5:40 a.m., the ministry said.





A private security company aboard the fishing vessel returned fire and thwarted the attack, the statement said.





No one was injured, and the ship did not suffer any material damage.





Following the attack, the Ortube Berria was sailing southward away from the area, the defense ministry said.





Pirates have captured more than 50 ships this year off Somalia and are currently holding 11, according to information from Spanish Defense Minister Carme Chacon.





Earlier this month, the crew of another Spanish fishing boat, the Alakrana, was released by Somali pirates after 47 days in captivity.





The Alakrana was hijacked off the coast of Somalia.





On Sunday, the commander of a European Union anti-piracy operation, deployed a Portuguese frigate based in the area toward the site of the attack, Spanish authorities said.





CNN's Per Nyberg contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Two beloved giant pandas left the United States for their new homes in China on Thursday.





Three-year-old Mei Lan left Zoo Atlanta in Georgia early Thursday morning and was flown to Washington aboard a FedEx 777 christened the "Panda Express."





In Washington, the plane picked up Mei Lan's 4-year-old cousin, Tai Shan, who left Washington's National Zoo.





The pandas, which were on loan from China, are being repatriated to help replenish the endangered species' numbers. They will eventually take part in a breeding program in China. The National Zoo estimates that 1,600 giant pandas are left in the wild.





See photos of Tai Shan's departure





Kathleen Ryland of Highland, Maryland, brought her children to say goodbye to the Washington giant panda.





"We watched him as he grew up, and it's kind of sad to see him go," Ryland said.





iReport: National Zoo says goodbye to Tai Shan





The flight from Washington to China will be about 15 hours, said Dave Bronczek, president and CEO of FedEx.





A panda breeding center that one of the pandas was heading to was preparing, according to the newspaper China Daily.





Officials at the center were searching for a boyfriend for Mei Lan, the paper reported.





They were also searching for a Chinese language teacher so that Mei Lan could be taught to understand when she is told in Chinese to return to her cage.





"Mei Lan has been living in the United States since she was born, and she must be unfamiliar with Chinese, especially the Sichuan dialect," Huang Xiangming, a director of the breeding center, told the paper.





Tai Shan is headed to a different facility in China's Sichuan province.

***

Lima, Peru (CNN) -- Peruvian President Ollanta Humala has removed 30 of 55 generals in the national police, the largest such purge in the institution's history.





The forced retirements, which were announced in the official gazette over the weekend, are widely seen as an attempt by Humala to combat corruption.





Among those forced out was the head of the national police.





The new head of the police, Raul Salazar, mentioned the need to fight corruption no less than six times during a speech at his induction ceremony.





"We have to uncover any act of corruption that stains the name of the police. From the most minimal to the most important, it doesn't matter, same if one sol or more are stolen," he said, referring to Peru's currency.





In a separate interview on the state broadcaster Tuesday, Salazar said that fighting drug trafficking would remain a priority.





The move means that until new generals are named, many regions in Peru, including many in the interior of the country, will be led by colonels instead of generals, something that opposition politicians have criticized.





Critics also voiced concerns that the move was a ploy by Humala, as a new president, to place commanders loyal to him in the top posts.





His interior minister, Oscar Valdes, said Tuesday that the retirements had to do with a reorganization of a bloated institution, the state-run Andina news agency reported.





"This is a studied measure, it is a re-engineering of the police," he said. "It's not possible that the police has so many generals."





Before the purge, the police had 55 generals, 900 colonels, and more than 2,000 commanders, he said.





Journalist Maria Elena Belaunde contributed to this report.

***

(PEOPLE.com) -- Get ready to feel old.





Jonathan Lipnicki, the inquisitive tyke who charmed Tom Cruise's "Jerry Maguire" with his oversized glasses and musings on bees' ability to smell fear in the 1997 film, turned 21 Saturday.





The actor is celebrating the milestone birthday in Las Vegas with his parents, his sister, an aunt, three cousins and an assortment of friends.





The Lipnickis celebrated Friday with a dinner at Tao before arriving a little after midnight at the Surrender Nightclub at the Encore, where he enjoyed vodka cocktails with his buddies late into the night.





The party continued Saturday with a cake and dinner at Lavo.





Virtually unrecognizable since his days starring in films like "Stuart Little" and "Like Mike," Lipnicki has spent a bulk of his time since graduating high school three years ago studying and fiercely working out, spending six days a week weightlifting and training in jujitsu.





"I live in Hollywood," Lipnicki, who clocks in at 5'7" and 150 lbs., told PEOPLE in September. "Go three feet and you will run into someone more cut and better looking than me. For me working out is more about keeping my temperament great. Jujitsu and lifting keep me very even."





See the full article at PEOPLE.com.





© 2011 People and Time Inc. All rights reserved.

***

(CNN) -- EU border patrol missions are scouring the Italian shore in search of yet another missing vessel carrying North Africans attempting to reach Europe, a Maltese commander told CNN Thursday.



Many immigrants from Africa attempt to make the perilous journey across the Mediterranean in overcrowded boats.



On Friday, a French patrol frigate operating under Frontex, a EU border patrol mission, alerted Italian officials of new incoming vessels after sighting six corpses floating in the Mediterranean.



Maltese army officials were unable to recover the corpses because of poor weather conditions.



"Unrelated to these corpses cited, last Friday, we monitored a fiberglass boat that originated from North Africa carrying about 30 to 35 people on board," said Major Ivan Consiglio from Valletta, the Maltese capital.



"Its fate is uncertain," he said. "We have lost track of this boat."



Malta is a hub for immigrants from Africa trying to reach Europe.



Approximately 20,000 would-be immigrants have been apprehended on European shores just this year alone, according to Frontex figures.



But many do not survive the trek.



"These waters are like the American Wild West," Consiglio said. "So many boats try to cross with families and children and some never make it."



Humanitarian groups such the Dutch-based UNITED against Racism, which keeps records on immigration, say thousands of Africans have died trying to cross the Mediterranean and the Adriatic.



The trek between Sicily and Tunisia has been dubbed "a floating cemetery for African immigrants."



In August, 70 people died off the cost of Malta attempting to cross the Mediterranean.



On Wednesday, about 300 would-be immigrants were rescued during a storm in the Italian island of Lampedusa.



Consiglio said that a growing number of would-be immigrants are braving the waters of the Atlantic in overcrowded dingy boats -- a dangerous mission this time of the year.



"It's fall here, waters are choppy and covered with fog," he said. "Trips are becoming even riskier and these locally-manufactured fiberglass boats don't have the same rigidity."

***

BARCELONA, Spain -- Barcelona's Argentina striker Lionel Messi will be out of action for six weeks after tearing a muscle in his left leg during Tuesday night's 1-0 Champions League victory over Celtic.



Messi is helped off the pitch after injuring his left thigh during Tuesday's 1-0 victory over Celtic.



The Catalan club confirmed on Wednesday that Messi will miss both legs of Barcelona's Champions League quarterfinal encounter.



It will also be a race against time for the 2007 World Player of the Year runner-up to be fit for the semifinals if Barcelona get past an opponent who will be named after the draw on March 14.



Messi picked up the injury after 34 minutes during Barcelona's victory over the Scottish side, which booked their spot in the last eight by easing through 4-2 on aggregate.



It is third time in the last three years that Messi has had the same injury, the last occasion being on December 15 against Valencia, which ruled him out of the 'El Clasico' derby the following week against Real Madrid.



In addition to his chronic problems with his left thigh, Messi has had four other significant injuries in the last two years which have caused him to miss a month or more.



Barcelona coach Frank Rijkaard has been forced to defend the club's medical services in the wake of Messi's latest injury.



"To doubt that they are doing their best is an insult. The medical staff and the club in general are working to prevent these sort of problems. They are working hard but there is always a player that can be injured," said Dutchman Rijkaard.



Messi's injury reopens the door for Thierry Henry to claim his place in the starting lineup. The Frenchman has rarely impressed since his big-money move from Arsenal to the Spanish giants last summer.



Rijkaard also has other options to replace Messi on the right flank in the shape of Portuguese international Deco or teenage Mexican winger Giovanni Dos Santos. E-mail to a friend

***

KUALA LAMPUR, Malaysia (CNN) -- Malaysia will swear in a new prime minister Friday -- one tasked with reuniting a multi-racial nation and shoring up an economy in dire straits.



Outgoing Prime Minister Abdullah Ahmad Badawi, facing, hugs his successor, Najib Razak last week.



Until now, Najib Razak had served as the Southeast Asian country's deputy prime minister. He succeeds Abdullah Badawi who turned in his resignation after five years as leader.



Both are part of Malaysia's ruling party, the National Front Coalition, which has ruled the country since it gained independence from Britain in 1957.



But last year, a loose coalition of opposition parties won 82 of 222 parliamentary seats in elections. It was only the second time in the country's history that the ruling party failed to gain the two-thirds majority needed to amend the constitution.



The election upset led to calls for Abdullah to step down. Various challenges await Najib:



In recent months, the country has seen riots with the country's ethnic Chinese and Indian communities who accuse the government of passing laws that favor the Malay majority.



Najib has said he will do more to address their concerns.



The country, like other nations around the world, has been severely affected by the global economic downturn. Critics are demanding Malaysia diversify its technology-heavy economy.



Last month, Najib unveiled a multi-billion dollar stimulus plan for new spending, according to published reports.



Najib also brings with him a whiff of controversy. Two former bodyguards are facing charges in connection the murder of a Mongolian model. He has denied all links to the killing.

***

(CNN)  -- A mine exploded Monday on a road in southern Somalia, killing four people -- three members of the medical humanitarian group Medecins Sans Frontieres and a journalist.



Ongoing violence in Somalia has devastated the capital Mogadishu.



The incident occurred Monday along a road in Kismayo, the group said.



Victor Okumu, 51, a Kenyan doctor; Damien Lehalle, 27, a French logistician; and a Somali driver named Billan were the MSF workers who were killed.



Another member of the team was slightly wounded, the group said in a posting on its Web site.



"The exact circumstances of this fatal incident are not yet clear," the posting said.



Also killed was journalist Hassan Kafi Hared, 36. The remote-controlled mine erupted as he was walking to a news conference in Siyad Village in northern Kismayu, said the National Union of Somali Journalists (NUSOJ).



He was working for the government-run Somali National News Agency and a Somali Web site called gedonet.com. He is survived by a wife and three children.



"This is a targeted attack and we declare that this brutal killing on the journalist and the aid workers is an attack on the society itself," said NUSOJ Secretary General Omar Faruk Osman, in a news release.



"We demand that transitional government and the authorities in Kismayu to identify the culprits of this crime and bring them to justice" he said.



The medical humanitarian organization said it was evacuating remaining international members of it staff from Kismayu.



Hared is the second journalist to be killed this year, according to the Committee to Protect Journalists. The first, 38-year-old Norwegian reporter Carsten Thomassen, died Jan. 15 in a suicide bomb attack in Kabul.



In a written statement, a representative of U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon said he condemned the killings and "demands a thorough investigation by the authorities." E-mail to a friend

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates has signed a deployment order to move an additional 3,000 troops to Afghanistan next year, according to U.S. military officials.



Helicopters are the main transportation of the U.S. military in Afghanistan, with its high mountain terrain.



The troops will be part of a combat aviation brigade, the latest approved by Gates for the expected build-up of U.S. troops in Afghanistan throughout next year.



Earlier this year, the U.S. commander in Afghanistan, Gen. David McKiernan, requested at least 20,000 additional troops be sent there to fight the increasing violence by the resurgent Taliban forces in the southern and eastern parts of the country.



The officials could not say what units are being tapped to go because those units are now being told of their deployment and the announcement has not yet been made public.



The aviation brigade will send a number of much-needed helicopters to the region.



Helicopters are the main transportation of the U.S. military in Afghanistan, where high mountain roads and passes make it difficult for large transport vehicles to move troops and supplies around the country.



There are more than 30,000 U.S. troops in Afghanistan.  Meanwhile, a Dutch soldier was killed Friday in southern Afghanistan, the NATO command confirmed.



The soldier died in an improvised explosive device strike, according to a news release from NATO's International Security Assistance Force.



"Our sincere condolences and sympathies are with the family and friends of this brave soldier, especially during this holiday season," said ISAF spokesman Capt. Mark Windsor Royal Navy.



"This soldier's death is an irreplaceable loss to all of us who fight for the peace and stability of Afghanistan. ISAF will continue to fight for the cause for which this brave soldier gave his life."



Eighteen Dutch troops have died in the Afghan conflict, according to a CNN count of casualty figures.

***

(CNN) -- Unbeaten American Floyd Mayweather Jr claims he will knock out WBO welterweight world champion Manny Pacquiao when the two boxing giants lock horns next year.





Speaking on HBO TV's Joe Buck chat show, the 32-year-old Mayweather -- who has an unblemished record from 40 fights -- said: "Pacquiao's a good fighter but I've been around the sport a long time and I've dominated boxing for around 15 years now.





"Nobody has defeated me yet so we'll have to see. The thing is, I don't want the fans to be really shocked by what will happen when we do happen to meet up -- because it's not going to be anything new for them."





"The things is, Manny has been knocked out before and he's taken losses. I'll be victorious."





Filipino Pacquiao will come into the fight following a remarkable 12 months which has seen him defeat de la Hoya, Ricky Hatton and Miguel Cotto.





Meanwhile, Mayweather has fought only once in two years, a unanimous points victory over Juan Manuel Marquez in las Vegas.





Although definitive plans for the mega-money contest are yet to be confirmed, a date of March 13 is widely rumored to be agreed, with three possible venues in the running to stage the contest.





The two fighters are regarded as the best pound-for-pound boxers in the world right now and the fight is expected to generate record levels of interest, easily surpassing the previous record of $18.4m for gate receipts, which was generated for Mayweather's bout with Oscar De La Hoya in 2007.





Two NFL stadiums are reported to be bidding to host the fight. Cowboy Stadium in Arlington, Texas, home of the Dallas Cowboys, is competing with the Superdome in New Orleans, as well as the MGM Grand in Las Vegas.





The two stadiums could accommodate up to 100,000 spectators, while the MGM Grand seats about 16,000.

***

Baghdad, Iraq (CNN) -- A series of deadly bombings claimed more than a dozen lives in Iraq Saturday, according to police and health officials.





Seven people were killed and 28 others wounded when three roadside bombs exploded mid-morning in the busy Bab al-Sharji commercial district of central Baghdad, police officials said.





Another six men died and 10 others were injured when a roadside bomb hit a minibus carrying young laborers and construction workers in al-Annaz area in eastern Falluja, health and police officials said.





The blast occurred at about 5.30 a.m. local time in what is a predominately Sunni area.





"The victims were traveling every day in a minibus from Abu Ghraib to Falluja to work in a number of reconstruction sites," police officer Ahmed Salman told CNN.





Meanwhile, the Iraqi army held a military parade in Falluja, sending hundreds of Iraqi soldiers accompanied by military vehicles through the main streets of the town Saturday morning, police told CNN.





The military parade was part of preparations for the Iraqi army to take over full responsibility for security after U.S. troops leave Iraq on December 31 this year.





Violence in Iraq has declined from its peak, but attacks around the country continue to cause deaths and injury.





On Thursday, 19 people were killed and dozens others were hurt when three explosions hit a commercial district in Basra, an oil-rich, predominantly Shiite city about 500 kilometers (310 miles) south of Baghdad.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN)  -- The State Department called the expulsion of the second U.S. diplomat from Ecuador in just over a week "unjustified," rejecting charges the diplomats meddled in Ecuador's internal affairs.





First Secretary Mark Sullivan has been given 48 hours to leave the U.S. embassy in Quito, Ecuador.





On Wednesday, the Ecuadorian government expelled First Secretary Mark Sullivan, whom it accused of meddling in the government's internal police policies, giving him 48 hours to leave the country.





On February 7, the government expelled Armando Astorga, an attaché with the Department of Homeland Security working in the U.S. Embassy.





Acting Deputy Spokesman Gordon Duguid said the expulsions stem from the fact that certain Ecuadorian police were banned from taking part in U.S. counternarcotics training programs, but rejected "any suggestion of wrongdoing by embassy staff."





"Despite the government of Ecuador's unjustified actions, we remain committed to working collaboratively with Ecuador to confront narcotics trafficking," Duguid said.





Asked whether the State Department would reciprocate the expulsions by kicking out Ecuadorian diplomats from the United States, Duguid would say only, "We will respond as appropriate."





A senior State Department official suggested the police in Ecuador police did not meet the criteria to take part in the training, noting, "The United States does have procedures that require it to vet candidates for U.S.-funded training."





The official added, "In some countries this is seen as onerous. However, it is part of the legal accountability measures we must follow."

***

(CNN) -- A Paris court has ordered eBay to pay $63 million damages to luxury goods company LVMH for allowing copies of its goods to be sold on the Web auction site.



Louis Vuitton took eBay to court for selling a range of fake luxury goods online.



The fashion company -- home to brands including Louis Vuitton, Givenchy, Fendi, Emilio Pucci and Marc Jacobs -- complained it had been hurt by the sale of fake products on eBay.



Pierre Godet, an adviser to LVMH Chairman and CEO Bernard Arnault, said the  court's decision was "an answer to a particularly serious question, on whether the Internet is a free-for-all for the most hateful, parasitic practices."



eBay said LVMH was trying to crack down on Internet auctions because it was uncomfortable with its business model, which puts sellers rather than brands in control.



"If counterfeits appear on our site, we take them down swiftly," eBay spokeswoman Sravanthi Agrawal said.



"But today's ruling is not about counterfeits. Today's ruling is about an attempt by LVMH to protect uncompetitive commercial practices at the expense of consumer choice and the livelihood of law-abiding sellers that eBay empowers every day."



She said eBay intended to appeal the ruling.



The case pit two pillars of their industries -- one old, one new -- in a country whose courts often challenge Internet companies on matters protected elsewhere by freedom of speech.



The ruling faulted eBay for "guilty negligence" for not doing enough to prevent fake goods from being sold on its site.



The court also ruled that eBay was responsible for the "illicit sale" of perfumes from the LVMH empire, which can be sold only through the brands' "selective distribution networks."



The court barred eBay from running ads for the perfume and cosmetic brands or  face a fine of $79,000 per day.



Heather McDonald, partner at law firm Baker Hostetler, said: "eBay has policies and procedures in place where they will intervene in an action between a buyer and seller if there's a problem, and they profit directly on the basis of every item that is sold on their Web site.



"This gives them an affirmative obligation to take steps to make sure that illegal goods aren't sold, and they certainly have the ability to do that.



"They have been able to make sure that you can't buy a handgun and they have been able to make sure that you cannot buy pornography or prescription narcotics or other medicines on eBay.



"They have the ability to do this, they have just chosen not do and to rest the entire burden of policing eBay on the shoulders of the trademark and copyright holders whose rights are being infringed here."

***

(CNN) -- Peruvian soccer star Paolo Guerrero has been punished with a record fine by his German club Hamburg for throwing a water bottle into the face of a fan who he claimed had insulted him.





The striker made a public apology on Monday, but could face further disciplinary action from the German Football Association on Tuesday.





The incident happened at the end of Hamburg's 0-0 draw with relegation-threatened Hannover on Sunday, a result which dented Guerrero's team's hopes of qualifying for European competition next season.





"I had a blackout," the 26-year-old told Hamburg's official Web site. "I was insulted and I over-reacted. "I am incredibly sorry. I hope that I get the opportunity to apologize personally to the spectator concerned.





"I have already done so to HSV. Of course I will accept any punishment from the club. I made a big mistake."





Chairman Bernd Hoffmann said Guerrero's behavior was "absolutely unacceptable."





"Something like that is not allowed to happen. Paulo will be heavily fined by us. He has assured us believably how sorry he is."





The amount of the fine has not been disclosed, but Hoffman told German football magazine Kicker that it would be "the like of which there has never been in the club."





Ralf Bednarik of the Hamburg Supporters' Board told the club's Web site that fans should accept Guerrero's apology.





"Players have to deal with criticism," he said. "But Paolo Guerrero has apologized for his behavior. Now it's up to us all to reappraise the things and to jointly look into the future."





Guerrero has played 24 times for his country, but missed many of the 2010 World Cup qualifiers after suffering injuries and being handed a six-game suspension for abusing a referee. Peru finished bottom of the South American group.





He moved to Hamburg in 2006 after beginning his Bundesliga career at Bayern Munich, and played as a second-half substitute against Hannover after recently returning to action following seven months on the sidelines with a knee injury.

***

Mexico City (CNN) -- Authorities found two severed heads along a highway in Mexico City on Monday morning, the city's attorney general said.





The heads were inside a car near the border dividing the city from neighboring Mexico state, Attorney General Miguel Mancera told reporters. The nation's defense ministry was also nearby.





A lengthy message was left beside the heads, Mancera said, detailing that a drug gang known as "The Hand With Eyes" was responsible.





"It ends saying that the territory of 'The Hand With Eyes' is so extensive that it has reached the metropolitan area and hasn't disappeared," Mancera said.





Police in Mexico City arrested the gang's suspected leader, Oscar Osvaldo Garcia, also known as "The Hand With Eyes," in August.





Mancera said Monday that authorities remained committed to tracking down members of the gang and stopping its growth.





Authorities were still working Monday to identify the victims.





Beheadings have become a signature sign of the brutally violent turf battles between drug cartels that have plagued cities across Mexico.





Last week authorities in the beach resort city of Acapulco made a similar discovery, finding five severed human heads inside a small wooden crate, Guerrero state authorities said.





But such violence is rare in the country's capital.





"Mexico City has been surprisingly calm in the midst of the turbulence of this conflict with organized crime, while other major cities are experiencing major upturns in violence," said Eric Olson, a security expert at the Mexico Institute of the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars in Washington. "It hasn't exploded the way it has (elsewhere). There's always that fear of that happening, because there's nothing to guarantee that it won't."





CNN's Krupskaia Alis, Rene Hernandez, Rafael Romo and Catherine E. Shoichet, and CNNMexico.com contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Chile's Supreme Court has ruled that former Peruvian President Alberto Fujimori can be extradited to Peru on five corruption and two human rights abuse charges.





Former Peruvian President Alberto Fujimori has denied all allegations, calling them politically motivated.





Alberto Chaigneau, a court judge, made the announcement about the order on Chilean TV on Friday.





Gabriel Zaliasnek, Fujimori's defense attorney, later said that the "decision of the Supreme Court should be respected and will be respected."





It is not known when the extradition will take place. But the wheels for extradition were set in motion a couple of months ago.





A Chilean prosecutor in June recommended that Fujimori be extradited to Peru to face the charges.





He was then placed under house arrest in his home in the suburbs of the Chilean capital, Santiago while awaiting a Supreme Court ruling.





Before moving to Chile, Fujimori had fled Peru for Japan, where he holds dual citizenship, as his decade-long presidency neared its end in 2000.





Japan refused to honor Peru's request to return him for trial, saying its nationals should be subject to Japanese law and pointing out the two countries have no extradition treaty.





He attempted to resign from the presidency by fax from Japan, but Peru's congress refused to accept it, instead declaring him morally unfit to govern.





He arrived in Chile in 2005, in what some saw as a possible attempt to return to Peru and seek office there in 2006. He was under house arrest for six months in Chile, but authorities lifted the restriction last year on the condition he not leave the country.





Peru has alleged Fujimori ordered death-squad killings and participated in various acts of government corruption. He has denied all the allegations, calling them politically motivated. E-mail to a friend

***

SANTIAGO, Chile (Reuters) -- Chile called home its ambassador in Peru on Monday, as a dispute flared over disputed maritime territory between the South American neighbors.



They have bickered over the rich Pacific coast fishing waters for years, and Peru published a new map on Sunday that pushes its bid to negotiate a new sea border.



Chile's government protested the move and said it was calling home its ambassador in Peru, Cristian Barros, for consultations.



"We feel that this type of publication (map) and this position certainly make more difficult a fluid bilateral relationship with the Peruvian government," spokesman Ricardo Lagos Weber said on Monday.



"Chile will continue to fully exercise its rights and competencies over Chilean territory," he said.



Peruvian President Alan Garcia said in June his country would take Chile to the International Court at The Hague to resolve the case.



Peru's foreign minister, Jose Antonio Garcia Belaunde, sought to downplay the row.



"It is an absolutely common diplomatic practice in novel situations like this that garner attention that ambassadors are called (back to report)," he said.



"The channels of dialogue and communication must be kept open, and the countries must work toward a positive agenda," Garcia Belaunde said.



The sea border, set in the 1950s, starts close to the land border and cuts due west across the ocean. But Peru says it was non-binding and rob it of 14,630 square miles (37,900 sq km) of fishing waters.



Its proposed border is a southwestern sloping line that follows the diagonal land border into the Pacific Ocean.



Analysts say Peru will have its day in court and the Hague is the only venue for the issue to be resolved, unless something happens to escalate the debate.



"The only thing that could happen, which would be very worrisome, would be if some autonomous group carried out some kind of act of sovereignty (in those waters) now that Peru officially claims them. That would be a shame," said Ricardo Israel, a political analyst in Chile.



Chile defeated Peru in the 1879-1883 War of the Pacific and seized a chunk of mineral-rich territory from its northern neighbor. The two countries have strong economic ties but relations are still rocky.



The dispute over their sea border has bubbled anew over the past two years and comes in addition to less serious disputes over the origins of everything from a dessert and a fruit to pisco, a grape liquor.



Peru and Chile are the world's top producers of fish meal, a cattle feed, and fishing is one of the engines of Peru's economy. E-mail to a friend

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Despite a bleak economic environment featuring wide-ranging layoffs and rising unemployment, the nation's premier law enforcement agency is touting "one of the largest hiring blitzes in our 100-year history."



The FBI is about to embark on its biggest hiring spree since immediately after the September 11, 2001.



The FBI posted openings for 850 special agents and more than 2,100 professional support personnel. Officials say it's the largest FBI job posting since immediately after the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.



The FBI's unexpectedly large number of job openings results more from attrition and a wave of retirements than from growing government appropriations, Bureau officials told CNN.



The FBI routinely advertises openings for individuals with critical skills in computer science and language fluency. But John Raucci, assistant director of the FBI's Human Resources Division, says current needs are much more wide-ranging.



"We're also looking for professionals in a wide variety of fields who have a deep desire to help protect our nation from terrorists, spies and others who wish us harm," Raucci said.



The lengthy list of openings includes positions in finance and accounting, security, intelligence analysis, training and education, nursing and counseling, physical surveillance, electrical engineering, physical and social sciences, and auto mechanics.



Procedures for applying and a full listing of available positions are posted on the Web site fbijobs.gov.



"This is a great time to apply for a great job in the FBI," said the bureau's chief spokesman, Richard Kolko.



Officials note at least a few jobs are currently available in every one of the FBI's 56 field offices across the nation.



The FBI lists openings throughout the year, but seldom has anything close to the current number of available positions.



The present job postings expire on January 16, but a new, possibly smaller set of openings will be posted shortly thereafter, the agency said.

***

(CNN) -- Two Americans and an Israeli were awarded the Nobel Prize in chemistry on Wednesday for painstakingly mapping out the thousands of atoms that make up the ribosome -- work that paves the way for new antibiotics.



U.S. researcher Thomas Steitz is one of three scientists sharing the 2009 Nobel Prize in chemistry.



Inside all animals, plants and bacteria are DNA molecules that contain the blueprint for life. Ribosomes are an organism's protein factories. They use the information in the DNA to make the tens of thousands of proteins that enable the organism to function properly.



These proteins include hormones, enzymes and hemoglobin, which transports oxygen.



From a medicinal standpoint, the ribosome is important because it is what antibiotics target.



In a bacterial strain, antibiotics bind to the ribosomes, preventing them from making the proteins the bacteria need to survive.



Americans Venkatraman Ramakrishnan and Thomas Steitz and Israeli Ada Yonath shared the $1.4 million prize for mapping the position of the thousands and thousands of atoms that make up ribosomes. Their three-dimensional models showed how different antibiotics bind to the ribosome.



"These models are now used by scientists in order to develop new antibiotics, directly assisting the saving of lives and decreasing humanity's suffering," said the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, which awards the prize.



Ramakrishnan, a U.S. citizen who was born in India, is a senior scientist and group leader at MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology in Cambridge, England, according to the Nobel Prize Web site.



Steitz is a professor at Yale University and an investigator at Howard Hughes Medical Institute at Yale, the site said.



Yonath is a professor at the Weizmann Institute of Science in Rehovot, Israel, and director of the Helen & Milton A. Kimmelman Center for Biomolecular Structure & Assembly at the Weizmann Institute, the Nobel site said.



The Nobel Prizes are being awarded this week and next. The medicine award was handed out on Monday and the one for physics on Tuesday.



The prize for literature will be awarded Thursday; the Nobel Peace Prize winner will be named on Friday, and the award in economics will be issued on Monday.

***

(CNN) -- The teenage niece of golf superstar Tiger Woods has failed to make the cut in her first professional tournament.



Cheyenne Woods was handed entry into the Wegmans tournament on a sponsor's invite.



Cheyenne Woods was four strokes shy of qualifying for the weekend rounds of the LPGA Tour's Wegmans event at Locust Hill in Rochester, New York.



The 18-year-old had to complete her second round on Saturday along with half of the 140-player field due to delays of almost five hours following thunderstorms in the area.



Competing on a sponsor's invite, the college amateur followed up her opening 75 with a two-over-par 74 to be well down the field.



She had been two-under for the round after 10 holes on Friday, but fell back again with a triple-bogey at the par-four 12th before finishing strongly with a birdie.



Cheyenne is the daughter of world No. 1 Tiger's half-brother, Earl Jnr.



Defending champion Eun-Hee Ji also missed the cut after completing a 71 which saw her seven over the card.



South Korean Shin Jiyai had led by three strokes overnight after posting a 68 which gave her a 36-hole total of  11-under-par 133.



However, Morgan Pressel reduced that advantage to just a single stroke when she picked up two birdies to complete a 66, leaving her one shot ahead of third-placed fellow American Stacy Lewis.

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN) -- For Miley Cyrus, star of Disney's popular television series "Hannah Montana" and its big-screen adaptation "Hannah Montana: The Movie," art is not far from real life.

Miley Cyrus, here in "Hannah Montana: The Movie," says filming in Tennessee was relaxing.

The 16-year-old actress and singer reconnected with her Southern roots for the filming of "Hannah Montana: The Movie." Traveling to Tennessee to shoot the movie, Cyrus said, helped keep her grounded.

"It actually gave me time to relax, and it was when my career was just starting to take off ... when I was just starting to travel," Cyrus said. "It was at a time when I needed to go back home and it couldn't have been more of a perfect time."

In the film, opening in theaters Friday, Cyrus plays Miley Stewart, a typical teenage girl who lives a double life as a famous pop star named Hannah Montana. Eventually, Hannah begins taking over Miley's life, leading Miley to take a soul-searching journey back home to decide what she really wants: notoriety or normality.

Miley shares the screen with her father, country musician Billy Ray Cyrus, who felt that a trip home would be beneficial to his daughter.  Watch Miley and Billy Ray discuss the film »

"This is definitely an example of art imitating life imitating art. ... It's so important to be aware of where you're at and be focused on where you're going but, more importantly, never forget where you came from," the elder Cyrus said. "You can't fake going home. That was her home."

Both on-screen and off, Miley said, she and her father share a close friendship, calling herself a "daddy's girl 100 percent."

Between the endless tabloid headlines and the paparazzi's persistence, keeping friends and family near at hand, Miley said, helps remind her of who she really is: "I think just have good friends, good family and a good team. That's what people miss the most, just having a good team."

Co-star Lucas Till, who plays Miley's love interest in the film, remarked on Miley's down-to-earth personality.

"She's really nice and really [endearing], and she really cares about people," he said. "She's a good friend, very loyal."

The two shared an on-screen kiss that, Till said, "could have been more meaningful."  Watch Till talk about kissing Cyrus »

"There was a lot more there to that kiss than you see," he said.

Asked whether Till was a good kisser, Miley replied, "Meh, he's OK. No, I'm just kidding. I don't know. I think I was too busy thinking about my next line to think about it."

During her film's opening weekend, Miley is planning on surprising select audiences at undisclosed theater locations across the country. Moviegoers who see "Hannah Montana: The Movie" this weekend could also be treated to surprise appearances by stars of the film, live performances and more.

Miley said she was excited to give back to her fans. "I have the best fans in the world," she said.

After playing "Hannah" for three years, Miley said, she's not ready to quit anytime soon.

"I can't be Hannah until I'm 30, but I want to keep doing it as long as possible," she said.

CNN's JD Cargill and CNN.com's Elham Khatami contributed to this article.

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- Consumer advocates Wednesday hailed the settlement of a class-action lawsuit over Sears stoves in which the retailer agreed to install safety brackets for free to prevent the appliances from tipping over or provide other reimbursements.

Stoves in danger of tipping over can be fixed for free under terms of a settlement announced Wednesday.

According to the court-approved agreement, Sears will notify nearly 4 million customers who may have bought stoves between July 2000 and September 2007 that they either can get anti-tip safety brackets installed for free or receive gift cards or reimbursements of up to $100 to qualifying customers.

The brackets keep the appliances bolted to the floor or wall to prevent them from tipping over. Such accidents have caused more than 100 deaths or injuries, mostly from scalding and burns, according to the nonprofit consumer group Public Citizen.

The value of the settlement depends on how many customers respond to Sears' offer, but Public Citizen said it could end up costing the retailer more than $545 million.  Watch to see if your stove is in danger of tipping Â»

In addition to paying $17 million in legal fees, Sears will install brackets on all new stoves for free for the next three years.

"This agreement by Sears and the lawyers for the consumer is a real deal," said Joan Claybrook, president of Public Citizen. "This is a fantastic deal for a lawsuit to make this headway and get the protection for the consumer."

Sears Holdings Corp. spokesman Chris Brathwaite said the plaintiffs' counsel is overestimating the settlement's monetary value.

"The parties dispute many aspects of the case, including the value on this settlement -- which Sears estimates to be a small fraction of what plaintiffs' counsel estimates," Brathwaite said in a statement.

Claybrook and other consumer advocates said they would like the Consumer Product Safety Commission to require anti-tip brackets for all stove installations. Installing brackets is now voluntary.

Claybrook said the agreement "sets a model for what the Consumer Product Safety Commission should do and should have done. They've known about it for 25 years and done nothing."

She said an amendment requiring anti-tip stove devices should be added to Senate legislation intended to beef up the safety commission.

Commission spokeswoman Patty Davis disagreed, saying, "The statistics and risk do not support mandatory rule-making at this time. We believe the voluntary standards are working."

Brathwaite said customers can visit the Web site  http://www.searsrangesettlement.com/ for information. E-mail to a friend

***

BAGHDAD, Iraq (CNN) -- Imams delivering their Friday sermons in Iraq are denouncing the shooting of a Quran, the holy book of Islam, by a U.S. soldier.



Col. Ted Martin kisses a copy of the Quran before presenting it to tribal leaders Saturday.



"If we were strongly united from the beginning, that silly-minded American soldier wouldn't have used the Quran as a target," said Sheikh Ahmed Abdul-Ghafour al-Samarie, delivering a sermon at Um al-Qura Sunni Mosque in Baghdad.



The U.S. military and President Bush have apologized, but it did not stem the violent protests in Afghanistan and calls from both Sunni and Shiite Iraqis for the soldier to be severely punished.



Muslims around the world were angered when it came to light last week that an American staff sergeant -- a sniper section leader -- had used a Quran for target practice in Iraq.



Imams at mosques in the largely Sunni cities of Falluja and Mosul, and in Baghdad, condemned the act.



The Baghdad mosque prayer was broadcast live on state TV.



"This soldier put the head of his state in embarrassment that he had to apologize to the prime minister. We call upon this soldier to be punished. This act, we reject and we stand against it," al-Samarie said.



He said if a similar incident happened again, "the world will turn upside down and things will not go back to how they were."  Watch residents of Baghdad protest »



Sayyed Muhanned al-Mossawi, a Shiite imam at al-Hakma mosque, said: "We condemn and denounce the criminal act by the American soldier in Radhwaniya in tearing the Holy Quran and using it as a shooting target."



Friday's prayer service is the most important Muslim event of the week.



The U.S. commander in Baghdad issued a formal apology Saturday and read a letter of apology from the shooter.  Watch the U.S. military formally apologize »



The sergeant has been relieved of duty as a section leader, officially reprimanded by his commanding general, dismissed from his regiment and reassigned to the United States, the U.S. military said.



Iraq's most powerful Sunni Arab party, the Iraqi Islamic Party, has demanded the "severest of punishments" for the American soldier.



CNN's Mohammed Tawfeeq and Saad Abedine contributed to this report.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Seven emergency medics in England have been suspended from work for playing an Internet game that involves being photographed lying down in unusual places.



The lying down should be as public as possible and as many people as possible should be involved.



Bosses at a hospital in Swindon, western England, were angered after photographs of the doctors and nurses lying face down on resuscitation trolleys, ward floors and an air ambulance helipad were posted on social networking site Facebook.



The photographs have been removed from the site and the members of the hospital's accident and emergency staff now face a disciplinary hearing.



Partipants in the "lying down game" must lie face down with the palms of their hands against their sides and the tips of their toes touching the ground. Should the medics have been suspended? Send us your views



There are two aims to the challenge: that the lying down should be as public as possible and that as many people as possible should be involved.



But Dr. Alf Troughton, medical director of Great Western Hospital NHS Trust, was unamused by the alleged incident, which he said took place during a night shift last month.



"This did not involve patients and we are satisfied that at no time was patient care compromised," Dr. Troughton said in a statement.



"The Great Western Hospital sets high standards for staff behaviour at all times and therefore takes any such breaches extremely seriously. It is important to reassure patients and our workforce that this was an isolated incident and staff cover was maintained at all times.



"The allegations have been thoroughly investigated and seven members of staff remain suspended pending formal disciplinary hearings."

***

(CNN) -- Hundreds of people filled a college auditorium Wednesday to pay their last respects to an El Reno, Oklahoma, woman slain along with her four children last week.



Summer Rust's children -- clockwise from top, Autumn, Kirsten, Evynn and Teagin -- carve pumpkins.



About 300 people attended the service at Redlands Community College for Summer Rust, 25; her son, Teagin, 4; and daughters Evynn, 3, and Autumn and Kirsten, both 7, CNN affiliate KOCO reported.



Rust's white coffin was placed in front of the podium, flanked by the smaller caskets carrying her children.



Each casket had a picture of the victim, surrounded by flowers. A slide show of the family played on an overhead screen throughout the service.



"I've preached a lot of funerals, but none like this one," said the Rev. Gerald Van Horn.



"This has been on my heart ever since I heard about it. I first learned of it from the news, and I said, 'In El Reno? No way.' ... We don't have to deal with tragedy very often, but it has come, and the reality of it has sunk in. Searching my heart on what to say, I have found it difficult."



He told mourners that God is near and feels their pain but acknowledged that Rust and her children "will be greatly missed."



The bodies were found January 12 in Rust's apartment in El Reno, about 30 miles west of Oklahoma City.



According to the document, each of the victims was suffocated and strangled. Crime scene investigators said each body had ligature marks around the neck.



Rust's boyfriend, Joshua Steven Durcho, 25, admitted choking her to death but said the children were not there at the time, according to an affidavit filed last week.



He was arrested in Hamilton County, Texas, officials said. A spokeswoman at the Canadian County, Oklahoma, Sheriff's Office said Durcho was being held in the county jail after waiving extradition.



Durcho's cousin found Rust's body and called officers, who found the children's bodies in the apartment, says an affidavit written by a special agent with the Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation.



An apparent acquaintance of Durcho's told police he came to her apartment Monday afternoon and told her he had "choked" Summer Rust to death and he was leaving Oklahoma, according to the affidavit.



The affidavit says Durcho told the woman "that the children were at their grandmother's residence ... while he and Summer worked out their relationship problems."



Rust's mother, Susan Rust of Carson City, Nevada, said Durcho was unemployed and had been living with Rust and her children.



Authorities in Texas said Durcho was arrested after a state trooper attempted to stop his car because the trooper suspected that the driver was drunk. When the trooper ran the license plate on the car, it matched the tag number of a vehicle sought by Oklahoma police.

***

NEW DELHI, India (CNN) -- Tibetan exile leaders, meeting in northern India to debate a potential new approach to Tibet's decades-long struggle for autonomy, have voted to stay with the Dalai Lama's current "middle way approach," according to a spokesman for the spiritual leader.



Some have sought Tibet's independence from China, but the Dalai Lama has sought autonomy.



"The majority of the people have spoken and have requested his holiness the Dalai Lama to continue with his middle way approach," said spokesman Tenzin Taklha.



The meeting was called after the Dalai Lama acknowledged he had failed in his efforts to convince China to restore the territory's autonomy. He did not attend the week-long conference in Dharamsala, a town in the hills of north India where he lives in exile. He called the meeting, he said, to offer the exiles an opportunity to discuss "the best possible future course of action" for Tibet.



Takhla said the Tibetans demonstrated that the Dalai Lama was their undisputed leader, and they hoped China would recognize him as such and negotiations toward a realistic solution could be held.



There was a small minority who said they wanted to demand Tibet's independence, Takhla said.



The "middle way" approach with Beijing is one in which Tibetans want a level of autonomy that will allow them to protect and preserve their culture, religion and national identity. In exchange, China could continue to claim Tibet as part of its territory.



Some in Tibet have advocated independence from China, but the Dalai Lama has long called for genuine autonomy.



Tibet is technically autonomous from the central Chinese government, but the Dalai Lama and others have said they favor real autonomy and resent the slow erosion of their culture amid an influx of Han Chinese, the largest ethnic group in China.  Learn about Tibet's history of conflict »



The resentment spilled over in March, when Buddhist monks initiated peaceful anti-Chinese protests in the Tibetan capital of Lhasa. The demonstrations began March 14, the anniversary of a failed 1959 uprising against Beijing's rule that sent the Dalai Lama into exile.



The protests soon turned violent, with demonstrators burning vehicles and shops. Some protesters advocated independence from China, while others demonstrated against the growing influence of the Han Chinese in Tibet and other regions of China with ethnic Tibetan populations. The subsequent crackdown left 18 civilians and one police officer dead, according to the Chinese government. Tibet's self-proclaimed government-in-exile put the death toll from the protests at 140.



China blamed the Dalai Lama and his followers for the March riots -- a charge he has consistently denied.

***

NEW DELHI, India (CNN) -- Facing intense government pressure, Indian oil workers agreed to call off a three-day strike and go back to work, the Oil and Petroleum Ministry announced.





Long queues at gas stations have become a common sight across India in recent days.





The workers ended the strike Friday, after the government threatened to suspend, fire or arrest workers who did not return to their jobs.





The impact of the strike had been felt across all major cities in India, including Mumbai and New Delhi, where motorists waited in long lines to purchase fuel. Police had been called in to maintain order at many stations.





Power plants that rely on gas ran out, causing power cuts, and airlines were forced to delay flights.





Some 45,000 workers walked off the job at the government-controlled oil companies Wednesday after the government refused their demands for higher pay.





India's Home Minister P. Chidambaram had called on workers to end the strike immediately, saying it was "placing an intolerable burden on the people."





He had said the army could be called in if the crisis deepened.





Meanwhile, a separate nationwide strike by truck operators entered its sixth day, with some truck operators saying arrested strikers had to be released before talks could take place, the Press Trust of India reported.





Five All India Motor Transport Congress leaders were arrested Friday on charges of disrupting the supply of commodities, the Indo-Asian News Service reported.





"We will not give up our agitation and will not hold any talks with the government until we are released unconditionally," AIMTC Secretary-General S. Venugopal told the news service.





The AIMTC is demanding a reduction in diesel and tire prices, the Indo-Asian News Service reported.





On Saturday, the transport minister, Thiru T.R. Baalu, said the government was "ready to discuss" the truck operators' demands, the news service reported.





However, he warned the government could suspend or revoke workers' permits, according to a summary of his remarks released by the government.





-- CNN's Sara Sidner and Bharati Naik contributed to this report.

***

(CNN)  -- Brendon Pelser said he saw pure terror in the faces of his fellow passengers after an engine fell from a wing as it took off from Cape Town, South Africa, Wednesday.



Men were sweating profusely, women were crying.



"There was fear on their faces," Pelser said. "Everyone started panicking."



But the pilot of Nationwide Airlines' Boeing 737 Flight CE723 was able to fly long enough to dump fuel and make an emergency landing at Cape Town International Airport.



Including crew, 100 hundred people were on the plane that departed at 3:50 p.m. on an hourlong flight to Johannesburg, South Africa. No one was injured.



The jet had only been in the air about 10 minutes before the engine fell.



"We heard something crash and bang, the plane veering left and right. A person on the right side said the engine was missing -- had broken clean off," said Pelser.  Watch Pelser describe how the flight crew told passengers to "prepare for the worst" »



"They flew us in very slowly. We were all prepared for the worst. We went into the fetal position, head between the legs," he said. "Then we hit the runway."



"I did kind of pray. I didn't want to die. I'm not really ready to die," the 33-year-old said.



An object had been sucked into the engine as the nose wheel lifted from the ground and officials are trying to identify it.



The engine-to-wing supporting structure is designed to release an engine "when extreme forces are applied," to prevent structural damage to the wing, Nationwide said on its Web site.



The airline described the incident as a "catastrophic engine failure."



As the nose wheel lifted from the ground, "the captain heard a loud noise immediately followed by a yaw of the aircraft (sideways slippage) to the right," the airline said in a news release.



The flight instruments showed the No. 2 engine on the right side had failed, it said.



Pelser said he spent the night in Cape Town, then flew back to Johannesburg where he lives, on the same airline.



Nationwide said the engine had undergone a major overhaul in March 2005 at "an approved Federal Aviation Authority facility in the U.S.A." and had flown only 3,806 hours since then.



"These engines typically achieve 10,000 hours between major overhauls," Nationwide Airlines' press release stated. E-mail to a friend

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Federal officials will travel to Standish, Michigan, on Thursday to tour a state prison that could be used to house terror suspects detained at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, U.S. government officials said Wednesday.



The prison in Standish, Michigan, is slated for closure but would stay open if Guantanamo detainees are sent there.



Among those who will check out the facility, the officials said, will be representatives from the departments of Defense and Homeland Security, the U.S. Marshals Service and the Bureau of Prisons.



One administration official stressed no decision has been made about where to relocate Guantanamo detainees. Multiple options are under consideration. That official added Thursday's visit is simply to gather information about the prison.



The prison in Standish is a maximum security facility slated for closure. Some local officials would like to see Guantanamo prisoners brought there as a way to keep the prison open and preserve jobs in an area with more than 20 percent unemployment.



Jerry Nelson, mayor pro tem of Standish, told CNN earlier this month that the area would lose 350 jobs if the prison closes.



"I think most people are for this," Nelson said. "Anything to keep the prison open."



Another location often mentioned for housing Guantanamo prisoners is a military prison at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas. Republican Sen. Sam Brownback and other officials vehemently oppose placing prisoners there.



"This local community has spoken loud and clear repeatedly," Brownback said in a news conference in Kansas this month. "They don't want the detainees here."



Administration officials have said they are looking at installations that could hold courtrooms for federal criminal trials as well as military commissions.



President Obama announced plans early in his presidency to close the U.S. military detention center at Guantanamo Bay by January. The center has 229 detainees.

***

(CNN) -- A gay rights group is welcoming the likely appointment of the world's first openly gay prime minister, Johanna Sigurdardottir of Iceland.

Protesters in Reykjavik celebrate the prime minister's resignation on Monday.

Sigurdardottir, the country's 66-year-old minister of social affairs and social security, is on track to succeed Prime Minister Geir Haarde, who resigned Monday following the collapse of the country's main banks, currency and stock market.

Negotiations are underway between Sigurardottir's Social Democratic Alliance Party and potential coalition partners. If they succeed, she will become interim prime minister until Iceland next goes to the polls, which must happen by May.

"We really warmly welcome that," said Gary Nunn, a spokesperson for Stonewall UK, a British gay-rights group. "At a time when we've just seen a black man elected to the highest office in America, it gives us hope that we will see an openly gay prime minister here some day."

"It really does matter. It is helpful" to have an openly gay prime minister, Nunn said. "We are trying to foster the ambition that young people can be anything they want to be."

Britain has only one openly lesbian member of Parliament, Angela Eagle of the Labour party, Nunn said. The United States currently has three openly gay members of Congress -- Democratic Reps. Tammy Baldwin of Wisconsin, Barney Frank of Massachusetts and Jared Polis of Colorado.

Stonewall considers it a higher priority to have significant numbers of openly gay lawmakers than an openly gay prime minister.

"For a head of state of to be gay is great and really encouraging, but it's really important for Parliament to represent the people it serves," he said.

Sigurdardottir has been a member of Iceland's Parliament for 30 years, and is in her second stint as minister of social affairs.

She started her career as a flight attendant for the airline that became IcelandAir. She was active in the flight attendants' labor union during her 11 years with the airline, according to her official resume.

Sigurdardottir briefly led her own political party, which merged with other center-left parties to form the Alliance party.

She would become Iceland's first female prime minister, although not the North Atlantic nation's first female head of state -- Vigdis Finnbogadottir became its fourth president in 1980.

Sigurdardottir lists author and playwright Jonina Leosdottir, 54, as her spouse on her ministry Web site. She has two children from an earlier marriage.

***

MEXICO CITY, Mexico (CNN)  -- Mexican authorities have detained the country's former drug czar on suspicion that he may have accepted $450,000 a month in bribes from drug traffickers, Mexico's attorney general said Friday.



Noe Ramirez Mandujano was in charge from 2006 through August of fighting organized crime in Mexico.



Noe Ramirez Mandujano was in charge from 2006 until this August of the attorney general's office that specializes in combatting organized crime.



Ramirez is accused of meeting with members of a drug cartel while he was in office and agreeing to provide information on investigations in exchange for the bribes, Attorney General Eduardo Medina Mora Icaza said at a news conference Friday.



The arrest was part of an ongoing investigation called "Operation Limpieza," or "Operation Cleanup," the attorney general said. The operation targets officials who may have passed information to drug cartels.



The arrest was announced Thursday night, four days after the house arrest of Ricardo Gutierrez Vargas, the director for International Police Affairs at Mexico's Federal Investigative Agency and the head of Mexico's Interpol office.



Authorities say more than 30 officials have been arrested since July in connection with the anti-corruption operation.



Interpol, which is based in France, announced Wednesday it is sending a team of investigators to Mexico to investigate the possibility that its communications systems and databases may have been compromised, a prospect raised by the arrest of Gutierrez, the top official working with the agency in Mexico.



"A war of master proportions" between authorities and narcotics traffickers and traffickers among themselves has left more than 4,300 dead so far this year, according to the Council on Hemispheric Affairs, an independent research and information organization. By comparison, the council said in a report this week, there were 2,700 drug-related deaths in 2007.



"Homegrown drug cartels operating from both within and outside the country are engaging in a vicious turf war to seize control of major trafficking corridors while engaging in almost open warfare against the mobilized forces of the state," the council said about what it calls "narco-fueled crime."



Mexican leaders have been trying to tamp down the violence by tightening controls on money-laundering and cracking down on corruption among local and municipal police forces infiltrated by drug traffickers. It may not be enough.



"Due to pervasive corruption at the highest levels of the Mexican government, and the almost effortless infiltration of the porous security forces by the cartel, an ultimate victory by the state is far from certain," the Hemispheric Council concludes.



Drug trafficking in Mexico is a $20 billion- to $50 billion-a-year industry, as much as the nation earns from tourism or remittances from Mexicans living in the United States, said Robert Pastor, a former National Security adviser to President Jimmy Carter and now a professor of international relations at American University in Washington. He has been studying Latin America for more than four decades.



"This is a huge industry with an extraordinary capacity to corrupt and intimidate the country. And they're doing both right now," said Pastor, also a former director of the Carter Center's Latin American and Caribbean Program.



The drug cartels are paying some Mexican officials bribes of $150,000 to $450,000 a month, authorities have said. This in a country where the per capita income is $12,500 a year and one of every seven Mexicans lives in poverty, according to the CIA World Factbook.

***

(CNN) -- India are poised to build a handy first-innings lead over South Africa after Virender Sehwag and Sachin Tendulkar scored centuries on the second day of the second cricket Test in Kolkata.





The home side, needing to win to level the series and retain their No. 1 ranking in the five-day game, reached 342-5 when bad light halted play early on Monday, having bowled the Proteas out for 296 in the morning session.





Opener Sehwag smashed a scintillating 165 off only 174 balls faced, hitting 23 boundaries and two sixes as he added 249 for the third wicket with Tendulkar.





The veteran Tendulkar extended his world record of Test tons to 47 as he took on the junior role, facing 206 deliveries for his 106.





Sehwag, who was dropped by J.P. Duminy on 47, had threatened South African Jacques Kallis's record for the fastest half-century but suffered a brief lull in run flow before passing the mark in just 41 deliveries.





He and Gautam Gambhir put on 73 for the first wicket in just 9.2 overs before the latter was run out for 25, then paceman Morne Morkel had Murali Vijay caught behind by stand-in wicketkeeper A.B. De Villiers for seven.





India reached lunch at 97-2 and Sehwag raced to three figures in only 87 balls for his 19th Test century as the duo batted through the middle session, going to tea at 232-2.





They both fell late in the day as part-time bowler Duminy removed Tendulkar and fellow spinner Paul Harris dismissed Tendulkar, then paceman Dale Steyn bowled Subramaniam Badrinath for one.





V.V.S. Laxman (9) and nightwatchman Amit Mishra (1) survived until stumps as India extended their lead to 46.





South Africa had resumed on 266-9 after a late collapse on Sunday, and tailenders Morne Morkel and Wayne Parnell added another 30 runs for a final-wicket stand of 35.





Left-arm seamer Zaheer Khan finally ended their resistance, trapping Parnell leg before wicket for 12 in his first over of the day to finish with figures of 4-90.





Spinner Harbhajan Singh claimed three wickets on Sunday.





Meanwhile, New Zealand reached 258-5 on a rain-hit opening day of the one-off Test against tourists Bangladesh in Hamilton.





The Kiwis slumped to 66-3 after Monday's start was delayed by an hour due to wet conditions, but Martin Guptill then added 60 with Ross Taylor (40) and an unbroken 100 with Brendon McCullum to guide the home team safely to stumps.





No. 3 batsman Peter Ingram crashed 42 off 47 deliveries before becoming the second of Rubel Hossain's three victims, but it was Guptill's more measured Test best score of 80 that anchored the innings.





The big-hitting McCullum kept the score ticking over as he celebrated his 50th Test with his 16th half-century, ending the day on 58 from 71 deliveries.

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- A store owner in New York who is being hailed as a hero after rescuing a 4-year-old boy from a burning building said he plans to visit the child in the hospital Friday.



Horia Cretan climbed up a fire escape and helped save a boy through the window of a burning building.



Horia Cretan, who owns an electronics store in the Bronx structure where the fire broke out, also hopes to meet Christopher's parents for the first time, he told CNN's "American Morning."



The boy is expected to recover, Cretan said. The child was taken to Jacobi Medical Center, where a nurse said she couldn't provide his condition.



Cretan, who moved to the United States from Romania 15 years ago, said he was inside his store Wednesday when he heard a child's screams. It was about 4 p.m., he said, about the time children play outside after getting out of school, but he said the screams he heard were "totally different."



He reached a fire escape and climbed to the fourth floor, where a firefighter handed the boy to him through a smoke-clouded window, video from the scene shows.



"What I was worried about is, is he still alive? Because his head just dropped, and he wasn't helping himself or helping me," Cretan said. "He just couldn't hold his weight and he was unconscious."



While the firefighter was handing over the boy, other crew members were trying to get into the building's main entrance to make their way to the apartment where the fire was, the store owner said.



Cretan covered himself and the boy with a blanket or curtain to shield themselves from falling debris and glass, which cut the boy on the leg.  Watch Cretan describe the rescue »



During the rescue, the boy's brother stood below, yelling, the rescuer said. Christopher was given oxygen on the ground and taken to the hospital.



Cretan said it wasn't the first time he rescued someone. He said he rescued his sister from a fire in Romania that killed their father. The 33-year-old Cretan said he was 12 years old at the time.



"It was a sad story, a tragic moment at the time," he said, referring to the Romanian incident.



"And you know, it had an impact on people around the neighborhood like it does right now. It's amazing. This just skyrocketed."



Cretan said he's received messages across the globe about the Bronx incident.



"This has become famous because somebody happened to be on the corner with the camera pretty much. You don't do things like this for merit. The merit in itself is you save somebody," Cretan said.



"And the whole community's just being great. Adopting me like a son, and I'm a part of a big family and I'm happy to have them in my life."

***

(CNN) -- James Cameron unveiled his much-hyped, wildly-anticipated 3D sci-fi epic "Avatar" to audiences in full in London Thursday.



Here's what the critics are saying about the Oscar-winner's first outing since "Titanic," the most successful film of modern times.



Todd McCarthy, Variety: The King of the World sets his sights on creating another world entirely in "Avatar," and it's very much a place worth visiting.



...delivers unique spectacle, breathtaking sights, narrative excitement and an overarching anti-imperialist, back-to-nature theme that will play very well around the world..."



Mike Goodridge, Screen International: ...once again takes cinema to a new level of remarkable spectacle ...



An epic film born entirely of Cameron's imagination, "Avatar" uses tailor-made technology to create the most astonishing visual effects yet seen on screen and blends them seamlessly into a mythical sci-fi story about an ancient alien civilization fighting the encroaching human menace.



It's an unprecedented marriage of technology and storytelling which is on the whole remarkably successful.



Chris Hewitt, Empire: It's been twelve years since "Titanic," but the King of the World has returned with a flawed but fantastic tour de force that, taken on its merits as a film, especially in two dimensions, warrants four stars.



However, if you can wrap a pair of 3D glasses round your peepers, this becomes a transcendent, full-on five-star experience that's the closest we'll ever come to setting foot on a strange new world.



Wendy Ide, The Times: "Avatar" is an overwhelming, immersive spectacle. The state-of-the-art 3D technology draws us in, but it is the vivid weirdness of Cameron's luridly imagined tropical otherworld that keeps us fascinated.



At times it verges on the tacky, like a futuristic air freshener advertisement with the color contrast turned up to the max. The ethically accented orchestral score certainly doesn't help matters.



But mostly, it's a place of wonder full of exotically freakish animal composites -- iridescent lizard birds, hammer-headed rhinos -- and sentient vegetation.



"Avatar:" We shouldn't really be telling you this -- but it's good.



Mark Brown, The Guardian: Perhaps most surprising was the politics. At one stage the deranged general leading the attack, with echoes of George Bush, declares: "Our survival relies on pre-emptive action. We will fight terror with terror."

***

BANGKOK, Thailand (CNN) -- A Thai court has found deposed prime minister Thaksin Shinawatra guilty of corruption, and sentenced him in absentia to two years imprisonment.



Thaksin Shinawatra lives in self-imposed exile in London.



The case stemmed from a Bangkok land deal while Thaksin was in office. He was convicted of violating a law that bans ministers or their wives from conducting business with government agencies.



Thaksin, who now lives in the United Kingdom, is unlikely to serve any jail time. He fled from Thailand in August just as he was to appear in court.



In the land deal, Thaksin's wife, Pojama, is accused of using her husband's political influence to buy undeveloped land from a government agency for about a third of its estimated value.  Watch more about the verdict »



The case is one of several corruption cases against Thaksin and his family that are winding their way through the legal system.



The billionaire is accused of abusing the country's system of checks and balances and bending government policy to benefit his family's business.



Thaksin has consistently denied that he or his family was involved in any wrongdoing.



In August, Thaksin and his wife skipped a court appearance and fled to the United Kingdom rather than testify in the real-estate case. He said he did so because he did not think he would get a fair trial in Thailand.



Thaksin, a telecommunications tycoon, once owned the English Premier League Manchester City Football Club but sold his stake this year.



His party won two landslide victories before he was deposed in a bloodless military coup in September 2006 after massive anti-government street protests.



He returned to Thailand after his allies in the People Power Party won nearly half the seats in the lower house in December's parliamentary elections and formed the ruling coalition.



In recent weeks, the country has seen daily demonstrations from anti-government protesters who want PPP leaders purged from the Cabinet. They have laid siege to the Government House -- the seat of the Thai government -- since August 26.



The protesters -- led by the People's Alliance for Democracy -- contend that the PPP is trying to amend the constitution so Thaksin does not have to face charges.



In September, Thailand's Constitutional Court stripped then-Prime Minister Samak Sundaravej of his position, ruling that he had violated the constitution by appearing as a paid guest on a television cooking show.



The PPP responded by picking Thaksin's brother-in-law as Samak's replacement -- further inflaming the protesters.



CNN's Dan Rivers contributed to this report.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- A motorcycle gang carried out a bold smash-and-grab raid on a jewelry store in the center of London -- right in front of a CNN camera.





One of the raiders can be seen clutching stolen watches as the gang makes its getaway.





CNN reporter Sasha Herriman and cameraman Peter Kavanagh were filming in Oxford Street, London's busiest retail area, when the raiders took a sledgehammer to the store's windows in broad daylight.





Kavanagh kept the camera rolling as the thieves helped themselves to handfuls of luxury watches before roaring off on their motorcycles, leaving a crowd of stunned shoppers in their wake.





"They always tell you to expect the unexpected when working in news, and this certainly was unexpected," said Kavanagh, an Australian cameraman with 19 years' experience.  Images from the daring heist »





"As we were filming we heard a couple of motorbikes revving their engines loudly and saw a crowd forming. We couldn't tell what was happening at first.





"We saw the men yelling at the crowd and gesturing for them to stay back. Then they ran out of the store, climbed on their bikes and sped off."





Kavanagh says the daring heist nearly came unstuck at the last minute when the riders were forced to swerve to avoid a truck pulling into the road -- a moment he caught on film, along with a tantalizing glimpse of their booty.  Watch raiders zoom away on motorcycles »





"As they went past, I zoomed in to get a clear shot. I noticed one of the passengers on the bikes was carrying a fistful of watches."





London's Metropolitan Police would not reveal the value of the items taken from the store, but said they were trying to establish if it was linked to other smash and grabs.





No one has been arrested in connection with the raid, they said, and witnesses were being sought.





Says Kavanagh, after the four raiders had fled, punching the air with victory signs, so did many of the passers-by who saw it happen.





"Afterwards we went over to the store and saw the glass from smashed cabinets and the sledgehammer lying on the ground. Most witnesses cleared off, but a few who had taken photos came forward."

***

(CNN)  -- Inter Milan stayed on course for the treble after beating Lazio 2-0 on Sunday to open up a two-point gap over Roma in the Serie A title race.





It completed a superb week for Inter, who reached the final of the Champions League with an aggregate win over Barcelona on Wednesday.





They also face Roma in the Italian Cup final next Wednesday having leapfrogged the capital side with their latest victory.





Lazio, fighting a relegation battle, were no match for Jose Mourinho's high-flyers, who are bidding for a fifth straight league title.





Argentine defender Walter Samuel headed in the opener just before halftime from a Wesley Sneijder cross.





Inter continued to press after the break and Thiago Motta scored the second from a Maicon corner in the 70th minute.





Roma had briefly led Serie A after their 2-1 win at Parma on Sunday with both teams now having two matches left to press their title claims.





Earlier, Sampdoria and Palermo both won to stay locked in the battle for the fourth and final Champions League qualifying place.





Sampdoria, who lead Palermo by two points, beat already relegated Livorno 2-0 while the Sicilians beat Siena 2-1.





The defeat sends Siena down.





In other games, Napoli and Juventus booked Europa League places.





Napoli won 2-1 away to Chievo while Juve dropped to seventh, but secured their spot with a 1-1 draw at Catania.





At the other end of the table, Bologna drew 1-1 with Atalanta to improve their chances of surviving the drop.





In the Netherlands, FC Twente sealed the Dutch title with a 2-0 win over NAC Breda to leave them one point ahead of Ajax, who beat NEC Nijmegen 4-0.





It is a remarkable triumph for a side managed by former England boss Steve McClaren who could not match the spending power of their Amsterdam rivals.





Bryan Ruiz and Miroslav Stoch scored the Twente goals to clinch the championship and a Champions League place.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Congress enacted a $300 billion farm bill Thursday over President Bush's objections, but questions remain about whether a clerical error will keep the bill from going into effect.



Congress voted to override President Bush's veto of a $300 billion farm bill.



The Senate voted 82-13 to override the president's veto of the bill Thursday, a day after the House voted 316-108 to override the veto.



Both override votes exceeded the two-thirds majority required by the Constitution.



A portion of the bill, however, remains in legal limbo.



Before the House override vote Wednesday night, lawmakers discovered that the version sent to the White House last week was missing a part. The discovery raises questions about whether that section of the bill, which dealt with authorized trade and food aid, would become law.



The discovery of the missing section, "Title III," prompted concerns from House Republicans that the override vote was improper.



Democrats said the matter stemmed from a clerical error. But Republicans pounced on the "fiasco," which they said would require a temporary extension of the current farm bill.



"What's happened here raises serious constitutional questions -- very serious," said Minority Leader John Boehner, R-Ohio. "I don't see how we can proceed with the override as it occurred."



However, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi said Thursday that the override votes in both chambers of Congress would allow the sections of the bill that were sent to the president to become law.



"So, the farm bill minus Title III would be enacted" after the override votes, Pelosi said. "But I'm optimistic that we will be able to get Title III as well, either on its own or by sending the full bill again."



"Obviously, we want the complete bill. But ... we have obviously consulted with those who are expert on the Constitution and congressional action and presidential signatures, vetoes and overrides."



In order to start the process of Title III to become law, the House passed the entire farm bill again Thursday by a vote of 306-110.



It is unclear what the Senate will do. It could pass the entire bill again, as the House did, or it could pass the portion not sent to the president as a free-standing bill.



Two-thirds of the $300 billion in spending for the farm bill would go for nutrition programs such as food stamps. Another $40 billion would go toward farm subsidies, and $30 billion is allocated for payments to farms to keep land idle and other environmental programs.



After vetoing the farm bill, Bush said it "continues subsidies for the wealthy and increases farm-bill spending by more than $20 billion, while using budget gimmicks to hide much of the increase."



The president said it would hurt efforts to improve American farmers' access to overseas markets.



Congress has passed one bill over Bush's objections: a $23 billion water-project legislation that the president vetoed in 2007.



CNN's Deirdre Walsh and Ted Barrett contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- This month on Inside the Middle East -- Zain Verjee hosts from Doha, Qatar.





Art Treasures Revealed





Ancient art finds a modern home in Doha at the Museum of Islamic Art as it celebrates its first anniversary. From jewelry to textiles to ceramics and metal work, the galleries host an unparalleled collection of artifacts spanning the 7th to the 19th centuries, from Spain to China. The minimal Arabesque cubism design of the building was done by award-winning architect I.M. Pei, famed for his Pyramid at Paris' Louvre Museum. Schams Elwazer takes us inside Doha's cultural landmark.





Campus Forum -- University students share their thoughts





In a region where 60 percent of the population is under 30-years-old, IME is going to universities to gauge the pulse on campuses and to speak to tomorrow's business and industry leaders. On this edition we visit the Virginia Commonwealth University in Qatar and ask design students about their passions, concerns, identity issues, and what it means to be young in the Middle East today.





On campus we also catch up with an industry leader -- architect and humanitarian entrepreneur Cameron Sinclair of Architecture for Humanity and hear his message of global action to young design students.





Your IME Diary





We report from on the ground in Mecca, Saudi Arabia where millions of Muslims gathered for the annual Hajj pilgrimage followed by the celebrations of Eid Al-Adha.





Qatar launched the first annual World Innovation Summit for Education (WISE), hoping to become the educational equivalent of the World Economic Forum, aiming to "create a new international multi-disciplinary platform to shape education models of the 21st century."





In the UAE, the Abu Dhabi Art exhibit brought famous names to its galleries while the Dubai World Championship brought golf stars to its greens.





You can watch Inside the Middle East at the following times in December:





Wednesday 2 December: 0830, 1430, Saturday 5 December 0830, 1700, 2030, Sunday 6 December 0530, 1530, Monday 7 December 0300  (all times GMT)

***

New York (CNN) -- Peter Madoff, brother of Bernard Madoff and chief compliance officer of Bernard L. Madoff Investment Securities, is the subject of a criminal investigation, the U.S. attorney's office in New York confirmed Thursday.





In a letter filed this week in federal court in Newark, New Jersey, Peter Madoff's attorney, Charles Spada, says that the investigation was the reason that his client invoked his Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination at a deposition in a related case in November.





Spada said he had been informed of the investigation into Peter Madoff's involvement in his brother's Ponzi scheme a week before the deposition, at which Peter Madoff declined to answer more than 290 questions.





"Given the circumstances and intensity of the criminal investigation, one can hardly question defendant's constitutional right not to answer questions about his brother, Bernard Madoff, his work at BLMIS ... and virtually any related topic for fear that such answers might 'furnish a link in the chain of evidence' for a criminal prosecution," Spada said in the letter to Judge Madeline Cox Arleo.





The deposition was for a lawsuit brought against Peter Madoff by the Lautenberg Foundation, which says it lost all of its investment with Madoff Investment Securities: $7 million that the firm told the foundation had grown to an estimated $15 million.





Spada's letter was filed in response to the foundation's move to have Madoff sanctioned for failing to be "cooperative" in the deposition.





The attorney says the Lautenberg Foundation -- a charitable private group headed by Sen. Frank Lautenberg -- is an effort to "unfairly jump ahead of thousands of other investors" who also are seeking damages from Madoff Investment Securities.





A separate lawsuit has been filed on behalf of all the business's investors, who have lost an estimated $200 million in the scheme.





In March, Bernard Madoff pleaded guilty to 11 counts related to running the most massive Ponzi scheme in history and was sentenced to 150 years in prison.





CNN's Jean Shin contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- The Rev. Jesse Jackson ended a trip to the Ivory Coast on Friday, after he spoke to leaders from the nation's political parties and was honored as a prince by a tribe in the West African nation.



Jesse Jackson says ceremony to name him a prince of the Agni people was "very exciting."



Jackson said he met with President Laurent Gbagbo and leading members of two opposition parties, Henri Konan Bedie and Alassane Ouattara. Bedie is a former president of the nation and Ouattara is a former prime minister.



Jackson said his mission was not to endorse a candidate, "but a process."



"I wanted the three of them to agree ... [to] campaign vigorously ... not to create divisive language, to each agree to support the winner, [and] end the [U.N.] sanctions," he said.



"I think there's a common agreement on these points. This country has so much to offer the world and Africa."



The United Nations imposed sanctions on the nation in 2004, among them, a ban on arms and diamond trades, a travel ban and asset freezes for some individuals. The sanctions, renewed last year, are in effect until October 29.



Earlier in Jackson's trip, Amon N'Douffou V, king of the Krindjabo kingdom, named Jackson a prince of the Agni people, news reports said.



Jackson said it was a "very exciting ceremony."



Jackson's wife, Jacqueline, suffered a broken leg during the trip when a stage she and her husband were on collapsed, Jackson told CNN in a telephone interview.



"We had excellent medical care," the pastor said, adding that the collapse was "not the fault of the organizers," but that too many people had gathered on the stage.



Official news agency Agence Ivoirienne de Presse reported that the stage collapse occurred in a sports complex in Yopougon, north of Abidjan.



A doctor was to accompany them on their Friday night flight back to the United States, Jackson said.



The coming elections in the Ivory Coast are being closely watched by U.N. officials.



In a July 30 statement, the U.N. Security Council said "any postponement of the elections of 29 November would be inconsistent with a credible process" and with a peace agreement that had followed an armed rebellion in 2002 that had divided the country in two.



The Security Council said it would review progress toward elections before October 15.



In March, U.S. State Department spokesman Gordon Duguid said the "United States believes that long-delayed presidential elections are still technically possible in 2009 and calls on all parties to take every step necessary to ensure that credible elections go forward as promised."



The statement said more than 5.7 million people had been enrolled as voters on a "preliminary basis."

***

Washington (CNN) -- Folklore says that George Washington was known for never telling a lie.





But as the United States marks its first president's birthday, a new poll indicates that 74 percent of the public thinks the father of our country did lie to the public while he served as president. It's an indication that Americans think the government has been broken for a very, very long time.





The CNN/Opinion Corporation survey was released Monday on the 278th anniversary of Washington's birth.





Three quarters of people questioned in the survey think that modern-day federal officials are not honest, a figure that is essentially unchanged since 1994. But the poll suggests that Americans think the problem of dishonesty is not a new one.





And it's not just George Washington; 71 percent think that Abraham Lincoln, known as "Honest Abe," also lied to the public while serving in the White House.





Full results (pdf)





"It's all part of a rich tradition in American history -- the belief that politicians are not always telling the truth," says CNN Polling Director Keating Holland.





What should we make of the figures for Washington and Lincoln?





"Part of it may be the recognition that, however much we revere them today, both men were politicians, and Americans are always a little cynical about people seeking office. Part of it may also be a realistic assessment that the president sometimes has to keep things from the public," adds Holland. "But whether it's based on cynicism or realism, or a little of both, it's an indication that Americans think that our government has been broken for many, many years."





According to CNN poll numbers released Sunday, Americans overwhelmingly think that the government in this country is broken, but the public overwhelmingly holds out hope that what's broken can be fixed.





The CNN/Opinion Research Corporation poll was conducted February 12-15, with 1,023 adult Americans questioned by telephone. The survey's sampling error is plus or minus 3 percentage points for the overall survey.





CNN Deputy Political Director Paul Steinhauser contributed to this report.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN)  -- The United States is expelling the Venezuelan ambassador to the United States in response to a similar move by Venezuela, U.S. State Department spokesman Sean McCormack said Friday.



"We have informed the Venezuelan ambassador to the United States that he will be expelled and should leave the United States," McCormack said.



Separately, the U.S. Treasury Department accused Friday two senior Venezuelan intelligence officials -- Hugo Armando Carvajal Barrios and Henry de Jesus Rangel Silva -- and one former official -- Ramon Rodriguez Chacin -- of assisting leftist rebels in the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC, with narcotics trafficking.



"Today's designation exposes two senior Venezuelan government officials and one former official who armed, abetted and funded the FARC, even as it terrorized and kidnapped innocents," said Adam J. Szubin, director of the Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control, in a statement.



The action freezes assets the three men may have under U.S. jurisdiction and prohibits Americans from conducting business with them.



The U.S. decision to expel the Venezuelan ambassador, Bernardo Alvarez Herrera, is the latest move in an escalating diplomatic battle that pits the United States against two of Latin America's leftist leaders.



It comes a day after Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez announced that he was expelling the U.S. ambassador to Venezuela, Patrick Duddy. Chavez also said he was recalling the Venezuelan ambassador from the United States.



"He has 72 hours, from this moment, the Yankee ambassador in Caracas, to leave Venezuela," Chavez told a crowd of supporters. "When there's a new government in the United States, we'll send an ambassador. A government that respects Latin America."



The president said he was making the moves "in solidarity with Bolivia and the people of Bolivia."



Bolivian President Evo Morales on Thursday accused the United States of fomenting a coup d'etat by rich eastern department landowners against him, and he called for the U.S. ambassador to leave for allegedly encouraging those protesters.



For the past two weeks, the demonstrators in the country's richer eastern lowlands have been protesting Morales' plans to redistribute the country's natural gas revenues.



"Without fear of anyone, without fear of the empire, today before you, before the Bolivian people, I declare the ambassador of the United States persona non grata," Morales said Wednesday of Ambassador Philip Goldberg in a nationally televised speech.



The United States called the allegations baseless and kicked out the Bolivian ambassador Thursday.



The Bolivians "made it very clear what their intention was and we took them at their word," McCormack said Friday. "We take President Chavez at his word in this particular case, and we have reacted appropriately."



Before expelling the U.S. diplomat from his country, Chavez also said Thursday that he had uncovered a U.S.-backed plot to remove him from power.



"It's the empire that's behind this," he told supporters in a televised address. "They go around looking for a way to stop our revolution and, with it, to strike all the processes of change that are occurring in our Americas, in the Caribbean, in Central America."



Chavez then played a four-minute tape of what he said were conversations among current and retired members of the Venezuelan military discussing whom they could count on to support a movement against the presidential palace.



He said also that the presence of two Russian warplanes on Venezuelan soil for a training exercise "is a warning" to the rest of the world that Venezuela's allies include Russia.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN)  -- President Obama reached out to citizens of the world Tuesday, saying in an op-ed piece that ran in 31 newspapers around the globe that there is an urgent need for worldwide economic cooperation.





President Obama will discuss the economic downturn with other world leaders next week at the Group of 20 meeting.





Obama's move comes ahead of next week's Group of 20 meeting in London, England, in which leaders of the world's richest nations will discuss the global economic downturn.





"My message is clear," Obama wrote. "The United States is ready to lead, and we call upon our partners to join us with a sense of urgency and common purpose. Much good work has been done, but much more remains."





The president is scheduled to hold his second prime-time news conference at 8 p.m. ET Tuesday.





In the op-ed, Obama spoke about the upcoming G-20 meeting, saying that world leaders have to work together.  Watch as the White House press secretary outlines Obama's economic strategy »





"We are living through a time of global economic challenges that cannot be met by half measures or the isolated efforts of any nation," Obama said. "Now, the leaders of the Group of 20 have a responsibility to take bold, comprehensive and coordinated action that not only jump-starts recovery, but also launches a new era of economic engagement to prevent a crisis like this from ever happening again."





The president also pointed out that although the United States is separated by two oceans from most of the rest of the world, a global economy renders those geographic distinctions moot.





"Once and for all, we have learned that the success of the American economy is inextricably linked to the global economy," Obama said. "There is no line between action that restores growth within our borders and action that supports it beyond."





Next week's G-20 summit will be Obama's first meeting as president with many of the world's leaders. He will meet many of the Western Hemisphere's leaders at the Fifth Summit of the Americas next month in Trinidad and Tobago.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Pro Evolution Soccer 2009 (PES) has a tough task on its hands. Not only does FIFA look good, it plays well too -- and gameplay was always the area where PES had the edge.

Barcelona forward Lionel Messi is the cover star of Pro Evolution Soccer 2009.

If you've played a PES game before you'll know what to expect, which is both a plus and a minus, depending on your point of view.

The ball pings around nicely, the weight of pass remains just about right and long passes are much improved. It mostly feels like a game of computer football should.

The game plays fast and given shots from distance almost never fly in, scoring is still a challenge and goals still get you punching the air.

For a series that's always short on official team and league licenses -- leading to silly-sounding approximations of players' names (Ryan Gills anyone?) and daft team titles -- PES gains the UEFA Champions League, which is a small coup.

Read our FIFA 09 review here.

Game modes are much the same as before, including the venerable Master League, but the new addition of Be A Legend, where you try to take one player to the top, does not feel finished.

The graphics are serviceable, with some player likenesses uncanny and others way off. The sound is no better than average and the commentary remains hit and miss. And it's not unfair to say the game menus and their annoying and repetitive music are badly in need of a revamp.

Online play is not great and given the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 are built for broadband multiplayer, PES is lagging -- literally.

You might say the game needs revolution rather than evolution and for next season's release publishers Konami must up their game.

Nevertheless, PES' reputation is built on a fun offline two-player experience and nothing has changed there.

Pro Evolution Soccer 2009 might not be cutting-edge in its presentation and options, but you still can't beat a 10-minute match with a mate beside on you on the sofa.

***

(Oprah.com) -- A decade ago Alissa Everett was holed up in her cubicle at an investment bank in San Francisco, flipping through acceptance packages from two top MBA programs. Numb from 100-hour workweeks, she'd applied to business school "because that's what everyone else was doing," she recalls. But as she read about statistics, accounting, and operations courses, "I had an aha moment," she says.





Oprah.com: 10 pieces of advice to get you through a terrible day





It suddenly seemed ridiculous to take on crushing debt to study subjects she wasn't passionate about. Within weeks, Everett had tossed her acceptance letters in the trash, quit her job, and flown to Southeast Asia to do some soul-searching.





Oprah.com: The one thing everybody in the world wants





Backpacking for months through Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia, and Burma -- and later the Balkans, Syria, Lebanon, Israel, Palestine, and Egypt -- she snapped thousands of photos. "As a kid, I wanted to be a National Geographic photographer," she says. "When I left my all-consuming job and cleared my head, I realized taking pictures was still what I wanted to do."





Oprah.com: How to say no at work -- and still keep your job





By 2003 the invasion of Iraq was dominating the airwaves. Everett made a gut decision "to go where the news was happening," she says, hoping it would help her get her work published. She drove over the border from Jordan with a fellow journalist, and after she met an army media person, got embedded with the 101st Airborne. When U.S. forces killed Saddam Hussein's sons in Mosul that July, Everett was in the right place at the right time. She showed her photos to an NBC producer, who ran them on Dateline.





Oprah.com: 7 women who turned their passion for food into a career





Since then Everett has worked in Pakistan, Darfur, the Congo, and the Gaza Strip. Eschewing the sensationalized scenes of explosions and gunfire favored by many news outlets, she tries to capture war's more mundane human dramas: a farmer reaping a modest harvest in ravaged Darfur, a rape victim refugee starting a sewing business in the Congo. "I'm drawn to under-the-radar stories that have passion, hope, and optimism," she says. Everett's time in Sudan inspired her to cofound Care Through Action, which raises funds for women and children who are victims of human rights abuses; her photos help fund the charity. "I don't go to places just because they're risky," she says. "I go because I believe the world needs to know what's going on. I want to tell stories for people who can't."





Oprah.com: A 4-step guide to discovering your true calling





Subscribe to O, The Oprah Magazine for up to 75% off the newsstand price. That's like getting 18 issues FREE.


Subscribe now!





TM & © 2011 Harpo Productions, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Police on the picturesque island of Jersey in the English Channel detained a 68-year-old man Tuesday as part of their investigation into alleged abuses at a long-closed government-run children's home.



A woman walks past the Haut de la Garenne children's home.



Spokeswoman Louise Nibbs said the man was helping authorities with their inquiries into "a number of historic rapes and indecent assaults."



But, Nibbs added, the man's detention was not "directly related" to the Haut de la Garenne children's home. Rather, he is part of a wider inquiry into abuses that authorities are investigating, she said.



"We can now also confirm that the alleged offenses in question took place in the 1960s and 1970s," she said. "We are not able to say at this time where the offenses took place."



Nibbs did not release the man's name or disclose any other details. The man has not been charged with a crime, Nibbs said.



Jersey is a British crown dependency, located 14 miles off the coast of Normandy near France.



In January, police arrested another man -- a former warden who was charged with three counts of indecent assault on underage girls in the late 60s and early 70s.



The man, 76-year-old Gordon Wateridge, has not entered a plea yet, Nibbs said.



The announcement in January that fragments of a child's skull had been discovered under a stairwell in the building has sparked more than 160 allegations of child abuse there dating back to the 1960s, authorities say.



The building opened in 1867 and housed up to 60 children at any one time. It underwent several renovations and closed in 1986 only to reopen as a youth hostel in 2004.



Possible clues to the abuse alleged to have occurred inside include writing found on a wall that "refers to somebody being bad," Jersey Deputy Police Chief Lenny Harper said in February. "We have no idea at the moment who put it there or, indeed, how long it's been there."



Police said much of what they found, including shackles, matches accounts given by witnesses. Several former residents allege they suffered physical and sexual abuse in a storeroom. Police suspect there could be four bricked-up chambers underground. Several alleged victims have talked about abuse occurring in a large concrete trough in the basement, which was originally the first floor of the building.



In February, authorities said they had compiled "well over 40" suspects who are alive, and a number of others who are dead.



The investigation has taken officials to Australia, Thailand, Germany and the British mainland.



Some of those who have reported abuse have taken their complaints to the news media.



"There was one occasion, in the sick bay, where I was made to fondle another boy -- if you didn't, you were threatened you wouldn't come out alive," said Carl Denning, who said he was taken to the home at the age of 5 and said one of his friends committed suicide after being raped there.



"You'd go to bed at night, sleeping, and all of a sudden your arms would be held down and the next thing you know you're getting raped," recalled Peter Hannaford, who spent the first 12 years of his life there. "You were subject to constant abuse. ... It was every night, and you were scared to go to bed."



Stuart Syvret, a local politician, told CNN the building had long been known "as a place where young boys were punished severely, where they suffered."



He alleged a "long-established culture of covering up alleged abuses" -- a claim the local government denies.



The investigation began in 2006, when police were alerted to the possibility that pedophiles had worked at the institution. That led to the discovery of the skull fragment.



The institution housed wards of the state -- primarily neglected and abandoned children. A remand wing housed children who had been convicted of crimes.



The allegations mar the carefully cultivated

***

Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic (CNN) -- A man who provided legal advice to 10 American Baptists accused of kidnapping 33 Haitian children after the earthquake there was arrested Thursday night in the Dominican Republic and accused of human trafficking, the country's anti-narcotics agency said Friday.





The man, identified as Jorge Torres-Puello, is linked to a network that trafficked in Haitian and Central American children and is wanted in the United States, El Salvador and Costa Rica, the National Drug Control Agency said.





Torres-Puello had been hiding in the Dominican Republic after he was accused of using the country to take Haitian children to North America, it said.





Members of the drug agency took Torres-Puello, also known as Jorge Torres Orellana, into custody without incident at 8 p.m. in the parking lot of a McDonald's restaurant in the capital, the news release said.





Torres-Puello is a Dominican who was born in New York, it said. "According to documents of authorities in the United States, the Dominican Republic as well as El Salvador and Costa Rica, this person is an important part of a network of traffickers of undocumented people, especially women and children from Central America and the Caribbean," the news release said.





Torres-Puello faces charges in the United States of conspiracy to take foreigners into the country illegally, it said. In El Salvador, he and his wife, Ana Josefa Ramirez Orellana, face charges of presumed sexual exploitation of minors and women, it said. Ramirez Orellana is jailed in El Salvador. The drug agency said Torres-Puello forced Nicaraguan and Dominican children to work as prostitutes in El Salvador.





Torres-Puello is also wanted in Vermont on alien smuggling offenses and in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, for probation violations for fraud, the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement agency said. He is also wanted in Canada.





Shortly after the American missionaries were arrested in Haiti on kidnapping and abduction charges, Torres-Puello contacted their church in Idaho, identified himself as a legal authority on Haitian and Dominican law, obtained a retainer and began representing himself as their attorney/spokesman, the U.S. agency said.





But Torres-Puello is not registered in the country's College of Lawyers, implying that he was practicing without a license, the Dominican drug agency said.





In February, law enforcement authorities in El Salvador suspected that the missionaries' legal adviser looked like a man they were seeking, and asked Interpol to help. The international police agency coordinated the efforts of various agencies that resulted in Thursday's arrest, the ICE statement said.





In a phone interview last month with CNN, Torres-Puello acknowledged he is the same man wanted by Salvadoran authorities but denied the charges against him.





"I never did anything," Torres-Puello said. "I started helping a Dominican pastor helping a lot of people who were stranded to get back to their home countries. We once gave some Nicaraguan and Costa Rican women some money to return home and instead they went to the authorities and put in a complaint against us. I never had anybody against their will."





He also denied Salvadoran allegations that he and his wife ran a brothel out of their home. "I know I am innocent and I want to clear my past," he said.





Journalist Diulka Perez contributed to this story from Santo Domingo.

***

Sara, 29, has lived in Miami for five years, where she works as freelance writer and film maker. Her blog, All Purpose Dark, keeps tabs on the city's nightlife and restaurants, and she is also the editor of the Miami edition of UrbanDaddy.com.

Sara has lived in Miami for five years and says the city has a vibrant arts scene.

CNN: What made you start blogging the city?

Sara: When I moved down here I realized there was so much more to the city than just the beach and the hotels.

There were lots of extravagant condo-building parties at the time -- the type where you'd go to the construction site, because the building was still in the planning stages, and they'd throw this lavish catered party with open bar and feather dancers in an effort to get people to buy units. We were going to at least three of these events a week and I felt the need to document it.

So my blog started out as kind of a nightlife, event-driven blog and eventually became a chronicle of my adventures in the city, focused now mostly on my eating adventures.

CNN: What makes Miami so special to you?

Sara: I think Miami is a place of unbridled optimism. It's also a place of great opportunity. There's lots of room here for entrepreneurial spirit and it's very much encouraged and appreciated. Just look at how much the city has changed in five years, in terms of the revival of Downtown and the Design District, and the thriving art scene. It's a place that is still evolving identity-wise and I'm excited to be a part of it.

CNN: Is there anything you dislike about the city?

Sara: The seasonal aspect of the city can be frustrating -- the way it shuts down in the summer and then revs up in the winter.

Also, the crowding in the winter, when all the seasonal residents come back and suddenly there are no parking spaces, the lines at the grocery store are horrendous and you realize you're trying to live in a tourist Mecca and get your errands done when everyone around you is vacationing. Oh and the drivers -- possibly the worst driving etiquette in the country.

CNN: Is Miami just about the sun and sand, or is there more to it?

Sara: There's definitely more to this city than the tropical getaway. There's a vibrant art scene, where each month the gallery district is alive with opening receptions and throngs of people interested in getting out and seeing the scene. There's also the internationally renowned Art Basel art fair that comes to town every year putting Miami on the cultural map.

Also, food-wise there's lots of exciting things going on, from an incredibly diverse selection of Latin cuisine. Everything from Argentinean to Venezuelan food, to Haitian, to Caribbean -- there's a ton of great ethnic food here. There's also a growing high-end dining scene, where a lot of the national trends, like organic, locally sourced cooking, are happening on a very high level.

CNN: Could you describe a typical Miamian's weekend?

Sara: A typical weekend would probably entail going to dinner in the Design District on Friday night, going for a walk or a bike ride along the beach on Saturday morning, then lunch on Lincoln Road. Saturday night there are usually some great DJs in town, so it's worth checking out the Downtown club scene, or if it's Art Walk, the galleries in Wynwood.

Sunday is spent perusing farmers markets, which are popping up in most neighborhoods, and lazily reading the paper over brunch. Sunday night is always bingo at the Standard hotel, a hipster hangout.

CNN: Where do you shop?

Sara: I usually head to the Aventura Mall if I'm looking to hit a bunch of stores in one fix. There's Bloomingdales, Urban Outfitters and your typical mall stores, like Banana Republic, etc. Collins Avenue in South Beach between 10th and 6th is good for Barney's Co-op

***

Tehran, Iran (CNN) -- Iran tested an upgraded version of a surface-to-surface missile with a range that makes it capable of reaching parts of Europe, state-run television reported Wednesday.





Iranian Defense Minister Gen. Ahmad Vahidi said on Press-TV that the solid-fuel, high-speed Sajil-2 missile has "great maneuverability" and can access targets more than 2,000 kilometers (1,242 miles) away, making Israel and U.S. military bases in the Gulf reachable.





Vahidi said the missile has a shorter launch time and is intended to boost Iran's deterrent capability.





In Washington, Pentagon spokesman Geoff Morrell said Defense Secretary Robert Gates had seen the intelligence on the launch, which occurred Tuesday, "and, based on that, is clearly concerned."





"At a time when the international community has offered Iran opportunities to begin to build trust and confidence, Iran's missile tests only undermine Iran's claims of peaceful intentions," he added. "Such actions will increase the seriousness and resolve of the international community to hold Iran accountable for its continued defiance of its international obligations."





But a U.S. intelligence official said the test launch does not represent "a major advancement" in Iran's missile technology. The official added that Iran carries out such tests on a "routine basis ... to attract attention."





Iran tested the initial version of the Sajil-2 in May.





In September, days before a key meeting over nuclear issues with industrialized powers, Iran tested two types of long-range missiles.





Those tests drew condemnation after the Islamic republic revealed the existence of a covert uranium enrichment site near the city of Qom.





Iran shocked the world with that revelation. Since then, it has allowed inspectors from the U.N. nuclear watchdog agency to visit the plant.





Western powers fear that Iran is intent on developing nuclear weapons. That's a claim Tehran denies, but the latest test-firing of the Sajil-2 could add to existing tensions.

***

ATLANTA, Georgia (CNN)  -- The two men who claimed to have found the carcass of Bigfoot have surfaced to say: Hey, it was just a joke.



Matt Whitton has been fired from his job as a police officer because of his role in the hoax.



Not everyone is laughing.



In an exclusive interview with CNN affiliate WSB, the two hoaxers -- car salesman Rick Dyer and now-fired police officer Matt Whitton -- said the whole situation began as a joke and then got out of hand.



"It's just a big hoax, a big joke," Dyer said.



"It's Bigfoot," Dyer explained. "Bigfoot doesn't exist."



Whitton chimed in: "All this was a big joke. It got into something way bigger than it was supposed to be."  Watch the two men explain their "joke" »



At a news conference in California last week, the two men had stood by their claims that they had discovered Bigfoot's corpse and had it on ice. Scientific analysis would prove it, they said.



Not quite.



Now the two Georgia men admit that the hairy, icy blob was an Internet-purchased Sasquatch costume stuffed with possum roadkill and slaughterhouse leftovers.



Whitton and Dyer say that when they came up with the hoax, they had no idea it would become a media circus.



"It got legs and ran. It's crazy now," Dyer told WSB.



Co-hoaxer Whitton agrees: "It started off as some YouTube videos and a Web site. We're all about having fun."



"Fun" isn't exactly how Clayton County Police Chief Jeff Turner sees it. He has kicked Whitton off the police force.



"He lied on national TV," Turner says of Whitton, "so a defense attorney now could say, 'How do we know you're not lying now?' "



Whitton and Dyer had announced that they had found the body of a 7-foot-7-inch, 500-pound half-ape, half-human creature while hiking in the north Georgia mountains in June. They also said they had spotted about three similar living creatures.



Still unclear is how much money Whitton and Dyer got out of the hoax.



Steve Kulls, who maintains the SquatchDetective Web site and hosts a similarly named Internet radio program, first interviewed Dyer on July 28 for the radio program. On August 12, Kulls said, Dyer and Whitton "requested an undisclosed sum of money as an advance, expected from the marketing and promotion."



Two days later, after signing a receipt and counting the money, Dyer and Whitton showed the Searching for Bigfoot team the freezer containing what they claimed was the carcass: "Something appearing large, hairy and frozen in ice," Kulls wrote on the Web site.



It was, as many had suspected, an ape-like costume stuffed with entrails.



After the news conference last week, Dyer and Whitton disappeared from view. The truth came out over the weekend.



In a Web posting this week, Kulls wrote that "action is being instigated against the perpetrators."



The two hoaxers have hired attorney Steve Lister to represent them.



"There have been some threats made to them for both civil and criminal prosecution," Lister said.



The attorney says the Bigfoot incident "got out of hand."



Dyer, asked whether he ever thought that the hoopla had become more than just a joke, implied that everyone should have known it was a hoax.



"Well, we told 10 different stories," he said. "Everyone knew we were lying."

***

(CNN) -- Bulgaria is a Turkish toilet, France is always on strike, Romania is a vampire theme-park and the UK... Well the UK doesn't exist.





The piece "Entropa" shows Romania as a giant Dracula-inspired theme park.





That's the view of the European Union according to a controversial art installation by Czech artist David Cerny, commissioned by his government to mark its six-month presidency of the pan-continental body.





The work, "Entropa," frames various representations of each member state as components of a giant multimedia model kit.





But the piece, scheduled to have its official unveiling Thursday at the EU headquarters in Brussels, has sparked controversy.  Look at images of European nations »





Bulgaria's foreign ministry has summoned the Czech ambassador in Sofia to lodge a protest about the piece, according to the Czech News Agency. What do you think about images?





And Betina Joteva, spokesperson of the Bulgarian permanent representation to the EU, said in comments reported by EUObserver.com: "It [the work] is preposterous, a disgrace. It is a humiliation for the Bulgarian nation and an offence to [our] national dignity."





Bulgaria is not the only nation to suffer an unflattering depiction.





Germany is criss-crossed by a series of autobahns in what some critics say is a close approximation of a swastika; Spain is a giant construction site in a dig at its building boom; and Luxembourg is a gold covered nugget sporting a "For Sale" sign.





The Netherlands is depicted as a submerged land with only minarets peeking through the waves in an apparent reference to its religious tensions.





Poland recreates the WWII flag-raising at Iwo Jima, only with the U.S. Marines and the Stars and Stripes replaced with Catholic clergy brandishing the multi-colored gay pride flag.





The UK is absent from the work -- possibly because of its on-off relationship with the rest of the continent.





The Czech government said in a statement on its presidency Web site Tuesday that the original brief was for the work to be created by 27 artists representing all EU Member States -- and that it was "unpleasantly surprised" to learn that this was not the case.





"David Cerny bears full responsibility for not fulfilling his assignment and promise," said Alexandr Vondra, Deputy Prime Minister. "In this situation we are now considering further steps. The government said it will issue a further statement Thursday.





The comments were in contrast to a statement issued by Vondra Monday, when he said that "sculpture, and art more generally, can speak where words fail. I am confident in Europe's open mind and capacity to appreciate such a project."





Cerny is no stranger to controversy. In 1991 he was arrested after painting pink a Soviet tank that served as a Prague war memorial.





His Web site shows other examples of his work, including previous kit-style installations entitled "Jesus Christ" and "Dead Raped Woman"; and a life-size bronze fountain that depicts two men standing opposite each other, urinating.





Cerny, and his main collaborators Kristof Kintera and Tomas Pospiszyl apologized to Czech Prime Minister Mirek Topolanek and other government ministers Tuesday, according to a statement on the artist's Web site, for " not having informed them about what is true and for having misled them.





The statement adds that Cerny and his colleagues initially wanted to use 27 European artists for "Entropa", but fell short due to lack of time and money. Instead, they say, they decided to create fictional artists, some of whom have even been given their own Web sites.





Cerny says he knew the truth would eventually come out but adds: "We believe that the environment of Brussels is capable of ironic self-reflection, we believe in the sense of humor of European nations and their representatives."





Try telling that to Bulgaria.

***

(CNN) -- As floodwater raged around their pickup, the family of a 6-year-old Arizona boy escaped to higher ground. The boy, however, was swept away. Teams were looking for his body on Friday, the Yavapai County Sheriff's Office said.





Meanwhile, an evacuation order for some Los Angeles, California, residents was lifted, and the mayor said those people can safely return home





Authorities were classifying the Arizona operation as a recovery, presuming that a child could not survive in the raging water, the office said in a news release. The boy's name was not released.





Rain has hindered attempts to find the boy after the incident Thursday night, authorities said.





"This effort continued through the night without success. Because of low visibility, along with the wind and rain, DPS (Department of Public Safety) Ranger helicopter was unable to fly over the area," the sheriff's office said.





Are you affected by the storms? Send your images and video





The family's pickup got stuck near the northern community of Mayer, between Flagstaff and Phoenix in central Arizona.





On Friday, the vehicle sat alone in a vast sea of mud, which reached nearly to the bottom of the windows and partially filled the area under the crumpled hood. The vehicle was tilted forward, as if diving into the muddy soup.





According to a preliminary report, the boy was in the pickup with his 8-year-old sister and parents, who were trying to take him to a hospital when floodwater swept the pickup off the road.





The mother was able to reach higher ground, and the father took the children to the bed of the vehicle for safety. By the time firefighters reached the scene, rising water had pushed the three from the bed. The father was able to reach a safe area with his daughter but the son was missing.





California iReporters deal with the rain but have fun too





The flooding was the result of heavy rainstorms that started pounding parts of neighboring California on Monday and continued through the week. Upper elevations got heavy snow.





Conditions in the area were not likely to improve until Saturday afternoon, the National Weather Service said. Forecasters predicted continued flooding of many rivers and streams and up to an additional foot of snow in the mountains.





In Los Angeles, Mayor Antonio Villaraigosa said Friday that the 2,000 city residents who were evacuated because of the storms could return. The permission came after teams of geologists and structural experts determined that areas threatened by mudslides were safe enough, he said at a news conference.





See KABC's coverage of the storms





Last year's wildfires burned trees and vegetation that normally hold soil in place and prevent hillsides from collapsing.





Hundreds of residents also had been evacuated in Los Angeles County, and many of these were cleared to return home, according to the Coordinated Agency Recovery Effort's Web site.





The storms stem from El Nino, a warm ocean current from the South Pacific, meteorologists said.





CNN's Sean Morris contributed to this report.

***

Bangkok, Thailand (CNN) -- Thailand's Prime Minister Yingluck Shinawatra warned Saturday that more water would pour into the capital, Bangkok, as the country endures its worst flood in half a century, state media reported.





Giving her weekly television address to the nation, Shinawatra said efforts were being made to manage the flow of floodwaters to minimize the impact on residents.





Extra protection would be given to historical sites, palaces, hospitals, business districts, utilities and transportation infrastructure, state-run news agency MCOT quoted her as saying.





The government has set up more than 1,700 shelters for victims of flooding in affected provinces, Shinawatra said, according to the agency. There are currently more than 113,000 people staying at the shelters, which can cater for about 800,000, she said.





The government had hoped that strengthening flood barriers and widening canals would keep populated areas safe.





But now the government is trying a different tack: opening floodgates to relieve pressure on dams and levees and send the water toward the sea.





The decision to divert water through canals in Bangkok means parts of the city, and its surrounding suburbs such as Rangsit, are flooded.





The flooding, which follows months of monsoon rains, has already killed 356 people, with nearly 9 million others affected, authorities said.





Overall damage from the floods could top $2 billion, with the worst yet to come as the waters destroy shops and paralyze factories nationwide, the Thai Finance Ministry said.





Many residents waded through dirty water in the capital Friday as they made a desperate attempt to save their belongings.





Among them was a teary-eyed woman named Surirat Prapankarn, from a suburb outside Bangkok, who could be seen lugging her sodden possessions through waist-high water.





Pulling her things out of her front room, Prapankarn said she was overcome with sadness when she looked at her destroyed home and at what had been lost.





She wondered how she would find food for her 16 dogs.





Waters rose overnight in the northern Bangkok suburb of Rangsit, giving residents little chance to save what they could.





The lucky few moved out of flooded homes by boat, or anything that could float. The rest waded through water with plastic bags balanced on their heads.





Pets could be seen tucked into coats or pushed inside boats. Children, meanwhile, seemed to struggle to stay on their feet against the fast-moving water.





Another resident, named Saisamorn Pongsairak, said she had lived in the inundated Rangsit neighborhood all her life.





"I woke up this morning around 2 a.m. and the water was only at my ankle high. But now it is up to my waist," she said.





Pongsairak runs a food store, which she said she refuses to close, frying chicken in waist-high water on an elevated stove.





Thailand's prime minister has urged all Bangkok residents to move their belongings to higher ground as government workers endeavor to contain the flooding.





Government spokeswoman Thitima Chaisaeng said the move was a precautionary measure.





To protect their cars, residents double parked along elevated highways, making it nearly impossible to navigate a city where traffic is congested on a normal day.





On Thursday, authorities expressed confidence that the main international airport, Suvarnabhumi Airport, was prepared to withstand the water's impact. Airport officials said a 3.5-meter-high flood prevention wall protects the airport.





Thailand derives a significant portion of its revenue from tourism.





CNN's Kocha Olarn and Karen Smith contributed to this report.

***

ATLANTA, Georgia (CNN) -- Caring for a car has you a befuddled. The honeymoon's over, and bureaucratic tasks are beating out bliss. You're meeting with a prospective babysitter or housekeeper, a stranger you'll entrust with much of your life.



Rory Tahari, with son Jeremey, hopes to make life's to-do's more manageable with a new book and iPhone app.



How do you know what to do? Where should you go and when? What should you ask these people?



You need a list!



If figuring out the answers to these kinds of questions leaves you loopy, Rory Tahari has a new book that may have your name on it.



"Lists for Life: The Essential Guide to Getting Organized and Tackling Tough To-Dos" is just what it says it is: a compilation of lists to help readers navigate everything they might need for weddings and funerals, household maintenance and vacations, divorces and diaper bags.  Watch Tahari discuss the book »



Along the same lines, she's behind a new iPhone application -- a travel packing list, available through the iTunes store -- that she said has been downloaded in about a dozen countries.



"It's just how my brain is wired. It's part of my DNA," said Tahari, vice chairwoman and creative director of Elie Tahari, the fashion design house bearing her husband's name. "I don't know how to operate other than to make a list."



CNN sat down with Tahari to discuss when her list-making started, what she's passed on to her children (son Jeremey, 8, weighs in) and how being stuck in a snowstorm inspired her. Here are excerpts from that interview.



CNN: You've earned the nickname "The List Mistress," but when did this, dare I say, obsession start?



Tahari: From a very young age, I was a compulsive list-maker. I was always organizing something or doing some kind of list. The first list I really remember making was taking an inventory of every piece of clothing in my closet and seeing how many different outfits I could make. I think I came up with 112 combinations.



CNN: The book covers such a wide range of topics: weddings, the home, pregnancy, travel, medical, emergencies, divorce and more. How many of these lists are or were based on your own organizational needs?



Tahari: Ninety percent of the book came from actual experiences I've lived through myself. The other 10 percent, I basically did the research. [She has a degree in journalism and is a former TV producer.]



I fell off a horse two years ago, and I broke my back. I'd never been hospitalized before, so I never knew what it was like to be hospitalized. If you have a friend or family member who's in the hospital, bring them a blanket. They're always going to be cold, and the blankets they give you in the hospital don't cut it. And the nurses? You need them; they don't need you. A little batch of cookies or brownies goes a long way with the nurses. And you know what? You'll have a lot better hospital stay.



CNN: Some of these to-do lists seem more fitting and standard than others. How did you decide what would go in the book?



Tahari: People say, "Why the emergency chapter? If you're in the middle of an emergency, you're not going to grab the book." Obviously, you're not going to have the book with you in the middle of the emergency. ... But I lived through at least three tornados in Atlanta [Georgia], one terrorist attack in New York and one blackout in New York. And after the blackout, I realized my family doesn't have a  plan. I wanted to at least stimulate the idea of having a plan.



CNN: Can you give me an example of a topic you had to research?



Tahari: Cars. I

***

CHICAGO, Illinois (CNN) -- The body found inside an SUV Monday morning has been confirmed to be Oscar-winning actress Jennifer Hudson's 7-year-old nephew, a top FBI official said.



The white SUV where the child's body was found is taken away to be examined by investigators.



The medical examiner positively identified the body found in the white Chevrolet Suburban as Julian King, Chicago Police Superintendent Jody Weis said Monday afternoon.



Julian had been shot to death, said police spokeswoman Monique Bond.



Police are collecting evidence from the Suburban and reviewing surveillance tapes from all over the city as the investigation continues, Weis told reporters.



"There's a lot of work to be done. We'll be sure we go through this thoroughly," he said.



Asked about possible motives, Weis said, "We don't know what the motive really was at this time. But, clearly you have people who do know each other, so it wasn't a case of a stranger-type homicide."



Earlier Monday Deputy Chief Cmdr. Wayne Gulliford said police found the body inside a parked white Chevy Suburban with a license plate matching the description in the child's Amber Alert, after responding to "a call about a suspicious auto" on Chicago's West Side at approximately 7 a.m.



He had no details on the body, pending the medical examiner's report.



Julian has been missing since Hudson's mother and brother were found dead in their home Friday.  Watch police say they've ID'd the body »



Over the weekend, Hudson offered a $100,000 reward for the safe return of her nephew.



"Please keep praying for our family and that we get Julian King back home safely," Hudson said in a posting on her MySpace page Sunday. "If anyone has any information about his whereabouts please contact the authorities immediately."



Hudson also posted two pictures of her nephew wearing the brown-and-orange striped polo shirt he was wearing when he was last seen.



Earlier, Hudson viewed the bodies of her mother, Darnell Donerson, and brother, Jason Hudson, the Cook County medical examiner's office told CNN on Sunday. They were found shot to death Friday in their South Side Chicago home.  Watch the latest on the Hudson case »



Julian's stepfather, William Balfour, was detained over the weekend for questioning in connection with the case, a police spokesperson told CNN. He was subsequently transferred to prison on a parole violation charge, the spokesperson said.



No charges had been filed against anyone in connection with the murders.



According to the Illinois Department of Corrections, Balfour, 27, spent nearly seven years in prison for attempted murder, vehicular hijacking and possessing a stolen vehicle.



Chicago news station WLS reported Saturday that Julian was not with Balfour when he was detained.



Hudson's sister, Julia Balfour, made an emotional appeal Saturday for the safe return of her son.



"My greatest fear has already happened, my greatest hope is for having my child. I just want my son," Julia Balfour said. "That's all I have to say. Just let my baby go."



William Balfour's mother, Michele Davis-Balfour, also urged the public to focus on finding Julian and said her son had nothing to do with the slayings.



"Out of no means did my son do this. This heinous crime to this family is unbelievable. It's unbearable," Davis-Balfour told WLS. Watch Davis-Balfour's emotional appeal »



Deputy Police Chief Joseph Patterson said the bodies of Hudson's mother and brother were found about 3 p.m. Friday, when a relative arrived and found the body of a woman on the living room floor. The relative backed out of the house and called police, Patterson said. Authorities found a man shot to death in a bedroom.



The Cook County medical examiner's office said Saturday that Donerson and Jason Hudson suffered multiple gunshot wounds and ruled the deaths homicides.



Neighbors reported hearing gunshots earlier Friday, Patterson said. Authorities found no signs of forced entry to the

***

(CNN) -- All three people on board a twin-engine plane died Wednesday when their aircraft crashed into a residential East Palo Alto, California, neighborhood, a spokesman with the Federal Aviation Administration said.





The victims were employees of Tesla Motors, a luxury electric car company.





"Three Tesla employees were on board a plane that crashed in East Palo Alto early this morning. We are withholding their identities as we work with the relevant authorities to notify the families," said CEO Elon Musk in a statement. "Our thoughts and prayers are with them. Tesla is a small, tightly knit company, and this is a tragic day for us."





The Cessna 310 took off from Palo Alto Airport at 7:53 a.m., FAA spokesman Ian Gregor said. During takeoff, the plane struck 60-foot high power lines, forcing the plane down onto a driveway, said Josh Cawthra, a National Transportation Safety Board aviation accident investigator.





Four homes were affected, and two had fire damage, Menlo Park Fire Chief Harold Schapelhouman said at a press conference.





A day care in a house sustained heavy damage when the plane went down, East Palo Alto Police Capt. Carl Estelle said. No children were there at the time.





The craft's fuselage landed in a house's yard, sparking a fire that destroyed several vehicles, Estelle said. One of the engines fell elsewhere in the neighborhood, apparently hitting the rear overhang of a yard, he said.





"Miraculously, incredibly, no one was injured on the ground," Schapelhouman said.





The crash site was about one mile northeast of the airport, he said. The travelers were headed to Hawthorne Municipal Airport in Hawthorne, California, more than 350 miles south, according to Gregor.





Gregor noted foggy conditions, but said it was not known if the weather played a role in the accident. Gregor said the cause of the crash was unknown.





Patricia Armistad said she lives maybe four or five houses from the impact site.





"I heard a loud bang and when I went to my bedroom window I felt a big hit, like an earthquake," she said.





She ran outside into the thick fog and immediately saw neighbors rushing to help, she said. Residents pulled people from the damaged houses and used their garden hoses to extinguish fires, she said.





iReport: More photos from the scene





The crash triggered a massive power outage in the area.





In addition to transmission lines, the aircraft also struck a transmission tower, Pacific Gas and Electric spokesman Joe Molica said.





The tower and lines run electricity into neighboring Palo Alto, he said.





Some 28,000 customers lost electricity, but power had been restored to all by 6:15 p.m., according to the City of Palo Alto Web site.





CNN's Khadijah Rentas contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Mount Redoubt, the Alaskan volcano expected to erupt at any time, is getting a bit more edgy.





Dark areas show a mudflow from the peak of Mount Redoubt earlier this week.





The Alaska Volcano Observatory said in a statement Friday "volcanic tremor" has increased in "amplitude."





The activity on the 10,197-foot peak is "more energetic than that of the previous several days. However, it is still less vigorous than that observed last weekend," the observatory said.





Peter Cervelli, a research geophysicist with the observatory, told CNN that "every indication is that we're heading toward an eruption."





Cervelli said scientists don't know exactly when it will happen, but if it does happen, it could be days or weeks -- or even hours.





"I would not be surprised to see it erupt at anytime," Cervelli said. "We're going to know it when we see it."  Learn more about Redoubt and its history »





Scientists raised the alert status Sunday to a "watch" level, the second-highest, based on seismic activity detected January 23.





The peak is about 100 miles southwest of Anchorage, the state's most populous city.





Mount Redoubt last erupted nearly 20 years ago, in December 1989, and that eruption lasted until April 1990. Geologists think there could be an eruption "similar to or smaller than the one that occurred in 1989-90." PopSci.com: Predicting eruptions





That eruption spread ash in Kenai and Anchorage, where it disrupted air traffic operations. Cervelli said the ash plumes caused engine failure on a jet.





The 1989-90 eruption also spurred volcanic mudflows, or lahars, that flowed east down the Drift River. The ash fall was seen as far away as Fairbanks and the Yukon Territory border. PopSci.com: Prehistoric explosions wiped out ocean life -- and created petroleum





The observatory has set up a Web camera near the summit of the volcano and another within Cook Inlet. It plans to do continuous visual surveillance, measure gas output and analyze satellite and weather-radar data.

***

ROME, Italy (CNN) -- An Italian newspaper and magazine published excerpts of what they said were audio recordings of Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi talking with an escort at the center of a corruption probe.



Veronica Lario, the wife of Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, pictured, filed for divorce in May.



The daily La Repubblica and its sister magazine L'Espresso said the recordings posted on their Web sites Monday were of Berlusconi and Patrizia D'Addario. She has said that an Italian businessman hired her and other women to attend parties at Berlusconi's homes.



In June, D'Addario told CNN that she had turned the tapes over to a prosecutor in Bari, southern Italy. Through her attorney, she refused to comment on the authenticity of the excerpts released Monday.



But in a statement carried by the Italian news agency ANSA, Berlusconi lawyer Niccolo Ghedini said the prime minister is challenging the "truthfulness and legality" of the recordings.



"We can only regard the material as worthless, completely false and the result of invention," Ghedini said. "In any case, the act of its publication is an illegal act in itself, which will need to be pursued, and all legal actions will be taken against any body who publishes such material."



Berlusconi, the 72-year-old media mogul-turned-prime minister, has denied the allegations.



According to La Repubblica, the conversation between D'Addario and Berlusconi took place in October and November at the prime minister's house in Rome. It also published an excerpt of what it said was a conversation between D'Addario and Gianpaulo Tarantini, the businessman accused of hiring D'Addario and other escorts.



Prosecutors in Bari, in southern Italy, are investigating allegations that Tarantini bribed health officials to buy prosthetics and other medical supplies from a company he and his brother own. Tarantini has denied any wrongdoing and says he brought women to the parties to make a "beautiful impression."



"I have never paid money to those who accompanied me except for refunding their trip expenses," he said in a statement issued last month. "I exclude that the premier could have been aware of these reimbursements and I want to ask forgiveness for having involuntarily damaged him."



Berlusconi's private life has been in the spotlight since his wife of 19 years, Veronica Lario, filed for divorce in May. The split followed reports that Berlusconi went to the birthday party in Naples of an 18-year-old girl, with whom Berlusconi has denied having an inappropriate relationship. And the Spanish newspaper El Pais has published what it said were photos of racy parties at Berlusconi's villa on the island of Sardinia, including one picture that showed scantily clad women.



But despite the swirl of scandal, Berlusconi remains popular, consistently scoring approval ratings well over 50 percent.



CNN's Hada Messia contributed to this report.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- The creators are billing it as one of the coolest hostels in the world and it's undoubtedly one of the most novel overnight stays you are ever likely to experience. Welcome to the Jumbo Hostel -- an old Boeing 747 which is being converted into a 25-room hostel at the Stockholm-Arlanda airport.



The Jumbo Hostel is currently being refurbished and will open for business in December 2008.



The idea is the brainchild of Swedish businessman and entrepreneur Oscar Dios, who has been running hostels in Uppsala, Sweden for the past five years.



Renovation work is underway on a plane which used to carry in excess of 350 passengers. Jumbo Hostel is scheduled to open for business in December 2008 and will provide accommodation for up to 85 guests.



CNN spoke to Dios about how he got the project off the ground. "We were looking to expand the business but it was more or less impossible to find reasonably priced housing at the airport. And you cannot build a new house and run a hostel because it is too expensive," he said.



It was in 2006 that Dios first heard about the Boeing 747, which was for sale. Formerly flown by the now defunct Transjet Airways, the plane was wasting away in a hangar at Arlanda airport and hadn't flown since 2002.



"The plane was in a terrible state when we first saw it," he said. "But we contacted the owners and gave them a fairly good offer, I think."



Although he wasn't prepared to let on exactly how much he paid for the old Boeing, Dios confirmed that the price tag was a six-figure sum (in euros).



Dios took possession of the 1976 Boeing 747-200 -- one of 393 built by the company until 1991 -- in June 2007 and by December he had reached agreement with the airport authorities about his unique proposal.



In August 2008 the plane was finally moved to its permanent home at Arlanda airport's main entrance, where it will now stay.



Apart from the engines being removed from the wings before purchase, the plane, from the outside, looks almost exactly as it did when it was grounded.



The interior, for obvious reasons, is a different matter. Dismantling and stripping out all the old equipment and instruments started earlier this year. The final phase of refurbishment is nearing completion and Dios says it complies with the same building regulations required for a house.



There will be two types of accommodation. A basic room will be roughly six square meters in size with sleeping space for three adults. It will cost €110 ($150) per night.



But if you fancy splashing out, you can book the top deck, complete with the cockpit suite, which comes with a private bathroom and panoramic views of takeoffs and landings. Dios envisages newlyweds taking advantage of this more expensive option, which costs €500 ($700).



If you don't want to spend a whole night on board you can hop on and relax in the cafe suite for a couple of hours at a cost of €25 ($35). This will also afford you the opportunity of striding out onto the wing and taking in the views of the bustling airport.



While most large commercial planes end up in vast aircraft boneyards, some, like the Jumbo Hostel, find new lives.



New York based urban architects Lot-ek plan to create a library in Guadalajara, Mexico, made by recycling 200 Boeing 727 and 737 fuselages. And Californian millionaire Francie Rehwald has started building a house from the parts of another scrapped 747.

***

JUAREZ, Mexico (CNN)  -- A deadly trade is occurring along the U.S. border with Mexico, federal officials say -- a flood of guns, heading south, used by drug thugs to kill Mexican cops.

Authorities recently seized these .50-caliber bullets, already belted to be fed into a machine gun.

In Mexico, guns are difficult to purchase legally. So, officials say, weapons easily purchased in the United States are turning up there.

"The same routes that are being used to traffic drugs north -- and the same organizations that have control over those routes -- are the same organizations that bring the money and the cash proceeds south as well as the guns and the ammunition," says Bill Newell, a special agent with the U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives.

Police in Mexican border towns fear for their lives, and with good reason. Five high-ranking Mexican police officials have been killed this year in what Mexican officials say is an escalating war between police and drug cartels.

In Juarez, Mexico, just across the border from El Paso, Texas, a police commander was gunned down in front of his home. The weapon used to kill Cmdr. Francisco Ledesma Salazar is believed to have been a .50-caliber rifle. The guns are illegal to purchase in Mexico but can be obtained just north of the border at gun shows and gun shops in the United States.

ATF special agent Tom Mangan says the .50-caliber rifle has become one of the "guns of choice" for the drug cartels. The weapon fires palm-sized .50-caliber rounds that can cut through just about anything.

Mangan showed CNN the power of the rifle on a gun range near Phoenix, Arizona. The weapon, a Barrett, was seized in an ATF raid. A round fired from 100 yards away tore through a car door and both sides of a bulletproof vest like those used by Mexican police.

"There's nothing that's going to stop this round," Mangan says.

The rifle was intercepted as it was being smuggled into Mexico. Mangan says investigators believe four others already had passed through the border.  Watch how the weapons fuel a little-known war Â»

The ATF has been trying to help Mexican police by cracking down on illegal purchases of guns and ammunition. Operation Gunrunner has led to several arrests and seizures of guns and ammo. But the operation has mainly shown just how big a problem exists, authorities say.

One recent seizure in a Yuma, Arizona, storage locker yielded 42 weapons and hundreds of rounds of .50-caliber bullets already belted to be fed into a machine gun-style weapon.

The guns confiscated included AK-47 rifles and dozens of Fabrique National pistols. The semiautomatic pistols fire a 5.7-by-28 millimeter round, which is technically a rifle round, according to the ATF. Newell says the round has a special nickname in Mexico. "It's called 'mata policias,' or 'cop killer,' " he says.

Mexican authorities along the border recently met with their counterparts in the United States, hoping more cooperation will lead to more arrests of criminals and fewer killings of Mexican police officers.

Guillermo Fonseca, Mexico's regional legal attachÃ© for the West Coast, told CNN the violence in his country is "problem number 1" -- and police in his country are outgunned. Officers in Mexico lack heavy firepower, he says. With the presence of large-caliber weapons from the United States, drug cartels and criminals have the advantage in what he says is basically a war. Part of the solution, he says, is for the United States to give Mexico more information about who is selling these guns illegally in the United States. Then Mexico could go after the buyers.

"We have access to systems to trace guns that have been smuggled into Mexico, and that has worked very well," Fonseca told CNN. "We need more information about the people who are actually purchasing the guns. We need to prosecute those people, to convict those people. In our opinion, that's the next step we have to take."

Last year

***

(CNN) -- The winner of the Nobel Peace Prize will be announced Friday morning in Oslo, Norway.





A record number of nominations -- 241 -- were received by the Nobel committee this year. Of those, 53 are organizations, including WikiLeaks -- the website founded by Julian Assange that facilitates the publication of classified information. It made headlines for leaking documents and videos related to the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and also released thousands of U.S. diplomatic cables.





Among the individuals thought to be strong contenders are several involved in fomenting peaceful uprisings in the Arab world.





They include Wael Ghonim, the former Google executive who used social media to jump-start social change in Egypt, Tunisian blogger Lina Ben Mhenni, who criticized the regime long before the uprisings began, dispersing information to the outside world, and Israa Abdel Fattah, who helped organize Egypt's online April 6 Youth Movement in 2008 and played a role again in 2011.





Other favorites are Sima Samar, head of the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission and a trailblazer for women's rights in Afghanistan, German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, Cuban dissident Oswaldo Payas Sardinas and Ghazi bin Muhammad, a Jordanian advocate of interfaith dialogue.





Another organization which could be in with a shot is Memorial, a Russian civil rights group known for its fight for to protect refugees and victims of political persecution and human rights violations in war zones.





Apart from the winner, the names of the nominees cannot be revealed by the Nobel committee for another 50 years.





Last year, Chinese dissident Liu Xiaobo won the prize but could not attend the award ceremony. The political activist and longtime critic of communist rule in China is serving an 11-year prison term for what the Chinese government calls "inciting subversion of state power."





U.S. President Barack Obama won for what the committee called "his extraordinary efforts to strengthen international diplomacy and cooperation between peoples" in 2009.





Nobel prizes in literature, chemistry, physics and physiology or medicine were awarded earlier this week.





Swedish poet Tomas Transtromer won the Nobel Prize in literature on Thursday. The Swedish academy said it gave the award to Transtromer "because, through his condensed, translucent images, he gives us fresh access to reality."





On Wednesday, the prize in chemistry was awarded to Israeli scientist Daniel Shechtman.





Shechtman is a professor at the Technion-Israel Institute of Technology and is known for his discovery of quasicrystals.





On Tuesday, the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences named Saul Perlmutter from Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory and the University of California, Berkeley; Brian P. Schmidt of Australian National University and Adam G. Riess of Johns Hopkins University and the Space Telescope Science Institute the winners of the 2011 Nobel Prize in physics. They made the discovery that our universe apparently is expanding at an accelerating rate some 14 billion years after the Big Bang.





The Nobel committee on Monday named Ralph Steinman, a biologist with Rockefeller University, and scientists Bruce A. Beutler and Jules A. Hoffmann, the winners of the 2011 Nobel Prize in physiology or medicine.





The Nobel Peace Prize has been awarded 91 times since 1901.





The youngest Nobel Peace Prize laureate is Mairead Corrigan, who was 32 years old when she was awarded the Peace Prize in 1976. The oldest winner is Joseph Rotblat, who was age 87 when he was awarded the Prize in 1995.





The Nobel Peace Prize is awarded by a committee of five people chosen by Norway's parliament and is named for Alfred Nobel, a Swedish scientist and inventor of dynamite.





Nominations come from lawmakers around the world, university professors, previous Nobel laureates and members of the Nobel committee.

***

(CNN) -- Felipe Massa has revealed that he hopes to be at his home Brazilian Grand Prix -- but he won't be behind the wheel of his Ferrari.



Felipe Massa has been given the all-clear to begin training as he bids to return to the race track.



The 28-year-old had aimed to be able to return to racing before the end of this Formula One season, but is resigned to getting fit for 2010 following his horrific crash in July.



Massa is now able to begin his rehabilitation after having plastic surgery on Monday to repair the broken bone in his cranium that resulted when a loose spring from Rubens Barrichello's Brawn hit him in the helmet during qualifying in Hungary.



The operation, at the Sao Paulo's Albert Einstein hospital, took around four and a half hours, Ferrari revealed on its official Web site.



Massa told UK newspaper The Guardian that his next step was to head to Europe to use a simulator and drive go-karts as part of his fitness evaluation.



He had hoped to return to action at Interlagos -- where his 2008 world championship dream was crushed by Lewis Hamilton despite winning the race -- on October 18, but said that he would only be there as a spectator.



"That was the race I wanted to come back in, but it's difficult to say if it would've been possible. It will be difficult to watch it, but I will be there," Massa said.



He told Italian newspaper Corriere della Sera that he still held a slim hope of driving in the final race of this season in Abu Dhabi on November 1.



"In 2010 I'll be back for sure and 100%, but it would be a dream to drive in Abu Dhabi," Massa said.



Massa will be replaced by Giancarlo Fisichella for the final five races of 2009, with the veteran Italian having been released from his contract by Force India to take over from test driver Luca Badoer.



He said he had never doubted that he would that he would get behind the wheel of a Formula One car again.



"It is my life," Massa, who is expecting his first child in November, told The Guardian. "For me, the worst thing that happened was not being able to race. If you can't drive that's terrible.



"But my wife has already asked me, at least 10 times, 'Are you sure you don't feel any doubts or worries?'



"Always, I say, 'No, because this is what I like to do.' If I don't drive then I am not the same person. Ever since I was a small boy this is my life. This is what I like to do.



"So I really hope, and expect, nothing will change inside me when I go back into the car and start pushing myself to the maximum again."

***

(CNN)  -- A Malaysian model, who was set to become the first woman to be caned in the southeast Asian country for drinking beer in public, had her sentence postponed Monday until the end of the Islamic holy month of Ramadan.



Kartika Sari Dewi Shukarno's punishment is unique in that she has opted to go through with it.



Authorities had picked up Kartika Sari Dewi Shukarno, 32, from her father's house Monday morning and were taking her to a prison in the eastern state of Pahang when the van turned around and brought her back.



"They sent her back to the house. They said the top official asked them not to bring her to Kuala Lumpur," said Kartika's father, Shukarno Abdul Muttalib.



Authorities in Pahang said the delay would run until the month of fasting ends. Monday was the third day of Ramadan.



An Islamic, or sharia, court in Pahang had fined Kartika -- a Muslim -- $1,400 (5,000 Malaysian ringgit) and sentenced her to six strokes with a rattan cane for drinking at a hotel bar two years ago.



Kartika, a 32-year-old part-time model and mother of two, was visiting Malaysia from Singapore at the time.



She pleaded guilty, paid the fine, and wanted her caning to be carried out in public.  Watch more on Kartika's release »



She said she lost her job as a nurse in Singapore and took up part-time modeling to support her husband in raising their two children. Her son has cerebral palsy; her daughter a heart condition.



"I want to move on. This case has been hanging over me for a long time," she told CNN last week.



On Monday morning, Kartika hugged her children, bade a tearful goodbye to the throngs of people gathered at her father's house, and boarded the van.



She was to be taken to a prison on the outskirts of Kuala Lumpur. The caning would have been carried out within seven days of that, making her the first woman to be caned in Malaysia under sharia law.



Kartika's punishment is unique in that she has opted to go through with it. Two other Malaysians sentenced to the same fate have filed appeals, the Syariah (Sharia) Lawyers' Association of Malaysia said.



The case drew widespread attention and condemnation, in and outside Malaysia.



The moderate Muslim country has a dual-track justice system, in which Islamic courts operate alongside civil courts.



Muslims -- who make up about 60 percent of the 28 million who populate the country -- are forbidden from consuming alcohol. Other religious groups are exempt.



Though caning is used as a supplementary punishment in Malaysia for at least 40 crimes, such as rape or immigration violations, it is not meted out by Malaysia's civil court for alcohol consumption.



But the country's civil system also cannot overrule a sharia court sentence.



In this respect, Kartika would have been the first woman to be caned for violating the country's religious laws.



"Regardless of whether or not such penalties fall under Syariah law or civil law, we believe that these should be repealed, as they go against the fundamental human right to be free from torture and violence," said Haslinah Yaacob, vice president for the All Women's Action Society.



CNN's Anna Coren in Sungi Siput, Malaysia, contributed to this report.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN)  -- Are circus elephants abused? Or are the elephants under the big top healthy and thriving in a caring environment?



Ringling Bros. and Barnum & Bailey elephants pass the U.S. Capitol in a parade this week in Washington.



That's the issue a federal judge must decide in a 9-year-old legal dispute pitting four animal rights groups against the nation's most famous circus, Ringling Bros. and Barnum & Bailey.



Closing arguments will be heard Wednesday in the case in which the circus is accused of mistreating its 54 Asian elephants, which are protected under the 1973 Endangered Species Act.



Under the law, endangered species cannot be "harmed, harassed, wounded, injured or killed."



The circus "is in fact in violation of the federal Endangered Species Act as a result of their routine practices that they use on the elephants," according to Tracy Silverman, general counsel for the Animal Welfare Institute.



Silverman alleges that the circus uses "bull hooks" and electrical prods called "hot shots" to train and manage the elephants and that handlers chain the elephants for extended periods of time. These practices violate federal law, Silverman says.



But the circus says that no evidence was presented at the six-week trial that such tools as bull hooks and hot shots are used on elephants.



"Ringling Bros.' practices are well known to the federal government who regulates their business," says Ringling Bros. attorney Michelle Pardo.



The tools the circus uses to handle animals "are time-tested, approved and commonly used," she added.



Pardo insists the trial evidence "showed the elephants are healthy, well cared for and they're thriving in Ringling Bros. care."



Besides the Animal Welfare Institute, other groups involved in the suit are the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, the Fund for Animals and Born Free USA, acting with the Animal Protection Institute.



While the animal rights groups allege the circus "severely mistreats and abuses" elephants, the circus says the animals are not only healthy but "really do benefit from the enrichment that the circus provides."



No immediate ruling is expected from the judge.

***

GONAIVES, Haiti (CNN) -- Four major storms have raked the desperately poor country of Haiti in the past month, leaving at least 341 people dead.



A man carries drinking water through the flooded streets of Gonaives, Haiti, on Monday.



Nine of the deaths were attributed to Fay, 79 to Gustav, 183 to Hanna and 70 to Ike, said Abel Nazaire, deputy head of Haiti's Civil Protection Service.



The country's fragile infrastructure was overloaded after the storms and officials were concerned that the floodwaters could spread disease, Sophie Boutaud de la Combe, a spokeswoman for the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, said Tuesday.



Gonaives, on the west coast, is one of the hardest-hit cities.



This week, Gonaives was knee-deep in filthy water and reachable only by water or air, with many of Haiti's bridges destroyed and roads flooded.



"My home is destroyed. I have no place to live with my kids. Everything I had just washed away," Roselene Josef told CNN.  Watch desperate survivors in Gonaives »



Another survivor said, "The flood washed away everything. I couldn't save anything. They should just move this city. Floods always destroy it."



Aid workers warned of a deepening humanitarian crisis as attempts to deliver aid were frustrated by logistical problems.



The U.S. Navy's USS Kearsarge arrived in the waters off Haiti on Monday to support the U.S. Agency for International Development's efforts to assist after the devastation.



The vessel will help move cargo and equipment between affected cities and will deliver relief supplies, said the U.S. Naval Forces Southern Command.



But Monday, the Kearsarge wasn't able to deliver anything to Gonaives, because the ship's scout helicopters couldn't find a suitable place for supplies to be unloaded, according to The Associated Press.



A U.S. Coast Guard ship carrying 35 tons of relief supplies arrived Saturday in Gonaives.



The U.S. cutter was preceded by a ship carrying U.N. relief supplies, including 19 tons of high-energy biscuits, 50,000 bottles of water and water purification tablets, which arrived Friday in Gonaives, said Myrta Kaulard of the United Nations' World Food Program.



CNN's Karl Penhaul watched as U.N. troops handed out scant supplies of food and water to a long line of Haitians.  The line became chaotic, with people fighting over supplies.  Watch the devastation Penhaul found in Haiti »



Hundreds of people had taken shelter in a school. They told Penhaul they had not received relief aid in a week.



An official in Gonaives told the AP on Monday that nine people had died in shelters, including two children. It was not clear if they had died of starvation or some other cause, Daniel Dupiton of the region's civil protection department told the AP.



When floodwaters were at their highest, some residents camped out on their roofs, their clothing and blankets hung over the sides of buildings.



Some people "have lost really everything. ... These are not rich people, these are people who were really struggling [already] against high food prices," Kaulard said.



U.S. Navy Capt. Frank Ponds said he had flown over part of southern and northern Haiti. "I saw towns that were completely flooded," Ponds said. "I saw infrastructure, such as bridge[s] and roads, totally wiped out."



The eye of Hurricane Ike never touched Haiti earlier this week, but the storm system did bring heavy rains and winds to Gonaives and other towns.



Jean Pierre Guiteau, executive director for the Red Cross in Haiti, said 52 people were killed when a river burst its banks in the mountain town of Cabaret near the capital, Port-au-Prince.



Another 21 bodies were pulled from sea at Fort-Liberté, Haiti, close to the border with the Dominican Republic.



"It's a very grim picture," Guiteau said Sunday. "Things certainly are getting no better."



CNN's Karl Penhaul contributed to this report.

***

(Travel + Leisure) -- China can seem as impenetrable as it is imposing. Consider the numbers: it's the world's most populous nation (1.3 billion), where more than 100 cities have populations over a million. Fifty-six ethnic groups are spread across 22 wildly distinct provinces and five autonomous regions, in a landmass slightly larger than the U.S.



The Tiananmen Gate at the entrance to the Forbidden City in Beijing



Its history seems limitless and its traditions just as deep. But here and now, change is the only real constant -- and it is accelerating at a dizzying pace. (One thousand new cars hit the streets of Beijing every day.)



How do you begin to fathom a country of such extremes? The futuristic cities glittering above timeworn villages; the great rivers and vast empty deserts; the radical new architecture juxtaposed with millennia-old monuments; the ceaseless push-and-pull between Confucianism, Communism, and commerce. Where do you even begin? Have no fear. Start here with Travel + Leisure's suggestions for where to go and what to see.



Beijing: 2--3 days



China's political, historical and cultural capital demands at least three days -- for the familiar landmarks of Tiananmen Square and the Forbidden City, and also for Beijing's 21st-century architecture, such as the "Bird's Nest" Olympic National Stadium by Herzog & de Meuron and the glass-and-titanium dome that is the National Grand Theater. China's contemporary art scene finds its nexus in the galleries and cafés of the Dashanzi Art District, home to the new Ullens Center for Contemporary Art. Travel+Leisure.com: Tips for flying to China



Beijing's atmospheric hutong, or traditional alleyways, are fast disappearing; explore the bustling ones off Nanluoguxiang, near the 13th-century Drum and Bell towers. Then check out the Legation Quarter, a high-end restaurant, entertainment and cultural development set within the former American Embassy compound. And save a morning to stroll the manicured, 660-acre grounds of the Temple of Heaven, site of the circular Hall of Prayer for Good Harvests, the 15th-century apogee of Chinese ritual architecture. Travel+Leisure.com: Chinese taxi trips



The Great Wall



Numerous stretches of the Great Wall are easily accessible from Beijing (ask your hotel to arrange a car or bus tour). But avoid the tourist trap of Badaling and head to the slightly less trammeled Mutianyu section, a 90-minute drive northeast of the Forbidden City. Early morning is best; try Asia 1 on 1 for day trips. Travel+Leisure.com: Where to stay in China



Shanghai: 2--3 days



First stop: the riverfront promenade known as the Bund, with its Art Deco, Neoclassical, and Beaux-Arts façades, bars and shops, and views of the space-age towers of Pudong. In People's Park you'll find the Shanghai Museum and the Museum of Contemporary Art. Weekdays are the best time to wander among the pine trees and ponds of the 16th-century Yuyuan Gardens.



Xintiandi was the birthplace of the Chinese Communist Party; now this restored two-block district is defined by upscale shops and restaurants. The leafy, rustic French Concession is the favored destination for cutting-edge fashion and designs for the home. Shanghai's latest secret? Lane 248, a gritty, narrow street now inhabited by artsy cafés and intimate boutiques, hidden behind Taikang Road. Travel+Leisure.com: China shopping tips and strategies



Guilin: 2 days



(Two hours by air from Shanghai.) With its sheer limestone peaks jutting up from the Li River, Guilin is straight out of a traditional Chinese landscape painting, and remains one of China's most breathtaking sights. Take in the view from Solitary Beauty Peak and marvel at the formations of the Reed Flute Cave. Spring and fall are best; avoid the heat of July and the crowds of the holiday seasons.



Xi'an: 2 days



(Two hours by air from Beijing.) China's ancestral capital is renowned for its "terra-cotta army," created during the Qin dynasty (221--207 B.C.): thousands of life-size clay warriors stand in

***

SAVANNAH, Georgia (CNN) -- Walt Peters knows what it's like to fear for his life. He knows how it feels to board a plane, deploying for combat. He knows the feeling of making it home alive.



Walt Peters is often among the last people soldiers see as they deploy and the first they see upon their return.



That's why the retired Vietnam veteran has stood outside at Hunter Army Airfield in Savannah, Georgia, for the past four years as a beacon of pride and support, welcoming home returning soldiers and wishing "Godspeed" to those deploying.



"To me, if it wasn't for our soldiers and our veterans, we would not have this beautiful country," says Peters. "These guys are our freedom."



Peters, 64, has been one of the last people that about 20,000 soldiers so far have seen before boarding the plane for the war zone -- and one of the first seen upon return.



No matter what time the soldiers' flights are arriving or departing -- many take place in the middle of the night -- Peters is there to shake their hands and give them a token of support: a small American flag. Some of those flags, Peters says, have gone to Iraq and back.



"When they touch that flag, we're giving them a piece of our country, saying, 'Thank you.'"



Peters is not the only volunteer showing his support at each flight. But he does all of this nearly blind.



He says learned he had chemical diabetes nearly 10 years ago after he was exposed to Agent Orange during his Vietnam tours. He has lost almost all of his sight over the past few years, but that hasn't depleted his dedication to the soldiers.



"When I went to Vietnam on my tours I'd never had this. I had never had nobody say, 'We appreciate your service. We thank you for what you're doing for our freedom,'" Peters says. "When they get on that plane, they're gonna know that this old Vietnam vet cares."



Peters first became involved greeting flights through the Savannah Red Cross in 2004 when a friend from his fraternal Moose Lodge brought him to welcome a returning flight. Peters has since become a flight greeting leader, bringing in and training his own volunteers.



His crew includes Moose members and Vietnam veterans. So many flights come in, Peters says, that it's impossible to be present for all of them. He's worked as many as three flights in one day, in a 26-hour period.   Watch how Peters sends off and greets deploying and returning U.S. soldiers »



Peters and his volunteers arrive two hours before a flight's arrival or departure to set up their tables and brew coffee. He makes sure he walks around and talks with the troops when they come through for processing.



"I'm a combat veteran; the soldiers know I can relate to them," Peters says. "I tell them, 'It's OK to be scared. You stay scared, you stay alive.'"



Peters also talks to the soldiers about the Adopt-A-Soldier program, asking them to fill out a card so a family can "adopt" them and send care packages and necessities to them in Iraq or Afghanistan.  Watch Peters and volunteers interacting with U.S. soldiers before their deployment to Iraq »



Peters says the most important thing is to show the soldiers "the support and the spirit that they need behind them as they step up to get on that plane."



"Sometimes it breaks your heart because you ask yourself, 'Which one of these beautiful people is not coming home?'"



But as long as there are soldiers deploying and returning, Peters says he'll be there.  Watch Peters talk about one of the highlights of his military career »



"I see the roots of our country and our future in every one of these soldiers," he says.

***

(CNN) -- More than 1,300 Palestinians died and about 5,400 others were wounded during Israel's three-week offensive in Gaza, the Web site of the Palestinian Authority's Central Bureau of Statistics said Monday.

A Palestinian man Monday prays in the rubble of his home,  destroyed during Israel's offensive in Gaza.

Louay Shabana, head of the agency, said more than 22,000 buildings were damaged or destroyed. Shabana put the economic destruction at more than $1.9 billion.

The fighting largely stopped Sunday with a cease-fire. Israel has said 13 of its citizens -- including 10 soldiers -- were killed during the offensive, which started December 27.

Israel said its offensive was aimed at stopping Hamas militants from firing rockets into southern Israel.

Gaza is in need of humanitarian, economic, sanitary and social help as a result of the Israeli attacks, Shabana said.

The attacks destroyed public sector and private buildings in Gaza, affecting even the United Nations Relief and Works Agency's facilities and halting economic and social services, the statistics agency said.  Watch Palestinians recover bodies from rubble »

Gaza's gross domestic product was slashed by 85 percent during the 22 days of war, and it could take a year for the economy to recover, the agency said in a preliminary report.

About 80 percent of crops in Gaza were destroyed, according to the agency.

"The pervasive sense here among the population is one of overwhelming grief, so many families have been destroyed in so many ways," said John Ging, the top United Nations official in Gaza.

Ging, UNRWA's Gaza director of operations, said the bill could reach "billions of dollars."

Among the dead were 159 children, two of whom died in an UNRWA school that was shelled Saturday, Ging said.

Gaza's main border crossings, which Israel often closed in response to Hamas rocket attacks, were open Monday. Infrastructure repairs were being made, but 400,000 people still had no water, according to Ging.

Streets in some northern Gaza towns were flooded with sewage, and about 50 U.N. facilities were damaged, he said.

More than 170 supply trucks crossed into Gaza on Monday, less than a third of the daily number that crossed in 2005, said John Holmes, U.N. under-secretary-general for humanitarian affairs and emergency relief coordinator.

Israel tried to avoid civilian casualties in Gaza, a senior Israel Defense Forces officer said in a posting Monday on the IDF Web site.

"This was not a war against the Palestinians," he said. "It was an operation of self-defense against Hamas and related terror organizations. Unfortunately, this task was made extremely difficult by Hamas, as they made the choice to use civilians as human shields."

Israel began the offensive in response to rocket fire by Hamas militants after showing eight years of restraint, the officer said.

The operation's goal, he said, "was to improve the security situation in southern Israel, and to facilitate peaceful living for the Israeli civilians living there."

"We asked ourselves how to accomplish this, and the answer was to hit Hamas hard -- to strike the tunnels, the terrorists themselves, and all of their assets -- in order to prevent them from committing war crimes by firing rockets that target our civilian population," the officer said.

He said seven rockets have been fired from Gaza into Israel since Sunday's cease-fire declaration.

"We want to give this cease-fire a chance, but if Hamas chooses not to, we will utilize all of our means," he said.

***

(CNN) -- A predicted busy hurricane season this summer is on a collision course with an unprecedented oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico, and the results are anyone's guess, weather experts say.





"The problem is that this is a man-made experiment we wish we hadn't made," said Jenni Evans, a professor of meteorology at Penn State University.





Scientists on Thursday said as much as 19,000 barrels of oil have been spewing every day from the BP well in the Gulf, making it the largest oil spill in U.S. history. Most of the oily water lies off the coast of Louisiana, where marshes and wildlife have been coated and the state's fishing and tourism industries have taken direct hits.





Not only is it hard to track how contaminants would be redistributed by a hurricane, but it's also hard to predict how the slick would affect the storm, NOAA Public Affairs Officer Dennis Feltgen and Evans agreed.





Evans said the storm could either move the oil along the water's surface or it could mix the oil with the water and cause it to sink. If the oil moved horizontally, the shoreline would be polluted, she said. If it moved vertically, the marine life under the surface would suffer.





The oil could slow the storm's growth, Feltgen said. Evaporated ocean water fuels hurricanes, and the oil forming a film across the Gulf could buffer the water from the air, preventing the ocean water from feeding the hurricane, he said.





But other scientists say the storms could be stronger than usual because the black oil would heat the water faster and accelerate formation of hurricanes, which rely on warm waters for their development, Evans said.





CNN meteorologist Chad Meyers said there was another threat from the volatile mix of hurricanes and oil: storm surge.





"All the winds would be coming here," he said, indicating the coast on a map, "and there would be storm surge here. All the winds would be going this way, and there would be scouring and cleaning of the beaches on this side. But the storm surge that could make its way up and bring the oil miles inland could be completely contaminating the oil inland."





Oil in the Gulf coast isn't the only worry for hurricane forecasters this year: In earthquake-devastated Haiti, roughly 1.5 million displaced people are at risk. They are living under tarps and in tents in makeshift camps.





In Haiti, aid agencies relocated about 20,000 people who were vulnerable to flooding and mudslides when the rainy season began. But it is impossible to hurricane-proof the congested tent cities that many are calling home right now, said Heather Paul, CEO of  the aid program SOS Children's Villages.





Paul's program is working to provide permanent, stable homes to orphans in the form of polypropylene shelters. While her program's anchored shelters have the greatest potential to withstand strong winds, the outlook appears grim for many Port-Au-Prince residents.





"It's only short of a miracle to prepare these people for hurricane season," she said.

***

Caracas, Venezuela (CNN) -- Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad and Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez pledged closer cooperation on Monday, vowing to fight poverty and imperialism.





The two leaders signed a series of accords in the areas of industry, science, technology and politics, the state-run AVN news agency reported. Sitting side by side in front of a room full of reporters, they presented a united front in their opposition to the United States.





"It's clear they are afraid of our development," said Ahmadinejad.





Earlier, at a welcoming ceremony outside the Venezuelan presidential palace, the Iranian president called Chavez his "dear brother," and said his nation has peaceful intentions.





"Our weapon is logic. Our weapon is culture. Our weapons are human values," he said.





Chavez pledged to work with his Iranian counterpart to stop the "imperial insanity" of the United States, which he described as a "threat for the world."





The Venezuelan president mocked concerns from Washington about his country's relationship with Iran, joking that U.S. media reports made it sound as though he and Ahmadinejad would be launching missiles and bombs at the U.S. capital.





"We are not warmongers," Chavez said, as the Iranian president nodded in agreement. "Iran has not invaded anybody."





It's no coincidence that Venezuela is Ahmadinejad's first stop on a four-nation Latin America tour this week. Despite their cultural differences, Venezuela and Iran have found significant common ground: Both are among the world's top crude oil exporters, and their leaders are strong allies united by a fierce opposition to what they describe as U.S. imperialism.





The Iranian leader arrived in Caracas on Sunday and is traveling with his ministers for foreign affairs, energy and economy, according to IRNA, Iran's official news agency.





Over the years, the two nations have signed more than 270 accords, including trade deals and agreements on construction projects, car and tractor factories, energy initiatives and banking programs.





Chavez has also helped the Islamic republic forge relationships with other members of the Bolivarian Alliance of the Americas, an eight-nation regional bloc Chavez founded.





Even before he arrived, Ahmadinejad's plans for a Latin American tour grabbed global attention, as tensions grow between many Western powers and Iran over Tehran's nuclear program.





Officials in the United States and other Western nations have ratcheted up sanctions against Iran several times since a November report by the U.N. nuclear watchdog agency said the Iranian government was developing the technology needed to build a nuclear weapon. Last month, U.S. President Barack Obama announced sanctions against Iran's central bank.





On Monday the United Nations' nuclear watchdog agency confirmed that uranium enrichment has begun at a nuclear facility in northern Iran.





Iran says there's a medical purpose behind the nuclear program.





But in Washington, U.S. State Department spokesman Victoria Nuland said the confirmation that Iran was enriching uranium to "a level that's inappropriate" is "obviously a problem."





Not everyone in Venezuela is happy with Ahmadinejad's visit.





Diego Arria, an opposition politician, described the trip as a "provocation" to the United States and an embarrassment for Venezuela.





"It comes at the worst moment -- at a time when Ahmadinejad is being looked at by the international community with great fear. ... It's bringing the threat to the United States closer to home," he said.





The Iranian president is scheduled to visit Nicaragua, Cuba and Ecuador later this week as part of his five-day tour.





CNN's Catherine E. Shoichet in Atlanta and CNN's Luis Carlos Velez in Caracas contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Authorities who seized $8,500 and assorted jewelry from a Tennessee man after a traffic stop in east Texas have agreed to return the property after his case drew attention from CNN.



Police in the small East Texas town of Tenaha are accused of unjustly taking valuables from motorists.



Roderick Daniels said police in Tenaha, Texas, took the money in October 2007 after they stopped him for doing 37 mph in a 35-mph zone. He said police threatened him with money-laundering charges and promised not to prosecute if he signed over the cash, which Daniels said was to buy a new car.



Daniels and other motorists who have been stopped by Tenaha police are part of a lawsuit seeking to end what plaintiff's lawyer David Guillory calls a systematic fleecing of drivers passing through the town of about 1,000. On Friday, after Shelby County District Attorney Lynda Russell refused repeated requests to discuss cases like Daniels' with CNN, her office filed papers dropping its claim on his property.



"I just feel blessed," Daniels said. "I am happy everything is going good right now. ... I just want to celebrate."



Texas law allows police to confiscate drug money and other personal property they think is used in the commission of a crime. If no charges are filed or the person is acquitted, the property has to be returned.



Russell issued a statement through her attorneys denying impropriety, and George Bowers, Tenaha's longtime mayor, says his police follow the law. But Guillory, who brought the lawsuit challenging the seizures, called cases like Daniels' "a shakedown" and "a piracy operation."



Guillory said authorities in Tenaha, about 180 miles east of Dallas, seized $3 million from 2006 to 2008. In about 150 cases, virtually all involving African-American or Latino motorists, the seizures were improper, he said.



All defendants in the lawsuit deny wrongdoing. In a written statement, Russell's attorneys said the prosecutor "has used and continues to use prosecutorial discretion ... and is in compliance with Texas law, the Texas constitution and the United States Constitution."



But the attention paid to Tenaha has led to an effort by Texas lawmakers to tighten the state's forfeiture laws.

***

(CNN) -- Springwood teenagers Dean, Kris, Jesse, Nancy and Quentin are having trouble not sleeping: They're knocking back coffee, popping pills, anything to delay another date with their dream stalker (which may explain why these high school students look like college grads). When one of them does drop off, the bedsheets turn red.





Wes Craven's 1984 slumber party massacre started from scratch -- it was a low-budget item from what was then a genuine independent studio, New Line -- and became the iconic horror franchise of the decade.





With his battered fedora, a striped sweater, a razor-glove and a face like Sal's Famous, Freddy Krueger was the most personable boogie man Hollywood had come up with in a long time, so what if he was also a child abuser? A recurring nightmare who stalked teenagers as they slept, Freddy preyed on the defenseless and played fast and loose with physics: If Salvador Dali had created a slasher movie villain, he might have come up with someone like Freddy.





After eight movies, a TV series and a comic book, you might think Mr. Krueger had been done to death. It's been seven years since Freddy put Jason Vorhees in his place (in "Freddy vs Jason"). But you can't keep a good bad guy down, and at the rate Hollywood is cannibalizing its horror back catalogue, we'll be seeing remakes of the remakes any day now.





Directed by pop video director Samuel Bayer and written by Wesley Strick and Eric Heisserer, the new "A Nightmare on Elm Street" is actually a lot like the old one. So much so, for a while you wonder why they didn't just re-release it. (You'll wish they had.)





Surprisingly, Bayer doesn't go the Michael Bay route and give it a high-gloss, ADD tempo, but in duplicating the most memorable bits from the original (the glove in the bath, for instance, and the face coming through the wallpaper), he fails to put his own stamp on it.





As Freddy, Jackie Earle Haley, who was Oscar nominated for playing a sex offender in "Little Children" (and who went on to play Rorschach in "Watchmen" and the battered psychopath Noyce in "Shutter Island") finds Robert Englund a tough act to follow.





Haley drops his voice an octave and comes on heavy -- this Freddy mostly keeps his quips to himself -- but he's significantly shorter than Englund, and the make-up suggests nothing so much as Ray Bolger in "The Wizard of Oz": the scarecrow who didn't even scare the crows.





iReporter gives new "Nightmare" an "A"





Branching out tentatively toward something new, the film toys with repressed memory syndrome and the intriguing suggestion that maybe Freddy was innocent; that he has every right to be angry about the lynch mob that incinerated him. I'll leave you to imagine how far the filmmakers go with that radical notion, but maybe a prequel would have been a more rewarding way to go?





The new "Nightmare" also proudly introduces a clinical-sounding term called "micro-naps," a side effect of sleep deprivation that handily justifies more shock effects even as the number of survivors is whittled down to two (gratifyingly, they're the least synthetic of the young cast members).





But is it scary? Barely. In the wake of "Paranormal Activity," Freddy's grandstanding theatrics seem pretty old hat. There is nothing about this redundant remake to give anyone sleepless nights, unless it's threat of yet more of the same old same old. Enough with the "re-imagining," Hollywood; just imagine!

***

(CNN) -- Lewis Hamilton won his first Formula One grand prix in almost four months as world champion Sebastian Vettel spun out of the race in Abu Dhabi during the opening lap.





McLaren's British driver took full advantage of Vettel's slip up -- the first time the 2010 and 2011 title holder has retired from a race since the Korean Grand Prix last year.





Hamilton fended off the challenge of Fernando Alonso's Ferrari while Jenson Button clung onto third in the face of fierce competition initially from Red Bull's Mark Webber and then from Alonso's teammate Felipe Massa.





Vettel, who secured the 2011 crown last month, had his lead at the top of the drivers' championship cut to 119 points by Button, who sits on 255. Hamilton stays fifth on 227 points but closed on Alonso in third (245) and Webber (233).





Latest F1 standings after Abu Dhabi GP





It marked Hamilton's third victory in what has been a difficult season for the 2008 world champion, who admitted before the race that personal problems had contributed to his below-par campaign.





"I feel fantastic," Hamilton said in a post-race press conference. "It was one of my best races. To hold off one of the best drivers in the world is very tough to do.





"I'm just happy. This is great. It's early days but this is definitely the start of something. We've got another great race ahead of us in Brazil. I've just got to keep my mind on the game."





Starting second on the grid, Hamilton watched Vettel beat him into the first corner but at the second a puncture to the German's back right tire sent him spinning off the track.





Vettel trundled round the circuit and made it back to the pit lane but Red Bull's mechanics decreed the damage too severe for him to rejoin the battle.





After the race he told reporters: "I don't know what happened. We lost pressure all of a sudden out of the exit of turn one. I don't why. There is nothing that I did differently to any of the other laps.





"We need to find out why, maybe I cut the kerb at a funny angle. It is tough, but I used the opportunity to learn a bit on the pit wall."





In his absence Hamilton maintained a two-second gap over Alonso for most of the race, while Webber and Button's battle saw them swap third and fourth place regularly.





Alonso did hold the lead for four laps after Hamilton's second pit stop but he couldn't build up enough of a cushion to rejoin the race ahead of his former McLaren teammate.





The Spaniard said: "It was a fantastic race for me as well. We fight most of the race three-five seconds distance to Lewis.





"We were close but we had some traffic in the pit entry behind a HRT and in the last stint they had a little bit more pace so it would have been difficult to win the race even if we had got into the lead.





"I'm happy with second."

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Do you know your "futtock" from your "baggywrinkle?"



A sailor stands on the "widow-maker" -- or bowsprit of his yacht.



Don't be concerned if you don't, as they are both relatively obscure terms used in sailing.



It is a sport littered with odd words and phrases and MainSail has put together a list of 10 of the weirdest below.



They are bound to raise a smile and will certainly make you more knowledgeable on the water -- who knows, you could even impress friends and colleagues with your mastery of obscure nautical terminology.



Scuttlebutt The scuttlebutt is a cask on a ship containing the vessel's drinking water. It was named this as the container was traditionally a small barrel, the so-called "butt," which had been "scuttled" -- had a hole made in it -- so water could be accessed. As sailors would often gather around the scuttlebutt to chat, the word has also taken on a slang meaning of rumor or gossip.



Rollocks A commonly used spelling for "rowlocks." These are the spaces cut into the vessel or small clasps raised up from the side of smaller boats that are used to rest oars when the boat is under paddle.



Are there any other nautical words you'd like to add? Tell us in the Sound Off box below.



Poop deck A poop deck is a deck at the rear of a ship, generally formed by the roof of a cabin. If a wave washes over this deck from behind the vessel, it is said to be "pooped."



Widow-maker This is a colloquial term for a boat's bowsprit -- the long pole, or "spar," extending from the bow used by sailors to tend to sails. The treacherous bowsprit earned its name and reputation from of the number of sailors who have lost their lives falling from the it.



Baggywrinkle This strange-sounding gem is simply a soft covering for ropes aboard yachts that prevent chafing of the sails. Where ropes and lines come into contact with sails there is serious potential for damage to the sail due to the abrasive nature of most rigging.



Mainsheet The mainsheet is a rope or line attached to the boom that allows the sailor to control the speed of a boat by adjusting the main sail.



Bilge The bilge is the lowest part of the interior of a ship. It marks the spot at the inside-bottom of the hull, below any floorboards, and it sits below the water-line.



Futtock Futtocks are the curved timbers used to form the interior ribs on the hulls of wooden ships.



Cat-head The cat-head is a large wooden beam that extends from vessels at a 45 degree angle and is used to assist in raising and lowering the anchor. Many cat-heads have had the faces of lions or other large cats carved into them -- however, it's not known if this gave the cat-head its name, or came as a result of the name.



Escutcheon The place on the stern of a ship where the boat's name is written is known as the escutcheon.

***

Fort Hood, Texas (CNN) -- The call came over the radio. "Shots fired." And then, even worse: "Officer down."



Billy Rhoads, chief of the Fort Hood Fire Department, grabbed a radio and donned his flak jacket. He jumped into his SUV and tore down the road. A dozen or so blocks away, at the Soldier Readiness Center, a gunman had opened fire on soldiers.



Rhoads stepped from his truck. His department's motto is "Protecting those who protect us." He hoped he was not too late for that.



The scene was chaotic. Wounded and dead soldiers were everywhere.



"I was listening to people hollering for help, and I was trying to get in there to see what we had," Rhoads recalled three days after the November 5 attack. "I assumed that we would have maybe several victims. I had no idea, I just could not fathom what we were going to encounter."



Amid all the army uniforms, one dark blue uniform stuck out.



It was Fort Hood police Sgt. Kimberly Munley, who, officials say, shot the alleged gunman, Maj. Nidal Malik Hasan, to end the rampage. She suffered three gunshot wounds.



"I broke and ran over to her," Rhoads said. "I got over to her and began trying to talk to her."



Rhoads and Munley had worked closely in the past. He considers her a friend.



Army medics had fashioned a makeshift tourniquet on her leg. He bent down to comfort her. She was extremely weak and unable to speak loudly.



"I just kept reminding her of her daughter and that she needed to stay with us for the baby's sake," he said. "She's a very tough cookie."



Munley, 34, had served in the Army herself before becoming a police officer at Fort Hood. Her husband is a staff sergeant in the Army, and their daughter is 3 years old.



Munley's neighbors have said she is so tough, she stopped burglars from entering her house last year.



Said Rhoads of Munley: "The old saying that dynamite comes in small packages is very true."



Emergency personnel were flooding the scene, and helicopters were en route to evacuate the injured.



Rhoads, who began as a volunteer firefighter 26 years ago when he was just a teen, took over the scene as incident commander. But first, he paused for a quick prayer.



"I just asked the Lord to be with me, to give me the strength and the courage I need to do my job wisely and keep my people safe."



Even as the first responders worked on the dozens of wounded soldiers, they weren't certain whether there were other shooters on the post.



"The thought's always there on your mind that there could be another suspect in the area," Rhoads said.



As for Hasan, the fire chief says that discussing the shooting suspect is too emotional. "I saw the suspect from a distance, but I never got a look at him."



Rhoads' prayers remain with the soldiers he tries to keep safe. "It's very emotional for everybody when we lose our soldiers. But when we lose them here at home like this, it takes it to a different level."



He says the department has arranged for counselors to be available for the firefighters as they process all they have endured. They've received phone and text messages from fire and police departments all across the country, offering support and prayer.



But the main thing his firefighters have relied on, he says, is each other.



"Afterward, everyone started to console each other and talk to each other. It's a brotherhood."

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- As a bill that would expand education benefits for veterans has become a flash point in the early sparring between Sens. John McCain and Barack Obama, some Republicans admit that the Democrats may have outmaneuvered them on the issue.



Sen. John McCain has sided with President Bush on opposing a popular GI Bill in Congress.



McCain has defended his opposition to the bill that would expand education benefits for veterans, saying it would hurt the military that he hopes to lead.



The bill, which passed the Senate last week 75-22, would expand education benefits for veterans who served at least three years in the military after the September 11, 2001, attacks.



A former Navy officer and prisoner of war during Vietnam, McCain says the bill would hurt military retention by 16 percent and be a disincentive for service members to become noncommissioned officers, which he called "the backbone of all the services."  Democrats cite the Congressional Budget Office, whose figures say the expanded benefits would boost enlistment by 16 percent. Watch more of McCain's comments »



"I think John McCain has been outmaneuvered," said GOP strategist Ed Rollins, who had served as former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee's presidential campaign chairman. "Sometimes in politics, there are intellectual issues and emotional issues."



"John McCain is going against veterans groups; he is going against a constituency that should be his. ... But I think he is on the wrong side of this issue," Rollins said. "A lot of Republicans are voting for this, and I think to a certain extent as it moves forward there will be more and more. There will be tremendous pressure from veterans groups past and present and I think you will see a lot of bipartisan support for this as well."



Over the weekend, Obama, who appears to be the likely Democratic nominee, again tried to tie McCain to Bush by noting that both of them oppose the GI Bill expansion.



"I revere our soldiers and want to make sure they are being treated with honor and respect," Obama said Saturday in Puerto Rico. "I think the GI Bill is one way for us to do that, and I hope that John McCain and George Bush decide they believe the same thing."   Watch more of Obama's comments »



Obama hasn't served in the military.



"It is really probably Barack Obama's shining moment in this campaign. The way he phrased this debate, the way he framed the issue," said Robert Zimmerman, a Democratic superdelegate who supports Sen. Hillary Clinton's run for president.  Watch analysts weigh in on the issue »



"Intellectually, John McCain may be right, the president may be right. Emotionally, you are on the wrong side, you can never win an emotional battle in an intellectual argument," Rollins added.



Rollins also said that despite McCain's war hero status, history has shown veterans who run for president don't always capture the veteran vote.



"I think the bottom line here in the statistic that was astonishing to me is George Bush's father was a war hero lost the veterans' vote to Bill Clinton who ... did not serve in a war," Rollins said. "Same way with Bob Dole, a war hero lost the vote."



McCain, along with Sens. Lindsey Graham of South Carolina and Richard Burr of North Carolina, has introduced an alternative bill that would increase education benefits on a sliding scale based on an individual's years of service.



The GI Bill was created in June 1944, when President Franklin D. Roosevelt signed into law the Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944. It was designed to help educate and train military veterans returning from WWII. According to the Department of Veterans Affairs, 7.8 million of 16 million troops who served in WWII received educational or vocational training from the GI Bill.



Soldiers, Marines and airmen, speaking at a Capitol Hill rally on April 29, said they are not given enough funds from the bill to cover college expenses as they were promised.



Todd Bowers, who served two tours in

***

Washington (CNN) -- Transportation Secretary Ray LaHood announced Monday that the Obama administration will push legislation designed to overhaul and upgrade America's aging oil and gas pipeline network.





The initative is partly a response to a series of deadly pipeline explosions, including one last year in San Bruno, California, that killed eight people and destroyed 37 homes. A February pipeline explosion in Allentown, Pennsylvania, resulted in the deaths of five people.





San Bruno's faulty pipeline was installed in 1956; Allentown's was installed in 1928.





During a news conference in Allentown, LaHood called on the major pipeline companies to conduct a review of their oil and gas delivery systems to identify the lines with the highest risk. He also urged them to speed up the most critical repair work.





"People deserve to know that they can turn on the lights, the heat or the stove without endangering their families and neighbors," LaHood said. "The safety of the American public is my top priority, and I am taking on this critical issue to avoid future tragedies we have seen in Allentown and around the country."





Among other things, the administration wants to increase the maximum civil penalties for pipeline violations from $100,000 per day to $250,000 per day. It also wants to increase fines from $1 million to $2.5 million for a series of violations.





The administration also would like to boost the number of safety inspectors and improve data reporting to increase the likelihood of early identification of possible pipeline safety risks.





The Transportation Department is planning to convene a pipeline safety forum on April 18 in Washington.





The United States has more than 2.5 million miles of pipelines used for the delivery of oil and gas, according to the Transporation Department.





CNN's Jeanne Meserve and Mike Ahlers contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- There's great potential in the field of regenerative medicine, but doctors caution against seeking experimental treatments in an unregulated environment.





Having had three surgeries for a neck injury already, Indianapolis Colts quarterback Peyton Manning reportedly took a private jet to Europe to get a stem cell treatment that is not approved in the United States. The therapy involved injecting fat cells from Manning's body into his neck, according to Fox Sports.





Colts head coach Jim Caldwell declined to discuss Manning's health situation when asked about the stem cell treatment at a press conference Monday. Further details of Manning's treatment are not available.





Discussing the choice to go abroad for stem cell treatments puts researchers in an awkward position, because the therapies offered abroad are unregulated and not confirmed to work, but they are based on concepts that the American medical community believes have potential. Generally, however, the consensus is that patients should not try to seek experimental stem cell treatments elsewhere, as there's no telling if they will work or have serious side effects.





"We believe that there is merit to this approach, we just want to see it (carried out) well, ethically and rigorously," said Dr. Joshua Hare, director of the Interdisciplinary Stem Cell Institute at the University of Miami's Miller School of Medicine. Scientists like Hare are trying to gather medical evidence through clinical trials to ensure that these treatments are safe and effective.





Leaving the country to seek experimental treatments abroad is common, experts say, although no one has exact numbers for how many people seek stem cell treatments in other countries. Medical tourism as an industry is projected to grow 35% annually, and could reach 1.6 million American patients going elsewhere for treatments by 2012, according to the Deloitte Center for Health Solutions. (The agency had previously predicted 6 million by 2010, but those numbers have not panned out.)





Besides orthopedic injuries like Manning's, there are stem cell therapies available elsewhere aimed at heart disease and neurological conditions, even autism. Germany, Panama and Thailand are all popular countries for seeking these kinds of treatments, Hare said.





The basic idea is that stem cells have regenerative potential, and can even form new tissues. Mesenchymal stem cells are a particular kind that can become a variety of cell types, including bone cells and cartilage cells.





While there is a lot of exciting research going on in the field of stem cells, the results aren't all good. A 2009 study in the journal PLoS Medicine documented the case of an Israeli boy who had gone to Russia to get fetal stem cells injected into his brain and spinal cord. He developed a brain tumor, apparently as a result of the treatment, although the tumor was slow-growing and benign.





And earlier this year, authorities closed down a large stem cell clinic in Germany called the XCell-Center, which had operated through a loophole in the country's regulations regarding unapproved experimental treatments. The clinic had been implicated in the death of an 18-month-old boy after a stem cell treatment; a 10-year-old almost died after receiving something similar.





One problem with going abroad for these unapproved treatments is that there's no follow-up; you won't have anyone back home to take care of any complications that might result, Hare said. In cardiac stem cell trials conducted in this country in people with advanced heart disease, medical professionals do follow up with patients and treat any complications that may arise.





Another concern is that, without proper regulation, any given stem cell therapy abroad may actually be different every time you receive a treatment, said Jeffrey Karp, director of the Laboratory for Advanced Biomaterials and Stem-Cell-Based Therapeutics at Brigham & Women's Hospital in Cambridge, Massachusetts.





There also may not be any regulations on the quality of the treatment, so you really don't know what you're getting, he said.





"Regulatory agencies such as the FDA can ensure that cell therapy that reaches patients is safe, effective, and that quality control is established for isolating the cells, manipulating them outside of the body, and delivering them,

***

(CNN) -- With a week to go before Election Day, most recent national polls show Democratic presidential nominee Barack Obama with an advantage. But how much are they to be believed?

As Election Day gets closer, will the race tighten in the polls?

The most recent national CNN poll of polls showed Obama with an 8-point lead over Republican presidential nominee John McCain, 51 percent to 43 percent. The polls were conducted October 21 through October 26.

Most other national polls show Obama with a lead ranging between 5 points and double digits.

A look at CNN polling during the same period before Election Day in 2000 and 2004 suggests that political observers and campaign supporters ought to be cautious in declaring the race over because of current polling numbers. See the latest state and national polls

When a presidential race has a non-incumbent in the lead, like this year, the poll numbers tend to tighten as Election Day gets closer, CNN senior researcher Alan Silverleib said.

"Any time it looks like they are on the verge of voting somebody new into office, there is buyer's remorse," he said. "Based on that, and the fact that the country has been so polarized in recent elections, there's pretty good reason to think that the polls might tighten up a little bit."

Four years ago, a national CNN poll of polls released about a week before Election Day showed President Bush leading Massachusetts Sen. John Kerry by 3 points, 49 percent to 46 percent.

The poll was released October 25 and reflected likely voters' choice for president. Election Day was November 2 in 2004.

A national CNN poll of polls released November 1 showed Bush leading Kerry by 2 points, 48 percent to 46 percent.

President Bush won by 3 percentage points, 51 percent to 48 percent.

In 2000, it was a bit of a different story. Election Day arrived November 7 that year.

A CNN/USA Today/Gallup tracking poll conducted October 29 through October 31 showed Bush, then the Texas governor, leading Democratic Sen. Al Gore, 48 percent to 43 percent. The poll had a margin of error of plus or minus 2 percentage points.

A subsequent poll conducted November 2 through November 4, released two days before the voters cast their ballots, showed the same results.

Gore, however, ended up winning the popular vote by about 540,000 votes. When broken down by percentage, both candidates had about 48 percent of the popular vote. Bush won the Electoral College, and thereby the presidency, by 5 electoral votes.

Two of the battleground states this year, as in many recent presidential elections, are Ohio and Florida. What did the polls say before Election Day in those states four years ago?

In Florida, a CNN/USA Today/Gallup poll conducted about a week before Election Day showed Bush leading Kerry 51 percent to 43 percent. The poll had a margin of error of plus or minus 4 percentage points and was conducted October 21 through October 24.

Kerry caught up to Bush in the polls before Election Day and led by a single point, 48 percent to 47 percent, in a similar poll conducted October 28 through October 31. The poll had a margin of error of plus or minus 3 percentage points. Bush won Florida by 5 percentage points in 2004.

In Ohio four years ago, a CNN/USA Today/Gallup poll showed Kerry leading Bush by a point -- 49 percent to 48 percent -- about two weeks before Election Day. The poll was conducted October 17 through October 20 and had margin of error of plus or minus 4 points.

A week before November 7, Election Day, a similar poll showed Kerry leading Bush 50 percent to 46 percent. The poll was conducted October 28 through October 31, and the margin of error was plus or minus 3 percentage points. Bush won Ohio by 2 points in 2004, 51 percent to 49 percent.

Obama leads McCain in recent CNN poll of polls conducted in both states. In Florida, he leads McCain 49 percent to 45 percent. The polls were conducted

***

PADUCAH, Kentucky (CNN) -- The aunt of former U.S. soldier Steven Green told jurors tearfully Monday that "We did not send a rapist and murderer to Iraq" as defense lawyers worked to save her nephew from a death sentence.



Former U.S. soldier Steven Green has been convicted of raping and killing a 14-year-old Iraqi girl.



Patty Ruth, a Texas elementary school principal, told a civilian jury about Green's childhood as a reader who loved to be hugged by relatives.



"I do not know how we got to this spot," Ruth said in emotional testimony. "I do not know how this happened."



Green was convicted last week in U.S. District Court in Kentucky of murder, rape, conspiracy and obstruction of justice in connection with a 2006 rape-and-murder south of Baghdad. A jury found him guilty of raping a 14-year-old girl, then killing her and setting her body on fire to destroy evidence. Green also was found guilty of killing the girl's parents and 6-year-old sister.



He could become the first former U.S. soldier to face the death penalty for war crimes before a civilian court, where he was tried because he had been discharged from the military before his crimes came to light. Four other former soldiers are in prison for their roles in the crimes and the cover-up that followed.



Green faces either death or life in prison without the possibility of parole. His fate will be in the hands of the jury by week's end.



The defense has presented relatives and medical professionals who have pieced together a picture of Green's childhood as troubled and stressful. It included the breakup of his parents' marriage, routine beatings to the point of injury by an older brother and being moved about through Texas by his mother.



Ruth, the final witness scheduled by the defense, said that when the idea of the military came up for her nephew, she was unsure the Army would accept him. Even after he received a high school diploma through a correspondence course, she said, "I could not picture or imagine how he could make it through basic training."



Ruth said when she saw a picture of her nephew before his September 2005 deployment, she knew he wasn't "Stevie" anymore, standing as tall as his father in the photo at Fort Benning, Georgia.



When he returned from Iraq 11 months later, he was "remarkably thin," Ruth said, and she noticed circles under his eyes. Green and his father spent a night at the Ruth home, his aunt said, and she remembered him pacing the yard while smoking. He fell asleep wearing his fatigues, she said.



When asked by the defense about the rape-murder plot that left an Iraqi family dead near Yusufiya, about 20 miles south of Baghdad, Ruth responded, "He's my Steve. You can't stop loving someone."



There were other family members in the court on Monday. Green's father, John, an oil field worker from Midland, Texas, looked on quietly. He did not testify.



Ruth, who is John Green's sister, noted for the jury that Green's mother is not at the trial this week. The mother is moving and had to attend a going-away party, Ruth said.



Final arguments are expected Wednesday.

***

New York (CNN) -- The New York Police Department has the capability to "take down" threatening airplanes, Commissioner Raymond Kelly said in an interview broadcast on CBS's "60 Minutes" Sunday night.





Asked by interviewer Scott Pelley whether he is satisfied with the handling of potential aerial threats, Kelly responded, "It's something that's on our radar screen. In an extreme situation, we would have some means to take down a plane."





"Do you mean to say that the NYPD has the means to take down an aircraft?" Pelley asked.





"Yes," Kelly answered. "I prefer not to get into the details, but obviously this would be in a very extreme situation."





"You have the equipment and the training?"





"Yes."





There was no comment on the technology that would be used in such a situation.





The interview highlighted several other security measures undertaken by the police department's Counterterrorism Bureau, including random subway searches, officers carrying nuclear radiation detectors on their gun belts, and thousands of "smart" cameras in downtown Manhattan.





Kelly created the Counterterrorism Bureau in early 2002 in response to the September 11th attacks that occurred 10 years ago last month. Since the attacks, more than $3 billion has been spent on New York City counterterrorism measures. Units within the bureau include the Joint Terrorism Task Force, the Lower Manhattan Security Initiative, and the Terrorism Threat Analysis Group.





"We're the number one target in this country. That's the consensus in the intelligence community," Kelly said. "We're the communications capital. We're the financial capital. We're a city that's been attacked twice successfully, we've had 13 terrorist plots against us since September 11th. No other city has had that."





On Monday, Mayor Michael Bloomberg commented on the police department's counterterrorism efforts at an education conference in Manhattan.





"Our job is to make sure that we stay safe going forward and that we show that the terrorists didn't win and that New York City is back," he said. "The New York City Police Department has a lot of capabilities that you don't know about and you won't know about them."





Although he said that he "cannot guarantee that you are safe forever or perfectly safe," he added that "I can tell you in 10 years we seem to have stopped a number -- and who knows how many additional we don't know about -- attempts to have terrorism here."





He went on to reinforce his support for the police department and the spending involved in its operations: "We spend something like 8 1/2 billion dollars, including pension costs, on our police department and I think it is money well spent."





The specifics of the department's capabilities are not commonly discussed with the media. Kelly has said the department is taking every possible measure to keep New Yorkers safe.

***

(CNN) -- Before middle-aged men started singing "Viva Viagra" in TV ads, before former Sen. Bob Dole appeared in its commercials in the '90s, before the blue pill with a funny name entered the public lexicon, impotence was hush-hush.

Viagra entered the market 10 years ago, bringing once taboo subjects like erectile dysfunction out in the open.

Now there's no getting away from it.

In-boxes are clogged daily with spam mail promising cheap and instant manliness delivered fast and in bulk. Couples exchange amorous, come-hither looks followed by a lengthy recitation of side effects on TV ads. The pill helped more than 25 million men get their groove back and blasted the topic of erectile dysfunction into the open.

"It's like the nuclear explosion," said Dr. Irwin Goldstein, director of Sexual Medicine at Alvarado Hospital in San Diego, California. "It created sexual medicine. It allowed the taboo to be broken."

Since the diamond-shaped blue pill debuted 10 years ago, it has become embedded in the public psyche, late-night television jokes and urologists' offices.

"It is one of the revolutionary steps in sexual health," said Dr. Ira Sharlip, spokesman for the American Urological Association. "It ranks with the changes in cultural attitudes about sexuality that were started by [Sigmund] Freud, continued by [William] Masters and [Virginia] Johnson, the two researchers in the '60s, and the work that [Alfred] Kinsey did in the '40s.

"These were the huge steps in the development of our understanding of human sexuality and cultural attitudes of sex."

Men seldom talked about their bedroom troubles before the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved Viagra as the first oral medication for erectile dysfunction in 1998.

"We lamented the fact that the men had so much shame about erectile dysfunction, how rarely anyone came for medical attention," said Dr. Abraham Morgentaler, an associate clinical professor of urology at Harvard Medical School.

Penis injections and vacuum pumps were available, but these treatments weren't appealing. Men with medical conditions such as diabetes, prostate cancer, hyper cholesterol, endocrinological and cardiovascular problems weren't able to enjoy sex, Goldstein said.

"People who couldn't enjoy intimacy before have been given a second life...." he said.  "We have had a better life because of it."

Viagra increases blood flow to the penis, enabling a man to have an erection. The drug does not induce desire and works when the man is sexually aroused, according to Pfizer, the makers of Viagra.

Urologists heard from patients who had tried the pill that Viagra made them feel as if they were 20-year-olds again. Anti-impotence drugs Levitra and Cialis have come along since.

"Along with the birth control pill in the '60s, this pill really changed people, society and medicine," Goldstein said.  "It changed the patient-physician relationship. You can walk in and ask about sexual functions. It was a major taboo at some point."

Dr. Gerald Melchiode, a Texas psychiatrist, agreed that the pill has helped men open up about their sexual health, but finds the commercials a bit much.

"I've never run across men singing about their impotency," he said.

Since Viagra's appearance on the market, the dialogue about sexual dysfunctions has helped doctors identify other health problems in their patients, doctors say.

"You always hear someone drops dead,"said Dr. Chris Steidle, a urologist who wrote the book "Sex and the Heart." "It's not sudden death if you couldn't get an erection. It's a symptom of a heart condition. You wouldn't ignore a stroke, but you would ignore erectile dysfunction -- it's a significant symptom."

The man's penis is like "the tip of the iceberg" or "the canary in the mines," which serve as an indicator of overall health, Morgentaler said.

"There's now good evidence that shows that men with ED who

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- There was no shortage of superstars in Washington this week, including the middle school students of Atlanta, Georgia's Ron Clark Academy.



Ron Clark Academy students singing their newest song, "Dear Obama," in Washington this week.



"There are those Obama kids!"



"Those are the kids from TV!"



"Sing for us!"



The middle schoolers' ode to the political process, "You Can Vote However You Like," set to the tune of rapper T.I.'s "Whatever You Like," has garnered exhilarating fame nationwide.



Invited to perform at inauguration events, the boys and girls were stopped along every block in the capital by people who asked them to sing and pose for a picture.



"I have a sleepy energy," sixth-grader Kennedy Guest Pritchett said. "I feed off of the crowd and their cheers."



The students' new song, "Dear Obama," which they have performed this week, offers advice to the president on energy, taxes, financial regulation and al Qaeda and urges him to "control Ahmadinejad."



"Dear Obama hear us sing/We're ready for the change that you will bring/Gonna shine the light for the world to see/to spread peace hope and democracy. ... Fight for health care for the young so that coverage is available to everyone/It's time to find a renewable way to fuel our needs so we don't end up depending on Chavez and the Middle East." Watch the students sing "Dear Obama" »



The kids will perform Tuesday at the Africa and International Friends Inaugural Ball, sharing a stage with Usher and Patti LaBelle, one of many events in their packed schedule highlighted by a luncheon gala Monday to honor the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr.



"I want to do good every song we perform. When the crowd cheers, I feel like we did a good job," said Willie Thornton, a seventh-grader. "I feel a lot of adrenaline afterwards."



The students have met the Kenyan Boys Choir, who told their American counterparts what kind of animals they might see when the Ron Clark students travel to Kenya on a school trip in June.



At another luncheon, the sixth- and seventh-graders were thrilled to catch a glimpse of actor Ed Norton, the man who played the Incredible Hulk. But he didn't compare to singer Beyonce, who closed Sunday's star-studded Lincoln Memorial concert and drew giggles and shouts.



The kids gained notoriety just before the election when they appeared on CNN, singing "You Can Vote However You Like." They became media favorites overnight, appearing on several networks and shows. Dressed neatly in their school uniform of khaki pants, light blue shirts and navy blue blazers, they discussed the Iraq war, the economy and taxes with the composure of adults.



Their teacher, Ron Clark, known for his innovation, has used pop music to teach his students. He once changed the words of Rihanna's infectious hit "Umbrella" to teach geography.



"You have to give students something they can identify with, something that catches their enthusiasm and spirit," he said. "I'm so proud of them all. They've taught me a lot."



Before founding his school in the rough neighborhood of South Atlanta, Clark taught in Harlem, where he penned "The Essential 55," a rule-book for educators that caught Oprah Winfrey's eye. She talked about it on her show, and it soon became a New York Times bestseller.



This past Christmas, Clark received another gift from the talk show host: $365,000. Winfrey donated $1,000 for each day of the year. Clark has said that the money will help provide scholarships for a year.



The teacher said he plans to incorporate Barack Obama's inauguration into lessons throughout the rest of the school year.



"Our school is about politics and world issues and helping the kids understand that they have an important role in all of that," he said.



CNN's

***

(CNN) -- Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi's energetic response to Monday's earthquake has been generally praised despite his comparison of the ordeal of survivors staying in emergency tents to a camping weekend.

An elderly local resident bursts into tears during a visit by Silvio Berlusconi, wearing a fireman's helmet.

Berlusconi has visited the town of L'Aquila, the epicenter of the 6.3-magnitude quake, every day this week, talking to survivors and pledging government help to rebuild houses. He scrapped a visit to Russia that was planned for this week.

The PM has even been greeted with applause on occasions, according to CNN correspondent Paula Newton, who interviewed him on Wednesday.

"He was very tired when I saw him, you could tell he hadn't had much sleep," Newton said.

"In general he thrives on these events and politically it will probably give him a boost, if only temporarily."

However, she added that his visit to a dormitory where students were buried under rubble had upset some of the parents and relatives. "They were kept well back and he did not meet with them," she said.  Watch Berlusconi talk about the disaster »  (Italian version) »

"One relative, in obvious anger, asked another 'why is he here?' and another replied "he's taking care of elections, of course."

And true to form Berlusconi has been unable to avoid putting his foot in it. During a visit to one tent village where thousands who had lost their houses were staying, Berlusconi told German television "they should see it like a weekend of camping."

The trademark gaffe sparked predictable outrage. "He is a completely insensitive man who thinks wisecracks can solve every problem," Rina Gagliardi, a former senator of the Refoundation Communist Party, told Agence France-Presse.

"He can never be negative, but an earthquake disorients him because he can't blame the left for causing it, so his response is extreme optimism," she said.

Berlusconi is of course renowned for such off-the-cuff remarks. In November he described Obama as "handsome and suntanned."

He was also forced to issue an apology to his wife, Veronica Lario, in 2007 after she read reports of him approaching several women at an awards dinner and declaring: "If I wasn't married, I would marry you straight away."

Lario received the apology after sending a letter criticizing her husband to a newspaper in which she said his behavior was "unacceptable" and "damaging to my dignity."

Despite the most recent criticism, Berlusconi has won praise from the media for his limelight-hogging visits to the region. People in the temporary camps also say they are being well looked after by the authorities although they are desperate to collect their own things from their homes.

In his interview with CNN on Wednesday Berlusconi said every effort was being made to assess which houses were safe to enter.

"This is an aerial view of Onno, and you can see, unfortunately, how the town has been totally destroyed," the prime minister told CNN. "Here, we can go into greater detail and concentrate on individual houses. This helps us to assess the damage right away and tells us how much it will cost to rebuild."

The Italian government has said it will cost 1.3 billion euros (1.7 billion dollars) to repair or rebuild about 10,000 buildings damaged in the quake.

"We have the plans for reconstruction and intend to start immediately with the building projects," Berlusconi told CNN.

"We will build a new town near the capital, L'Aquila, and keep the possibility open for many families to stay, for the time being, in hotels along the coast, less than a hour away, in pleasant and comfortable circumstances."

Berlusconi said the plan for the new town would involve low-rate mortgages.

"This is not an alternative to the reconstruction," he said Wednesday. "These are additional houses."

***

TOKYO, Japan (CNN) -- Even in the midst of Japan's deepest economic recession since World War II, the country's love hotel industry is thriving.



The Style A hotel in Tokyo offers amenities.



"I'd hate to use the term "recession-proof," but it's certainly proven very resilient over the last six to nine months," said Steve Mansfield, CEO of New Perspectives, which operates six love, or "leisure," hotels in Japan.



One of them, the Bonita Hotel in Isawa, boasts a 257 percent occupancy rate. Rooms can be rented for three to 24 hours.



Mansfield's company estimates the industry in Japan pulls in $40 billion a year in revenue.



"It's a natural human desire. Even these days, on the weekend, every love hotel is full of people -- it's hard to get in. You can never stop sexual desire," said a woman with her boyfriend in Tokyo, who laughed in embarrassment when asked for her name.



Love hotels fill a need for privacy in a country where high population density often means couples have little time alone.



Rooms offer a broad assortment of features, including karaoke machines, PlayStation game consoles, DVD players, a variety of cosmetics, customized condoms and indoor-outdoor Jacuzzis.  Watch Morgan Neill's report from inside a love hotel »



Though required by law to have a front desk, most can be rented and entered without talking to a clerk.



The days of Japanese being ashamed to enter love hotels are coming to an end, though, Mansfield said.



"Seventy-five percent of our guests are members of our points program," he said. "They carry our points cards, they collect points and they receive gifts. That's something people are very comfortable with, and I think that reflects the customers that we attract."



Takashi Yamamoto, who designs love hotels in Tokyo, agreed.



"The bad image that love hotels had has faded over time. Also, customers started to raise their voices and became more selective about choosing hotels. In response, management has improved."



The flashiest love hotels are found in Osaka, including a Hello Kitty-themed hotel and one with a room featuring a merry-go-round.



Tokyo hotels tend to be tamer, focused on winning customers with amenities. The Style A Hotel, for example, offers a suite for $190 that includes a full-size Jacuzzi and a private sauna.



Though young couples make up the majority of customers, they are not the only ones. One man, who declined to be named, said: "I go to love hotels when I'm drunk and don't feel like going home."



Whatever the reasons, the hotels have been doing well enough that Mansfield recently went to London, seeking investors to expand.



"The industry has 25,000 hotels, and through our research we've worked out that 90 percent of owners have five or fewer hotels," he said.



That fragmentation is a structural inefficiency in the market, he said, one he would like to help correct.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- President Obama will address the future of the U.S. military prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, Thursday morning in a speech at the National Archives.



The Guantanamo facility houses terror suspects, and lawmakers don't want them in the U.S.



In a speech that is being billed as a major address, Obama is also slated to discuss issues of state secrets, transparency and protecting national security, White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs said.



Former Vice President Dick Cheney, one of the most outspoken critics of Obama's policies, is scheduled to give an opposing argument Thursday morning.



Cheney has charged that Obama's national security decisions have left the United States more vulnerable to attack.



Obama's address is scheduled for 10 a.m. ET at the National Archives. Cheney will speak before the conservative American Enterprise Institute at 10:45 a.m.



Obama is hoping to rally support behind his national security measures after angering some with his decision to resume the Bush administration practice of military tribunals and by reversing course on his decision to release photos of alleged inmate abuse at Guantanamo.



On Wednesday, Obama was dealt another blow when the U.S. Senate passed a measure that would prevent detainees at Guantanamo Bay from being transferred to the United States for now.



The measure passed with overwhelming bipartisan support in a 90-6 vote. A similar amendment has already passed the House. It was attached to a supplemental war funding bill.



Following in the steps of House Democrats, Senate Democrats rejected on Tuesday the administration's request for $80 million to close the Guantanamo facility. They instead asked that President Obama first submit a plan spelling out what the administration will do with the prisoners when it closes the prison.



Obama, in one of his first official duties as president, announced that he would close the prison by January 22, 2010.



Congressional Democrats, however, are now attempting to avoid an onslaught of criticism from Republicans, who argue it would be reckless to shutter the prison before deciding where to transfer the detainees.



FBI Director Robert Mueller told members of Congress earlier Wednesday that he is concerned about the potential dangers that may result from the release of detainees in the United States.



In response to a question from Texas Rep. Lamar Smith, the ranking Republican on the House Judiciary Committee, Mueller said he is concerned about the potential for fundraising to support terrorist groups and the radicalization of others, as well as the potential for attacks within the country.



Mueller also said that while he is not concerned about dangerous terrorists escaping from maximum security federal prisons, he is concerned about the potential of activities being directed from within prison walls, and he cited such actions by dangerous gang members.



Attorney General Eric Holder, the president's point man overseeing the Guantanamo plan, sought to downplay the FBI director's concerns and the Senate vote to bar funds.



"The concerns that have been expressed by the director and concerns expressed by other people will all be taken into account in formulating the plan that we will ultimately use," Holder told reporters late Wednesday.



"We're not going to do anything that's going to put the American people at risk," he said.



The attorney general continued to express confidence that the Guantanamo Bay prison camp will be permanently closed by Obama's deadline. iReport.com: Sound off on Obama, Cheney speeches



"We will have conversations with Congress, and I'm confident that as a result of those conversations, the necessary funds will come our way," Holder said.



At the White House, press secretary Robert Gibbs echoed Holder's promise. "The president understands that his most important job is to keep the American people safe and that he is not going to make any decision or any judgment that imperils the safety of the American people."



CNN's Terry Frieden and Kristi Keck contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Americans appear to actually thrive on adversity, according to a study published this week that reached the conclusion after researching the nation's biggest economic downturn.



This sculpture at the FDR Memorial in Washington depicts men waiting in a Great Depression bread line.



Life expectancy during the peak years of the Great Depression increased 6.2 years -- from 57.1 years in 1929 to 63.3 years in 1933 -- according to University of Michigan researchers Jose A. Tapia Granados and Ana Diez Roux. The increase applied to men and women, whites and non-whites.



The team crunched data from the federal government and concluded that "population health did not decline and indeed generally improved during the four years of the Great Depression, 1930-1933, with mortality decreasing for almost all ages, and life expectancy increasing by several years in males, females, whites, and non-whites."



For most age groups, "mortality tended to peak during years of strong economic expansion (such as 1923, 1926, 1929 and 1936-1937)," they wrote in the "Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences."



"The finding is strong and counterintuitive," said Tapia Granados, the lead author of the study. "Most people assume that periods of high unemployment are harmful to health."



The researchers used historical life expectancy and mortality data to examine the association between economic growth and population health from 1920 to 1940. Though population health improved during 1930-1933 and during the recessions of 1921 and 1938, mortality -- the death rate -- increased and life expectancy fell during times of economic expansion, such as 1923, 1926, 1929 and 1936-1937, they wrote.



The researchers looked at mortality rates due to six causes of death that made up two-thirds of total mortality in the 1930s: cardiovascular and kidney diseases, cancer, influenza and pneumonia, tuberculosis, motor vehicle injuries and suicide.



Only suicide went up during economic downturns, they said, citing the recession years 1921, 1932 and 1938, but suicides accounted for less than 2 percent of total deaths. Those years were marked by high unemployment; the nation experienced its highest unemployment rate of 22.9 percent in 1932, they wrote.



Yet from 1920 to 1940, life expectancy increased 8.8 years.



The authors speculated about possible explanations for why population health tends to improve during recessions but not expansions.



"During expansions, firms are very busy, and they typically demand a lot of effort from employees, who are required to work a lot of overtime, and to work at a fast pace," Tapia Granados said. "This can create stress, which is associated with more drinking and smoking."



In addition, new, inexperienced workers may be more likely to become injured; workers may sleep less and adopt less healthy eating habits, he said.



Further, boom times may translate into more industrial pollution, which can take a toll on populations' health, he said.



During recessions, with less work to do, employees may work slower, sleep longer and spend more time with family and friends, he said. With less money, they may spend less on alcohol and tobacco.



The researchers pointed out that their work looked at the relationship between recessions and mortality on a macro level and was not predictive for any one person.



The findings may apply to others, too. Tapia Granados, 53, whose work was self-funded, said he has carried out similar studies that looked at Japan, Spain and Sweden.



"In the three of them, it was the same," he said.

***

(CNN)  -- A human rights group urged Burundi to reverse a law that makes homosexuality illegal, saying it risks worsening the harsh treatment of gays in the eastern Africa nation.



In March, people in Burundi demonstrate in favor of a measure banning homosexuality. It became law in April.



The new law makes "sexual relations with persons of the same sex" illegal and punishable by up to two years in prison, Human Rights Watch said in a recently released report.



It was enacted just as the gay, lesbian and transgender community had started to mobilize and call for equal treatment, according to the organization.



"The government needs to listen to these voices to understand the harm it is doing to Burundians with its state-sanctioned discrimination," said Georgette Gagnon, Africa director for Human Rights Watch. "The government should rescind this law and instead work to promote equality and understanding."



Before the law, which was passed in April, some gays and lesbians already faced significant discrimination in Burundi, according to the organization.



Some had lost their jobs, others were beaten by parents and local youths, and others were evicted, according to the Human Rights Watch report, which cited accounts by the victims.



Numerous attempts to reach government officials were unsuccessful.



Homosexuality is illegal in most countries in the region, including in nearby Kenya and Uganda, where sodomy laws were introduced during colonialism.



Most African nations have revised those laws to include consensual sex among gay and lesbian couples and made the punishments tougher, according to Human Rights Watch.



"Half the world's countries that criminalize homosexual conduct do so because they cling to Victorian morality and colonial laws," said Scott Long, director of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender rights program for Human Rights Watch. "Getting rid of these unjust remnants of the British empire is long overdue."



The role religion plays in Africa has a lot to do with the ban, others say.



"It is wrong from a biblical standpoint, and most African countries are governed based on religious beliefs," said Olatunde Ogunyemi, a professor in Grambling, Louisiana.



"Christianity and Islam are the dominant religions in the continent, and in some cases, constitutions are based on religion, which justifies making it illegal."



South Africa's post-apartheid constitution bans discrimination against gays -- the first in Africa to prohibit discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation.



Homosexuality is also illegal in other countries, including Ghana, Nigeria and Zimbabwe, according to Human Rights Watch.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Investigators with bomb-making components in their luggage and on their person were able to pass through security checkpoints at 19 U.S. airports without detection, according to the Government Accountability Office.



Passengers pass through security at O'Hare International Airport in Chicago, Illinois.



GAO officials are expected to testify about the investigation Thursday before the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform.



The investigators reported that most of the time security officers followed Transportation Security Administration policies and procedures, but investigators were able to take advantage of "weaknesses in TSA procedures and other vulnerabilities."



"These weaknesses were identified based on a review of public information," the planned GAO testimony says.



Investigators concluded that if they had attempted the same test at other airports, they would have evaded detection.



But the GAO did not detail the weaknesses because they "are sensitive security information."



The investigators obtained the bomb-making components at local stores and over the Internet for less than $150, according to testimony.  Watch a tester point out a TSA mistake »



The GAO said its investigators also tested the devices that could be built with the components they smuggled and discovered that "a terrorist using these devices could cause severe damage to an airplane and threaten the safety of passengers."



The GAO investigators devised two types of devices: an "improvised explosive device" made of a liquid explosive and a low-yield detonator, and an "improvised incendiary device" that could be created by combining commonly available products prohibited in carry-on luggage.



The GAO said it found the instructions for creating the devices "using publicly available information," including Internet searches.



According to the testimony, a transportation security officer barred one of the investigators from bringing an unlabeled bottle of medicated shampoo through the checkpoint. But the security officer allowed a liquid component of the improvised explosive device to pass through undetected, although that item is prohibited by the TSA.



In another test, the investigator put coins in his pockets to assure he would get a secondary inspection. But the officer, using a hand-wand and a pat-down, failed to detect any of the prohibited items the investigator was carrying.



The GAO said it had briefed the TSA on its findings "to help them take corrective action."



In testimony to be provided to the same congressional committee, TSA chief Kip Hawley defends the administration's policies and procedures, saying that the screening checkpoints are but one of a "multilayered approach to security."



"We recognize that, despite our efforts to make each layer as strong as possible, a concerted effort may target any one layer," according to the testimony. "Our ongoing success is a result of the tremendous power in the reinforced, multiple layers. Truly, the whole is greater than the sum of the parts -- and together, they are formidable."



Hawley sketches for members of Congress 19 security steps the TSA employs before, during and after checkpoint screening. "Each and every one of these 19 security layers is important and strong in its own right," he says. "Linked together, they are effective and daunting."



Although it would not discuss the specific nature of its recommendations, the GAO said it recommended establishing special screening lines based on risk and passengers with special needs. The TSA should introduce more "aggressive, visible and unpredictable" measures to detect concealed items and develop new technology for screening at checkpoints.



Hawley's said the TSA concurs with the GAO's recommendations and specifically discussed several "new technology" items that he said were "greatly improving our effectiveness in detecting prohibited items."



Among the new technology, he said, were whole body imagers, bottled liquids scanners, hand-held explosives scanners and advanced technology X-rays. And, he added, "our pursuit of new technology is not limited to what I described today."



He also said the TSA is constantly conducting covert tests of the screening process, including detection of prohibited liquids and IEDs. "The nation's aviation system remains secure," he said, "but requires

***

(CNN) -- Henry Joseph Madden was a good student and track team member in high school, but he had a secret: He sometimes wore his mother's pantyhose and underwear under his clothes.



Dr. Jennifer Madden, a family physician, began her transition to being female at age 48.



"I really wanted to be a girl so bad, and that was one way for me to satisfy those feelings," Madden said. "I always felt like someone was looking over my shoulder."



The desire to be female never went away. At age 48, Madden confessed these feelings to a doctor, and started seeing a gender therapist who suggested Madden was transgendered.



Through reconstructive surgeries, electrolysis, laser procedures and voice lessons, Henry Joseph became Jennifer Elizabeth, known as Jenny. She is a practicing family physician in Nashua, New Hampshire.  Watch Jenny's story »



Chastity Bono, child of performer Cher and the late entertainer and politician Sonny Bono, announced Thursday the beginning of a transition from female to a male.



While still relatively rare -- one advocate estimates that 0.25 to 0.5 percent of the American population is transgendered -- the idea of changing gender identity has become more widespread in recent years. The term "LGBT" (Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender) is more commonly recognized, and transgendered people have been portrayed in the 1999 film "Boys Don't Cry" as well as the 2002 book "Middlesex" by Jeffrey Eugenides.



Many people who have transitioned, including Madden, say they knew they had been born into the wrong gender from childhood. As early as age 3, Dr. Julie Praus, born male, didn't understand why her father wanted to play catch. As a boy, Praus learned how to fish and hunt, but enjoyed collecting Depression-era glassware vases. Praus, 48, a psychiatrist in Brattleboro, Vermont, started living as a woman in March 2008.



"I get up every morning and say, 'Wow, I can actually look at myself in the mirror,' because I've never been able to do that in my life, because what would stare back at me was not me," Praus said. iReport.com: Share your story of gender change



Doctors speculate that there is a biological foundation to gender identity, but no one has determined what in the biological makeup determines that gender. The interactions between personality and culture also contribute to identity, said Chris Kraft, clinical director at the Johns Hopkins Sexual Behaviors Consultation Unit.



The process of changing genders



For people who want a gender change on a biological level, the first step is therapy, experts say. Dr. Gary Alter, a plastic surgeon in Beverly Hills, California, said patients don't come to him until they've been in therapy, a process that can take as much as a year.



A therapist then gives a physician approval to start the patient on hormone treatment. At that point, the patient may or may not start living as the chosen sex, Alter said.



Females seeking to transition into males may elect to have their breasts removed via surgery. With testosterone, they will grow hair on their face and chest after about two years. Read one man's female-to-male advice to Chaz Bono



A higher percentage of males transitioning to females will go forward with genital surgery than females going to males, Alter said. Surgical methods for creating a penis -- which range from making one out of the clitoris to using the skin from the forearms -- are "not perfect," and many patients are happy with just chest surgery, he said.



Genital surgeries for creating female genitalia are better, he said. Alter's method is to make a clitoris out of the head of the penis, and make space for a vagina.



Facing the rest of the world



It is rare for people to undergo a gender transition and then want to reverse it, especially when surgery is involved, experts say.



Some say changing genders is one of the best things they've done, like Jamison Green, 60, author of "Becoming a

***

(Sunset) -- Great things to do and see, and memories (you can still make) of summer at the lake.



With clear blue water and picturesque boulders, Sand Harbor is the place to swim in Lake Tahoe.



The scene



Families dot the beaches, and boaters dominate the lake; traffic slows on State 89, and the Truckee River overflows with inner-tubers. Still, from North Lake to Emerald Bay, and South Lake to Incline Village, you'll find plenty of peace, quiet, and to-die-for beauty.



Cruise the lake



Skip the stern-wheeler paddleboats packed with tourists for a wine-and-cheese sunset sail on the Tahoe Cruz. Departs daily from Tahoe City Marina in Tahoe City, California; $60; reservations required; tahoesail.com or 530/583-6200.



Walk on water



Stand-up paddleboarding is the latest craze. Give it a shot, or go for a sit-on-top kayak from Tahoe Paddle & Oar (paddleboard or kayak rental from $20 per hour; 8299 N. Lake Blvd./State 28, Kings Beach, California; tahoepaddle.com or 530/581-3029). Sunset.com: Lake Tahoe landmarks



Jump in



Lake Tahoe-Nevada State Park's Sand Harbor area is popular for its gentle turquoise coves and fine white sand. Get there before 10 a.m. to avoid the crowds. $8 per vehicle; on State 28, 3 miles south of Incline Village, NV; parks.nv.gov or 775/831-0494.



Skinny-dip



For a quiet swim, hike 0.5 mile to Secret Cove and Chimney Beach, where those who hate tan lines like to hang out. Trailhead is off State 28, 2 1/2 miles south of Sand Harbor; 530/543-2600.



Wine and dine



Christy Hill serves a killer chile relleno with an equally killer lake view. (Closed Mon; 115 Grove St., Tahoe City, California; average entrée price around $30; 530/583-8551).



The deck at Sunnyside Resort has a party scene and the best Hula Pie this side of Hawaii. (Most entrées between $20 and $30; 1850 W. Lake Blvd./State 89, 2 miles south of Tahoe City, California; 530/583-7200). Sunset.com: Make your own lake dinner menu



Hang with the locals



Built in 1859, Chambers Landing Bar and Restaurant is set at the end of a pier. Arrive by boat or car, but if you're the designated driver, steer clear of the Chambers Punch. Most entrées $12 or less; 6400 W. Lake Blvd./State 89, Homewood, California; 530/525-9190.



Stay in a cabin



Carved wooden bears are everywhere at the woodsy Cottage Inn. From $158, including breakfast; just south of Tahoe City, California; 800/581-4073. Sunset.com: The West's best national parks



Splurge on a room



Book a suite at the West Shore Cafe & Inn, then wait for a bald eagle to fly past your window. Rooms from $350; Homewood, California; 530/525-5200.



Pitch a tent



Easy swimming access and hot showers make for blissful family camping at D.L. Bliss State Park (from $25; reserveamerica.com or 800/444-7275). For views, the best sites are 148, 149, 151, 153, and 156. If Bliss is full, try Nevada Beach Campground, on the east side (from $28; recreation.gov or 877/444-6777).



Enter to win a monthly Room Makeover Giveaway from MyHomeIdeas.com

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- A Navy admiral engaged in sexual relations in the White House in 1990 with a federal employee whom he falsely told he was a widower, according to a report released Friday by the Defense Department.



Rear Adm. John Stufflebeem was demoted and fired from his post as director of the Navy staff.



In March, when the report was submitted to Pentagon officials, Rear Adm. John Stufflebeem was demoted and fired from his post as director of the Navy staff.



Stufflebeem told investigators he couldn't remember the name of the woman he had an affair with. He also lied when he told investigators he did not engage in sexual relations with the woman, identified as "Jane Doe," the Defense Department's inspector general's report said.



Jane Doe, who was then unmarried and working for a federal agency, told the investigators the allegations were true, the report said. Her supervisor and Stufflebeem's superiors supported her testimony.



Stufflebeem was convicted April 18 of making false official statements to investigators. After the hearing, called an admiral's mast, he requested retirement.



Jane Doe told investigators that she and Stufflebeem began their affair on an overseas trip in 1989, that the married admiral told her he was a widower who was raising his children as a single parent and that they had sexual relations several times, including once in a White House room reserved for "military aides with overnight duties."



She also told investigators that Stufflebeem came to her home on the day in August 1990 when she learned he was married and that she called him "scum," shut the door in his face and never spoke to him again. Read the report (PDF)



"We found Ms. Doe to be an extremely credible, candid and articulate witness who willingly participated in our interview with the knowledge and support of her husband," the report said.



By contrast, the report said, Stufflebeem's testimony was "inconsistent with the weight of the evidence," and "it did not appear Stufflebeem's misstatements in these areas of testimony were inadvertent."



At issue was Stufflebeem's removal from his post as a presidential aide in 1990. Stufflebeem testified that he initiated the request to leave his White House post because of "close family personal problems." But his superiors testified that he was removed from the post because of his relationship with the woman -- and that he admitted the affair.



Jane Doe's supervisor told investigators that when she learned of the affair from Doe, she confirmed Stufflebeem's marital status and told Doe what she'd learned.



"Ms. Doe's reaction, according to the supervisor, was one of complete surprise and shock," the report said.



The supervisor also said that she telephoned Stufflebeem's immediate supervisor to tell him of the affair and that when she called a few weeks later to follow up, the supervisor told her that "everybody in town knew Boomer was f'ing some bimbo at the [federal agency]."



Stufflebeem, however, denied to investigators that he had a sexual relationship with Jane Doe, although he admitted to one kiss and said he had an "inappropriate relationship" with her because he told her about his marital problems.



"I did not have sex with this woman," he said during one of two interviews with investigators.



Although he told investigators he could not remember the woman's name, he testified that he "had to live with shame for a long time" after the "inappropriate relationship" ended, that he was "racked with guilt" and "had a terrible time getting myself right with my family."



"So I have had a great 18-year career since I left the White House," he said, according to the report. "If this is the end of it, then I still leave a rewarded individual, thankful for the blessings that I have had."



Investigators found Stufflebeem's remarks inconsistent.



"In our view, comments regarding guilt, shame, and the end of a distinguished naval career are incongruous with a physical relationship limited to one kiss," they wrote in the report.

***

(CNET) -- Now that stereo Bluetooth has become a common feature in a lot of music phones, it's no surprise that stereo Bluetooth headsets have become quite popular as well.



Stereo Bluetooth headsets come in many shapes and sizes, from the behind-the-ear style of the Motorola Rokr S9 to the over-the-head style of the Jabra BT8030.



The Jabra BT3030 is in the style of a pendant, or as its design suggests, more of a dog tag.



It's been available for a while now, but we think it's still worth it. The Jabra BT3030 can be purchased for around $39.99. Of course like any stereo Bluetooth headset, the Jabra BT3030 requires a cell phone with the A2DP or stereo Bluetooth profile.



The Jabra BT3030 consists primarily of a small remote control unit housed in a dog-tag style pendant. Measuring 2.1-inches long by 1.6-inch wide by 0.38-inch thick, the pendant is slim and compact with a metal finish and a rubberized border all around it.



All of the controls are laid out right on the front face in a straightforward grid. They are the Play/Pause key, the track shuffle keys, the volume controls, plus the multifunction Call key. The keys are all made of rubber, and are raised above the surface for a nice tactile feel.



The 3.5mm headset jack is on the right spine, while the charger jack is on the bottom. On the top is an opening for an optional lanyard. Also on the top is a tiny microphone.



Getting the headset set up is pretty simple. Just power it on via the multifunction Call button, and turn on the Bluetooth pairing mode on your cell phone. We managed to pair the Jabra BT3030 with the LG Chocolate 3 without a problem. From there, we could play/pause tracks, skip songs, and adjust the volume, all from the Jabra BT3030.



The Jabra BT3030 comes with nice pair of ear buds that sit comfortably in the ear, but since it has a 3.5mm headset jack, you can use any headphones of your choosing.



Aside from using the Jabra BT3030 for music, you can also use the it to make calls via the last number redial or voice command. When there's an incoming call during music playback, the music will pause and you will hear a ringing tone. You can then hit the Call button to answer the call. After you hang up, the music will resume from the paused point.



Other features include call-waiting support, the ability to reject calls, plus the ability to transfer calls from the headset to the phone, and vice versa.



Sound quality was quite good, and comparable to most MP3 players on the market. The bass was a little weak, but the overall quality was decent.



Call quality was mixed. While we heard our callers just fine, we did have to bring the pendant close to our mouths for callers to hear us. They reported a little bit of static and echo from us as well. This seemed to vary from caller to caller, however, so we urge you to give it a trial run before you settle for it.



The Jabra BT3030 also comes with an optional clothing clip accessory, plus an AC adapter. It has a rated battery life of 8 hours talk time, 7 hours music streaming, and 9.58 days standby time.



© 2009 CBS Interactive Inc. All rights reserved. CNET, CNET.com and the CNET logo are registered trademarks of CBS Interactive Inc. Used by permission.

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- A small, rural town in the hills of New Hampshire was jolted by a home invasion over the weekend that left a mother dead and her young daughter severely injured.



Steven Spader, 17, is accused of using a machete to kill a woman and injure her daughter.



"This type of murder does not happen very often," New Hampshire Senior Assistant Attorney General Will Delker said. "This is something out of the ordinary."



Four teenagers have been charged in connection with the incident early Sunday morning along an isolated dirt road in Mont Vernon, a town of about 2,000.



In a news release Tuesday, the New Hampshire Department of Justice identified the victim as 42-year-old Kimberly Cates. The medical examiner determined that she died from "multiple sharp injuries to the head, torso, left arm, and left leg."



The victim's 10-year-old daughter sustained serious knife injuries that required hours of surgery.



"She's still in the intensive care unit," Delker said. "Her injuries weren't life-threatening, but you shouldn't minimize the severities of the injuries she suffered."



Delker said Kimberly Cates' husband was away on business at the time of the attack.



Cates was a registered nurse at St. Joseph Hospital in Nashua, New Hampshire.



"She worked part time in our maternal and labor department and also in our emergency department," Sarah Ward, director of marketing and communications for the hospital, said Tuesday. "The staff is pretty upset about it. They were pretty close to her."



"The people up here aren't used to this kind of thing," Don Himsel, senior photo editor for the Nashua Telegraph, said Tuesday. "This never really happens."



Himsel also said violent crime is extremely rare in Mont Vernon. "I think we may have had one assault in town in the last 10 years."



The Mont Vernon Congregational Church opened its doors Wednesday for people who want to grieve, pray and meditate.



"This is a way to come together peacefully; that's what we are trying to do," church official Jane Nilles said Wednesday. "The church understands that there are people hurting on both sides. This is a time to pray and ask for God's presence right now. It is a time to gather and to pray."



On Tuesday, the state Department of Justice announced the arrests of the four teenagers accused of taking part in the crimes.



Steven Spader, 17, and Christopher Gribble, 19, were charged with first-degree murder, attempted murder and conspiracy to commit first-degree murder.



William Marks, 18, and Quinn Glover, 17, were charged with burglary, conspiracy to commit burglary and armed robbery.



"The allegations are that Spader wielded the machete and Gribble used the knife, and each of them struck the victims," Delker said.



Delker, who described the case as being in its earliest stages, said prosecutors will evaluate whether additional charges will be brought or upgraded.



"Under New Hampshire law, anyone 17 and older is charged as an adult," Delker said.



A probable cause hearing for the suspects will be held October 20.

***

Washington (CNN)  -- When Robert Byrd came to Congress from West Virginia, a postage stamp cost 3 cents and kids were clamoring for a new toy called Mr. Potato Head.



On Wednesday, almost 57 years later, Byrd became the longest-serving member of Congress in history.



Two days before he turns 92, the eloquent legislator known for his encyclopedic knowledge of Senate rules and history surpasses Carl T. Hayden, the Arizona Democrat who served a total of 20,773 days in the U.S. House and Senate.



With his 20,774th day representing West Virginia -- six years in House and then nearly 51 years and counting in the Senate -- Byrd sets a record for longevity unlikely to be broken as the political climate turns toward term limits and growing public dissatisfaction with Congress.



In a statement issued by his office, Byrd expressed his gratitude to "the people of the great State of West Virginia" for their long-standing confidence in him.



His only regret, he said, was that his wife, Erma, who died in 2006, would not be with him.



"I know that she is looking down from the heavens smiling at me and saying congratulations my dear Robert -- but don't let it go to your head," Byrd's statement said.



In a career representing the West Virginia coal-mining country from which he emerged, Byrd has cast more Senate votes (18,000-plus) and held more leadership positions (including two stints as majority leader) than any other senator. He has never lost an election.



He was raised by an aunt and uncle after his mother died when he was a year old, and he did not graduate college until he received a degree in 1994 from Marshall University.



In a sign of his Appalachian roots, Byrd was an avid fiddle player and appeared twice on the television program "Hee Haw." He gave up playing in the 1980s because of a tremor in his hands.



His early political years displayed some of the deeply rooted racism of the American South. Byrd was a member of the white supremacist Ku Klux Klan in the early 1940s, and later called it "the most egregious mistake I've ever made."



In 1964, he voted against the Civil Rights Act pushed by Democratic President Lyndon Johnson. But Byrd later followed a more traditional Democratic path.



An ardent foe of President George W. Bush's policies in the aftermath of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, Byrd opposed creating the Department of Homeland Security in 2002 and called Bush "dangerous, reckless and arrogant" in February 2003, six weeks before the Iraq war started.



Three months later, he criticized Bush's landing a jet on the USS Abraham Lincoln to signal the end of the Iraq war as "flamboyant showmanship."



On June 12, 2006, Byrd became the longest serving senator in history, and was re-elected to his ninth consecutive Senate term five months later.



Things have changed since he arrived in Washington as a new congressman in 1953, along with the first Eisenhower administration. Gas cost 20 cents a gallon then, and the average annual salary was less than $4,000.



Ten presidents later, Byrd is known for his devotion to his state and constituents.



"His number one priority has always been the people of West Virginia," Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nevada, says in a statement on Byrd's Senate Web site. "It has been a great example for all of us to never lose sight of the fact that you are elected by the people from your state and the people in your state should have first priority."



Byrd's statement marking Wednesday's achievement reflected that thinking.



"Although we are marking a longevity milestone, it has been the quality and dedication of service that has guided me over the years," Byrd said in his statement. "I have strived to provide the people of West Virginia the best representation possible each of the 20,774 days which I have served in the Congress of the United States."



He thanked his constituents for their support and for "putting their trust and

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Ailing "Great Train Robber" Ronnie Biggs -- one of the most notorious British criminals of the 20th century -- was formally released from prison to his death bed Friday after being granted his freedom on compassionate grounds.





Ronnie Biggs, pictured at a book launch in Rio de Janeiro in 1994.





Biggs, who is gravely ill with severe pneumonia, is being cared for at a hospital in Norwich, eastern England, where he was moved on Tuesday.





Three prison staff who had been assigned to Biggs' bedside have been withdrawn following UK Justice Minister Jack Straw's decision to authorize his release, a Ministry of Justice spokesperson told CNN.





"The medical evidence clearly shows that Mr Biggs is very ill and that his condition has deteriorated recently, culminating in his re-admission to hospital," Straw said in a statement Thursday. "His condition is not expected to improve."





Biggs' son, Michael Biggs, said his father was "over the moon" that he had been released on the eve of his 80th birthday. Speaking to reporters outside the hospital, he confirmed his father had been handed his release papers.





"As a family, we are absolutely thrilled," Michael Biggs said, according to the UK's Press Association.





Biggs is unable to walk, barely able to communicate and no longer able to eat or drink, Michael Biggs said, adding that the family was "very hopeful that my father will be able to survive the next few days."





Biggs' legal advisor Giovanni Di Stefano told journalists that Biggs was unlikely to ever leave his hospital bed. "This man is ill, he's going to die... he is going to stay in hospital," he said.





Saturday also marks the 46th anniversary of the infamous 1963 heist dubbed the "crime of the century" that transformed Biggs from a petty London thief into one of the most wanted men in Britain.





Biggs and 14 other professional criminals made off with more than £2.5 million ($4.2 million) in used bank notes -- the equivalent of around £40 million ($67 million) today -- after holding up a mail train from Glasgow to London in the early hours of the morning. In the course of the robbery the train driver was badly beaten with an iron bar.





Most of the gang, including Biggs, were soon picked up in a massive manhunt after police discovered fingerprints at a farmhouse hideout where the robbers had holed up to split their spoils.





Biggs was sentenced to 30 years in prison but escaped over the wall of a London prison after serving just 15 months -- and spent most of the rest of his life as a celebrity fugitive.





After undergoing extensive plastic surgery in Paris, Biggs made his way to Australia, living there with his wife and two children. Tracked down by police, Biggs fled again in 1969, this time to Brazil.





Five years later, Biggs was traced once more by a newspaper reporter. Metropolitan Police Detective Superintendent Jack Slipper, who had led police efforts to bring the train robbers to justice, flew out to Rio de Janeiro to arrest Biggs, allegedly greeting him at a beachside hotel: "Long time no see, Ronnie."





But efforts to bring Biggs home were frustrated because by then he had fathered a Brazilian-born son -- Michael Biggs -- and authorities rejected British requests for his extradition.





Biggs continued to live openly in Rio, trading on his notoriety by entertaining tourists, selling t-shirts and even recording with the Sex Pistols.





In 1981 he was kidnapped by a gang of British ex-soldiers and smuggled to Barbados. But legal efforts to have Biggs brought back to the UK once again stalled and he was allowed to return to Brazil.





By the late 1990s Biggs was in poor health following a series of strokes and running out of cash. In 2001 he flew back to the UK on a private jet laid on by the Sun newspaper. He was promptly locked up in a high security prison but then moved to a facility for elderly prisoners.





Since his return Biggs and

***

(CNN) -- It's all tied up in Texas.



Sens. Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama are running a tight race in Texas.



A new CNN/Opinion Research Corp. poll suggests the battle for the Democratic presidential nomination between Sens. Hillary Clinton of New York and Barack Obama of Illinois is a statistical dead heat in Texas, which holds primaries March 4.



In the survey, out Monday, 50 percent of likely Democratic primary voters support Clinton as their choice for the party's nominee, with 48 percent backing Obama.



But taking into account the poll's sampling error of plus or minus 4½ percentage points for Democratic respondents, the race is a virtual tie.  Watch Democrats target Texas. »



Two recent polls by other organizations also show the race statistically even. Map: National and state polling



"One reason the race appears to be tight is that Texas Democrats are having a hard time choosing between two attractive options," says CNN polling director Keating Holland.



"Likely Democratic primary voters would be equally happy if either candidate won the nomination, and they don't see a lot of difference between them on several top issues.



"Roughly a quarter of likely voters say they could change their minds in the next two weeks -- and not surprisingly, those people are splitting roughly equally between Clinton and Obama."



Many political strategists and analysts consider Texas and Ohio -- which also holds a March 4 primary -- must-win states for Clinton. Obama has won the past eight contests and is now ahead in the overall battle for delegates, 193 of which are at stake in Texas.



The new survey indicates Arizona Sen. John McCain is the clear favorite for the Republican presidential nomination.



Among Republicans, 55 percent of likely Texas GOP primary voters support McCain as their choice for nominee. Thirty-two percent back former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee and 11 percent support home-state congressman and former Libertarian standard-bearer Ron Paul. The poll's sampling error for Republican respondents is 4 percentage points.



The CNN/Opinion Research Corp. poll was conducted by telephone from Friday through Sunday. Pollsters talked to 1,506 adults in Texas, including 553 likely Republican primary voters and 529 likely Democratic primary voters.



McCain is the overwhelming front-runner in the fight for the Republican presidential nomination and party leaders have rallied around the candidate in an attempt for party unity.



The poll was released on the same day the only living former Republican president -- George Herbert Walker Bush, the current president's father -- endorsed McCain at an event in Houston.  Watch McCain get a big boost »



But McCain has had trouble winning conservative voters. Just last week, McCain lost the conservative vote to Huckabee in the Virginia primary, according to exit polls. The new survey, though, suggests McCain may have better luck in Texas.



"It looks like McCain has made some inroads with conservative Republicans," Holland said.



"McCain is picking up a bare majority among conservative likely voters in the GOP primary. The McCain campaign probably wishes that number were higher, but it does mean that a McCain victory in Texas would not be based on the votes of moderates and independents, as has happened in several states in the past few weeks."



Texas Democrats and Republicans may not see eye to eye on the issues, but the poll suggests they do agree on what's the most important issue. Thirty-five percent of Democrats and an equal number of Republicans said the economy was the most important issue in their choice for president.



The second most important issue for Democrats was health care, at 23 percent, followed by the war in Iraq at 22 percent, illegal immigration at 10 percent and terrorism at 7 percent.



Nineteen percent of Republicans said illegal immigration was their most important issue, putting it in second place, followed by the war in Iraq and terrorism at 17 percent and health care at 8 percent.



Sixty percent of Republicans say they'll definitely support the candidate they are now backing. That number climbs to 76 percent for Democrats.



Likely Democratic primary voters view Clinton and Obama on roughly

***

PRETORIA, South Africa (CNN) -- The United States no longer supports a power-sharing deal between Zimbabwe's President Robert Mugabe and the country's main opposition because a viable unity government is not possible with Mugabe in power, a top U.S. diplomat said Sunday.



Zimbabwe President Robert Mugabe, in a speech to supporters Saturday, refused calls to step down.



The statement from U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Jendayi Frazer follows recent calls from  President Bush and other world leaders for Mugabe to abandon power amid a growing cholera epidemic that the United Nations says has killed more than 1,000 people in recent months.



Frazer visited southern Africa to articulate the change in U.S. policy toward Mugabe at the request of U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice. She made the comments Sunday during a roundtable discussion with journalists in Pretoria, South Africa, before her expected return to the United States later in the day.



She called for a new vote in Zimbabwe.



"Fresh elections are necessary but not possible under the current environment," Frazer told reporters.



Zimbabwe has had no Cabinet since the March presidential election, during which no candidate won enough votes to avoid a runoff, according to the government. After opposition leader Morgan Tsvangirai withdrew from a June runoff, saying Mugabe's supporters had waged a campaign of violence against opposition supporters, Tsvangirai and Mugabe reached a power-sharing agreement that has yet to be implemented.



The political impasse has aggravated the country's humanitarian and economic crisis, including a cholera outbreak that began in August.



Frazer said that during her trip, she consulted with the leaders of Zimbabwe's neighbors who are stuck between their concerns about Mugabe's grip on power and their support of the power-sharing agreement, which they still think is the best way to deal with the crisis without creating a backlash.



Frazer said she believes it could be weeks before African leaders put pressure on Mugabe to step down, which she said could be achieved by simply telling him with one voice that he should go.



She said the U.N. Security Council will deal with the issue of Zimbabwe next month. This time, she said, South Africa will not be able to block resolutions calling for more sanctions because South Africa will no longer hold a seat on the council in 2009. Watch what options the international community has in Zimbabwe



"The South African government will be held responsible for what is happening in Zimbabwe because they are the country with the most influence in Zimbabwe than any other in the world," Frazer said.



The Security Council's recent failure to impose sanctions on Mugabe's regime drew scoffs from the 84-year-old Mugabe, who has accused Britain -- Zimbabwe's former colonizer -- of trying to take over the country to get its resources.



Tsvangirai said Friday that his party will withdraw from efforts to form a unity government unless 42 party members who have been kidnapped are either released or brought to court to face formal charges by New Year's Day.



Mugabe's ZANU-PF party and the Movement for Democratic Change, led by Tsvangirai, have failed to implement the September 15 power-sharing deal because they cannot agree on who should control key ministries.



Under the deal, brokered by former South African President Thabo Mbeki, Mugabe would remain president while Tsvangirai would become Zimbabwe's prime minister.



There had been hope that a unity government would reverse Mugabe's policies, which are widely blamed for the country's economic crisis. Mugabe blames economic sanctions imposed by Western nations for Zimbabwe's economic collapse.



Zimbabwe, once the breadbasket of Africa, is now a net importer of food and facing acute shortages of most essentials such as fuel, electricity and medical drugs. Its inflation rate -- the highest in the world -- is officially at 231 million percent.



Last week, Zimbabwe's central bank introduced a $10 billion note worth less than 20 U.S. dollars.



Mugabe has repeatedly refused calls from Western leaders to step down, most recently telling his supporters late Saturday that he would not follow the U.S. president to his "political death."



"They now want to topple the Mugabe government.

***

SARATOGA SPRINGS, New York (CNN) -- Two years ago, Dawn Warfield was drowning in debt.



Dawn Warfield sold one of her two video stores to help reduce her debts.



The average American household has $8,329 in credit card debt, according to the Nilson Report, a credit industry newsletter.



Warfield had nearly 10 times that amount.



At its worst point, her debt totalled nearly $80,000.



She had 17 credit cards and admits that living beyond her means was part of the problem.



"I'll own up to that," she said.



"There is always unforeseen expenses, and when you are making the minimum payments on these credit cards, when you think you can't afford to make more than that, they don't go down."



But Warfield's spending was not the only factor working against her.  Watch Warfield describe how the debt piled up, and how she started paying it off »



She was in the middle of an expensive divorce and had been charging business expenses to her personal credit cards when she opened a second location of her video store.



"Every month I was writing out 17 checks," she said.



"And the interest rates ranged from like 6 percent to 33 percent. So it was impossible.



"I was transferring balances from one card to another, and every time I got a card to a decent interest rate, I felt like one of the cards would come off the promotional interest rate, and I was just never catching up."



So Warfield took matters into her own hands.



She sold the second location of her video store, stopped using her credit cards and decided it was time to get help.



"I sat down one day and I called each credit card one by one, and I asked each one to work with me ... to lower my interest rate."



The credit card companies did not respond to her plea.



Instead, she was directed to the debt management program of the nonprofit Consumer Credit Counseling Service, part of Money Management International.



Counselor Eric Jackson helped Warfield analyze her bills and expenses and created a plan to help her get lower interest rates. Now she makes a single monthly payment.



"I don't even have to think about it, which makes it a lot easier for me, because when you have a lot of debt, it's not just financial, but it's emotional, you know, even physical," Warfield said.



"You think about it all the time."



Adds Jackson: "She's making her payments on time, they're posting to her creditor accounts, she has very low interest rates -- that was one of the benefits -- and she's definitely doing well.



"She is on track to get all her debts paid off in full within the five years."



Today, Warfield is less than $40,000 in debt.



"I'm about halfway," she said. "It hasn't been easy, but we're getting there."



Are you fighting the recession, using innovative techniques to stay ahead in this economy or overcoming financial adversity? Share your story with us by sending an e-mail to realstories@cnnmoney.com , and you could be profiled in an upcoming segment on CNN.

***

(CNN) -- An agreement could be reached before week's end between Washington University students and an Illinois nightclub that allegedly barred six African-American students while admitting nearly 200 of their white classmates.



Fernando Cutz, senior class president at the university in Missouri, said the aggrieved students have been in contact with lawyers representing Original Mother's, a bar in Chicago's Gold Coast neighborhood.



The two sides expect a resolution to their dispute as early as Wednesday, Cutz said. He did not, however, say what the students were demanding or why he was optimistic that a deal could be struck.



The students complained to state and federal agencies after six African-American members from their senior class trip celebration were denied admission to the club on October 17.



Bar personnel cited dress code violations -- specifically baggy jeans -- in barring the African-American students, Cutz said.



A white student and a black student then exchanged jeans to see what would happen. The white student was admitted, while his classmate still was kept outside, Cutz said.



Calls from CNN to the nightclub were not immediately returned. The bar told the Chicago Tribune newspaper that it was investigating.



The celebration at Original Mother's was to top off a two-day senior class trip to Chicago, Cutz said. The party had been arranged with the bar in advance by the student class board, which includes two of the African-American students who were later denied entry, Cutz said.



He said he was already inside the bar with some 200 other students, none of whom are African-American, when the first group of African-American classmates arrived. Cutz said he quickly learned that the manager of the bar had denied the six students entry, and he said the manager told the students their baggy pants violated the bar's dress code.



Cutz, who is white, said he confronted the manager. "These six [students] were better dressed than I was," Cutz told CNN.



He told the students to "go back to the hotel and change." But the manager of the bar stepped in to say that he had made his decision and that the six men could not return to the bar even if they changed clothes, Cutz said.



The students became "more agitated" and "set up an experiment," Cutz said.



Class Treasurer Regis Murayi, who is black, exchanged jeans with a white student, Jordan Roberts, who -- being 3 inches shorter than Murayi -- looked "substantially baggy."



Roberts approached the same manager who had turned away the African-American students, paid the entry fee and was allowed in, Cutz said.



CNN's Susan Candiotti also contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Dating advice books take a tech-addicted turn with the release of "Flirtexting: How To Text Your Way To His Heart."





The authors of "Flirtexting," above, say women need to learn how to text their way to love.





The book's co-authors, Olivia Baniuszewicz and Debra Goldstein, seek to explain the dating scene based on the premise that men understand text messages while women need to catch up.





"It's official. Boys text, therefore girls must learn how to flirtext!" they say on their Web site, flirtexting.com.





Baniuszewicz and Goldstein offer up a new etiquette for what they call the "A.C." world of dating -- or "after cells." The pair, who described themselves as "best friends" and "best flirtexters," spoke with CNN about their book, and the text message's role in society.





The following is an edited version of that conversation.





CNN: What abbreviations would you need to know in order to flirt over text messages?





Debra: We say, "If you don't wanna date, abbreviate." Too many abbreviations is a turn off, so be very careful. If you don't have to abbreviate, then don't. For "OK," you can write the letter "k," and for "are" you can write the letter "r," but never the "great" with the 8 in the middle [gr8]. Please never do that.





Olivia: So, the things you should avoid when abbreviating is writing "perf" [short for "perfect"] or "brill" [short for "brilliant"] back to a guy. That's fun for girls texting to each other, but not when you're trying to flirtext.





CNN: What's the difference? Why would a guy take it differently?





Olivia: It's just a little girly. You just have to know your audience and speak to it, and that's all flirtexting is all about.





CNN: Do you think the idea that you need to teach girls how to use text messages to pick up guys is a little sexist?





Debra: Sexist? Oh absolutely not. I think it's about empowering women to have the time to come across exactly the way they want and in the best light.  Watch how to enter this new dating world »





Olivia: I think flirtexting is all about empowering. It's all about you choosing your moment. Girls can choose their moment. Girls can decide what they want to get out of this text in order to ask him out, or is it a date, or for him to just meet up with you that night just to have a good laugh, and banter back and forth because you're bored at work. This is all that it's about.





CNN: Are there any people who date exclusively through texts?





Debra: There's a lot of girls who will say, "He keeps texting me but I want him to call" ... I think there is a time when you need to put the cell down and pick up the phone if you really like someone.





Olivia: There's a huge no-no: not to be heavy in your text messages. So a lot of times, I think things like "I want to break up with you" or "I love you" for the first time over text -- you should just not be doing that, and I think that's a mistake a lot of people do.





CNN: What are some other things that shouldn't be discussed over text?





Debra: We say, "Don't kid yourself." If he only texts you past 10 p.m. he's probably just looking to hook up. So girls, watch out for that.





Olivia: True. And the other don't -- I think we've all been there -- is texting under the influence: TUI. [Laughs]. It's true. I think you're out with your girlfriends, you're having a drink,