(CNN) -- A virus found in healthy Australian honey bees may be playing a role in the collapse of honey bee colonies across the United States, researchers reported Thursday.

Honey bees walk on a moveable comb hive at the Bee Research Laboratory, in Beltsville, Maryland.

Colony collapse disorder has killed millions of bees -- up to 90 percent of colonies in some U.S. beekeeping operations -- imperiling the crops largely dependent upon bees for pollination, such as oranges, blueberries, apples and almonds.

The U.S. Department of Agriculture says honey bees are responsible for pollinating $15 billion worth of crops each year in the United States. More than 90 fruits and vegetables worldwide depend on them for pollination.

Signs of colony collapse disorder were first reported in the United States in 2004, the same year American beekeepers started importing bees from Australia.

The disorder is marked by hives left with a queen, a few newly hatched adults and plenty of food, but the worker bees responsible for pollination gone.

The virus identified in the healthy Australian bees is  Israeli Acute Paralysis Virus (IAPV) -- named that because it was discovered by Hebrew University researchers.

Although worker bees in colony collapse disorder vanish, bees infected with IAPV die close to the hive, after developing shivering wings and paralysis. For some reason, the Australian bees seem to be resistant to IAPV and do not come down with symptoms.

Scientists used genetic analyses of bees collected over the past three years and found that IAPV was present in bees that had come from colony collapse disorder hives 96 percent of the time.

But the study released Thursday on the Science Express Web site, operated by the journal Science, cautioned that collapse disorder is likely caused by several factors.

"This research give us a very good lead to follow, but we do not believe IAPV is acting alone," said Jeffery S. Pettis of the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Bee Research Laboratory and a co-author of the study. "Other stressors on the colony are likely involved."

This could explain why bees in Australia may be resistant to colony collapse.

"There are no cases ... in Australia at all," entomologist Dave Britton of the Australian Museum told the Sydney Morning Herald last month. "It is a Northern Hemisphere phenomenon."

Bee ecology expert and University of Florida professor Jamie Ellis said earlier this year that genetic weakness bred into bees over time, pathogens spread by parasites and the effects of pesticides and pollutants might be other factors.

Researchers also say varroa mites affect all hives on the U.S. mainland but are not found in Australia.

University of Georgia bee researcher Keith S. Delaplane said Thursday the study offers a warning -- and hope.

"One nagging problem has been a general inability to treat or vaccinate bees against viruses of any kind," said Delaplane, who has been trying to breed bees resistant to the varroa mite.

"But in the case of IAPV, there is evidence that some bees carry genetic resistance to the disorder. This is yet one more argument for beekeepers to use honey bee stocks that are genetically disease- and pest-resistant."

Bee researchers will now look for stresses that may combine to kill bees.

"The next step is to ascertain whether IAPV, alone or in concert with other factors, can induce CCD [colony collapse disorder] in healthy bees," said Ian Lipkin, director of the Center for Infection and Immunity at Columbia University Mailman School of Public Health.

Besides the Columbia and USDA researchers, others involved in the study released Thursday include researchers from Pennsylvania State University, the Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture, the University of Arizona and 454 Life Sciences. E-mail to a friend

***

HONG KONG, China (Reuters) -- Paul Lee got his liver from an executed Chinese prisoner; Karam in Egypt bought a kidney for his sister for $5,300; in Istanbul Hakan is holding out for $30,700 for one of his kidneys.

Doctors in Pakistan have been arrested for abducting people, drugging them and stealing their kidneys.

They are not so unusual: a dire shortage of donated organs in rich countries is sending foreigners with end-stage illnesses to poorer places like China, Pakistan, Turkey, Egypt, Colombia and the Philippines to buy a new lease of life.

Lee, a 53-year-old chief subway technician in Hong Kong, was diagnosed with liver cancer in January 2005 but doctors denied him a transplant because they feared the tumor would spread.

A friend told him about a transplant hospital in China's north eastern Tianjin city and he signed up for a place. That April, he paid 260,000 yuan ($34,380) for a transplant -- surgery that saved his life.

"The hospital has connections with a lot of prisons," Lee told Reuters. "Mine came from an executed prisoner from Heilongjiang. I thank the donor deeply."

The World Health Organization estimates that 21,000 liver transplants are carried out annually, but medical experts put annual worldwide demand at at least 90,000.

Demand for kidneys also exceeds supply, and that has given rise to organ trafficking and a black market for rich people and "transplant tourists" who travel to poor countries to buy body parts from people with few other routes to a better living.

A donor in South Africa receives $700 for a kidney compared with $30,000 in the United States. A lack of transparency and little protection for donors has spurred calls by international bodies to crack down on, or at least regulate, the trade.

But even where the trade is banned, laws are often muddled or laced with loopholes, which are sometimes defended by vested interests.

And the unregulated route is much less complicated for the recipient. Any transplant procedure involving a living donor carries risks for the donor -- especially for liver transplants which involve removing part of the donor's liver.

The complications can include bleeding, infection, even death.

In the transplant trade, the recipient need not worry about, for example, exposing a living relative to that risk.

"It is cheaper and your next of kin is not taking the risk and you don't have to care for someone you don't know. Once you pay, it is discarded in a way, it is dispensable," said Luc Noel, a Geneva-based coordinator for Clinical Procedures at the World Health Organization.

China recently banned the sale of human organs and restricted transplants for foreigners, saying it must first meet demand at home for 2 million organs a year.

Only 20,000 transplants are carried out in China each year. Of these, 3,000 are liver transplants and 95 percent of them use livers from dead donors.

China defended its use of organs from executed prisoners, saying consent was obtained from convicts or their families. A transplant operation using the liver of a dead donor costs around $33,000 in China.

"What is important is the transparency, it has to be open to scrutiny ... if China makes its current system open to scrutiny and very transparent, that would do good," said the WHO's Noel.

In Asia, a cultural obsession with keeping the body of the deceased intact has stymied public organ donation programs.

Excluding China, Asia has fewer than 200 livers donated by people ahead of their death each year, said Lo Chung-man, professor of hepatobiliary and pancreatic surgery at the University of Hong Kong.

Pakistan, where trade in human organs is not illegal, is turning into a "kidney bazaar", said the chief executive of Pakistan's Kidney Foundation, Jaffar Naqvi.

There are no confirmed figures for the number of foreigners coming to the country for new kidneys but Naqvi said there were 13 centers in Lahore alone which reported more than 2,000 transplants last year from bought kidneys.

Patients, mostly from Europe, Saudi

***

JERUSALEM (CNN) -- The world knows her as the daring nanny who, clutching a 2-year-old boy, pushed past the havoc in a terrorized Mumbai and risked her life to keep the toddler safe.

Sandra Samuel bravely saved the life of Moshe Holtzberg, 2, but says she sees no heroism in her actions.

But Sandra Samuel sees no heroism in her actions amid last week's terror attacks on India's financial capital that killed nearly 180 people -- including baby Moshe's parents, Rabbi Gavriel Holtzberg and his wife, Rivka. She only wishes she could have done more.

"Even today, I am thinking I should have sent the baby and done something for the rabbi and his wife," Samuel told CNN in an exclusive television interview in Israel, where she now lives.

Samuel and Moshe were among the few to make it out of the Chabad House alive after gunmen stormed the Jewish center, killing the Holtzbergs and four others.

Israel's Chabad movement has set up a fund to provide for Moshe's care. He is being looked after by members of the community, although who will serve as his guardian has not yet been established.

The nanny says she came face to face with a gunman late Wednesday, the first night of the siege. "I saw one man was shooting at me -- he shot at me."  Watch CNN's Paula Hancocks talk with Samuel Â»

She slammed a door and hid in a first-floor storage room and attempted to reach the rabbi and the others on the second floor.

Overnight, Samuel frantically tried to call for help as gunfire and grenade blasts shook the Chabad House.

Samuel says she emerged early the next afternoon, when she heard Moshe calling for her. She found the child crying as he stood between his parents, who she says appeared unconscious but still alive.

Based on the marks on Moshe's back, she believes he was struck so hard by a gunman that he fell unconscious at some point as well.

"First thing is that a baby is very important for me and this baby is something very precious to me and that's what made me just not think anything -- just pick up the baby and run," Samuel said.

"When I hear gunshot, it's not one or 20. It's like a hundred gunshots," she added. "Even I'm a mother of two children so I just pick up the baby and run. Does anyone think of dying at the moment when there's a small, precious baby?"  Watch Samuel describe the escape Â»

Outside, chaos flooded the streets as people tried to make sense of the massacre that killed at least 179 people and wounded 300 others. Ultimately, she and Moshe reached safety at the home of an Israeli consul before arriving in Israel, where she is considered a hero.

In the aftermath of the attacks, Moshe asked for his mother continuously, Samuel says, and he is learning to play again -- though he likes the nanny close by. And while she still has nightmares of the horrific siege that took hold of Mumbai, Samuel, a non-Jew and native of India, said she will stay in Israel for as long as Moshe needs her.  Watch as Samuel describes boy asking for his mother Â»

"Yes, yes, they said it is important I am here," she said. "Me, I just take care of the baby."

***

MEXICO CITY, Mexico (CNN) -- Arrest warrants have been issued for another nine people associated with a fire at a day-care center in northwestern Mexico in June that killed 48 children, the state-run Notimex news agency said Saturday.



Two girls lay flowers during a funeral of one of the 48 children who died in the day-care fire.



The warrants are for the owners and legal representatives of the ABC day-care center in the city of Hermosillo in Sonora state, which burned down June 5, Notimex said.



Officials have determined that the fire started at an air-conditioning unit at a government-owned warehouse in the same building as the day-care center. Fourteen children remain hospitalized, Notimex reported earlier.



The latest arrest warrants are the third group to be issued since the fire.



On Wednesday, the Mexican federal attorney general's office ordered the arrest of nine public officials from the Mexican Institute of Social Security, which owned the day-care center, as well as private individuals connected to the facility.



Two weeks earlier, Mexican officials announced they had ordered the arrests of 14 people who worked at the warehouse.



Parents of the dead children and others have held demonstrations in Hermosillo and Mexico City to protest what they see as foot-dragging by authorities in punishing the responsible parties.

***

(CNN) -- Venezuela expelled Israel's ambassador to the country Tuesday and accused Israel of attempting to carry out "genocide" against the Palestinian people.



Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez called the Israeli army "cowards."



"In this tragic and indignant hour, the people of Venezuela manifest their unconditional solidarity with the heroic Palestinian people, share in the sadness that overcomes thousands of families through the loss of their loved ones, and extends to them a hand by affirming that the government of Venezuela will not rest until it sees those responsible for these criminal atrocities severely punished," the Venezuelan foreign minister said in a statement read by an anchor on state television.



The statement added that the government "condemns strongly the flagrant violations of international law" by Israel and "denounces their planned utilization of state terrorism."



"For the above-mentioned reasons, the government of Venezuela has decided to expel the ambassador of Israel and some of the personnel of the Israeli Embassy in Venezuela," it added.



In a news conference broadcast by state-run Venezuelan television, President Hugo Chavez blasted the Israeli military.



"They are cowards," he said. "It's as though a boxing professional were to come here and challenge you to box. Well, how courageous! How courageous is the Israeli army!"



It said that Chavez "makes a fraternal call to the Jewish people throughout the world to oppose these criminal policies of the state of Israel that recall the worst pages of the history of the 20th century.



"With the genocide of the Palestinian people, the state of Israel will never be able to offer its people the perspective of a peace that is both necessary and long-lasting."



Mark Regev, a spokesman for Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert, was unswayed.



"I haven't heard the details yet, but you know the regime in Venezuela has been one of the few countries in the world that gives automatic support to the Iranian extremists, and it doesn't surprise me that they have affinity with groups like Hamas and Hezbollah," he told CNN.



He predicted that other countries would not follow suit, even in the Middle East.



"I think, even in the Muslim and Arab countries, there is a fair amount of understanding for what Israel has had to do here," he said.

***

MIAMI, Florida (CNN)  -- Miami rapper Brisco lost $40,000 in jewelry and his luxury SUV when armed robbers stormed the barber shop where he was getting a trim, but the artist says the hold up may help his creativity.



Security camera video showed Brisco, whose real name is British Mitchell,  sitting in a barber chair when four armed men rush into the Miami, Florida, business, fire a few shots and order everyone, including the rapper, to the floor.



"He went to a barber shop to get his hair cut," Miami Police Officer Jeffery Giordano told Miami TV station WSVN. "They took a little bit more off the top than expected."



Brisco's gold watch, bracelet, chain and pendant were taken from him, along with the keys to his Range Rover. The vehicle was later recovered, Giordano said.



"For a rapper to have his bling stolen, they might as well stolen that man's heart," Giordano said.



Brisco, known for his songs about ghetto street life, said he was still alive and looking at the bright side.



"I'll get bigger jewelry and still go hard," Brisco said. "It's great material for my next album."



Music fans also know Brisco by his other nickname, the Opa Locka Goon, a reference to his south Florida hometown.



The armed robbery took place July 29 in Miami's Model City neighborhood.

***

BERLIN, Germany (CNN) -- Concerns were growing Wednesday for a polar bear born last month at a German zoo after its twin died and was possibly eaten by its mother.



One year ago Vera gave birth to Flocke, pictured here playing in her enclosure in April.



The young polar bear died Monday, less than two weeks after it was born, Nuremberg Zoo said.



The surviving twin was doing well, the zoo said, but added that it was concerned the mother may not be able to care for it properly.



Zookeepers watching a video feed from the bears' enclosure said they had noticed the baby bear looking thinner and weaker. They saw the bears' mother, Vera, nudging the dead bear with her nose and observing it -- and as of Wednesday, they said, the dead bear was nowhere to be seen.



"It is very, very sad," said zoo director Dag Encke. "it is unfortunately frequently the case that with twins, one of the animals doesn't survive."



Zookeepers had kept their distance from Vera and her babies, watching them only on camera so as not to make the mother feel threatened. Polar bears are known to eat their young if they sense any danger or interference.



"We have to worry more about the surviving young animal and take care that the polar bear with her baby is not disturbed," Encke said. "So far, Vera is caring for the surviving baby in an exemplary way."



One year ago Vera gave birth to Flocke, who became an instant celebrity across Germany. Flocke's first birthday is Thursday.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Two men accused of failed car bomb attacks in London and a car bombing at Glasgow International Airport last year went on trial Thursday.



Mohammed Asha, a doctor, is accused of conspiracy to murder and cause explosions.



Bilal Abdulla and Mohammed Asha, both doctors, are charged with conspiracy to murder and conspiracy to cause explosions. Their trial at London's Woolwich Crown Court is expected to last up to 12 weeks.



The case stems from the discovery in June 2007 of two explosives-filled Mercedes sedans in central London. One of the cars was parked across the street from a packed nightclub near Piccadilly Circus and the other was towed from an underground car park at Hyde Park.



An ambulance crew notified police about the first car after they saw smoke coming from it. The second car was towed for a parking offense but drew suspicion because it smelled of gasoline.



Officials said both cars cars were filled with fuel, gas canisters, and nails. Police managed to defuse them.



The following day, with attention still focused on the averted attacks in the capital, a Jeep sped through the barriers outside Glasgow International Airport and slammed head on into the terminal. The Jeep, filled with propane gas, burst into flames and created a fireball.



The driver and passenger jumped out of the car. One set himself on fire and later died in the hospital; the other was identified as Abdulla, an Iraqi doctor who had been practicing medicine in Scotland.



Later that day, police arrested Asha as he was driving with his wife on a highway in Cheshire, England. Police said Asha, a doctor of Palestinian descent who grew up in Jordan, conspired with Abdulla to carry out the explosions.



The incidents happened just days after British Prime Minister Gordon Brown took office.



A third man charged in the case, Sabeel Ahmed, pleaded guilty in April to failing to disclose information about an act of terrorism. He was ordered to be deported to India.

***

(CNN) -- Tensions mounted in Paris, Texas, on Tuesday when about 100 mostly black protesters clashed with white supremacist groups in a verbal confrontation over a black man's death.



White supremacists taunt black protesters who marched Tuesday in Paris, Texas.



The confrontation stems from the 2008 death of 24-year-old African-American Brandon McClelland. After his body was found mangled on the side of a rural road, investigators concluded he was run over, dragged, and killed.



Two white men were initially charged with murder, but the charges were dismissed last month because of a lack of evidence.



Black protesters marched through the town Tuesday, hoisting a flag of red, green and black, the colors associated with African liberation movements. They chanted, "No justice, no peace."



White demonstrators waved a flag emblazoned with a Nazi swastika and taunted the black marchers, shouting through a megaphone: "White power, white power."  Watch the confrontation »



Paris, in northeast Texas, has 25,000 people, 70 percent white and 20 percent black.



No violence or injuries were reported but two white men were arrested and charged with disorderly conduct for trying to incite the protesters, Lt. Danny Huff of the Paris Police Department said.



McClelland's mother, Jacqueline McClelland, told CNN the demonstration was not about race but was aimed at achieving justice for her only child.



"We come seeking justice, not only for myself, but [for] other people who have been done wrong," she said. "I want for everyone to get equal justice.



"I don't know the whole story," she said. "I can't be at peace until I know what happened to my child."



CNN's Carolina Sanchez contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Some legendary names in music and art are voicing their support for the Occupy movement, with a music compilation record called "Occupy This Album," the album producers say.





David Crosby, Jackson Brown, Devo, Third Eye Blind, Yo La Tengo, Lloyd Cole, The Guthrie Family and filmmaker/activist Michael Moore have signed on to the project, the producers said in a press release.





The album was inspired by the Occupy Wall Street movement and will "provide an anthem and rallying cry for the protesters involved in the uprising," producers say.





Graham Nash, a member of the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and former member of the band Crosby, Stills and Nash has also signed on to help with the project, according to the press release.





"The Occupation movement is really the voice of the people, it's an idea that's been a long time coming. I fully support their non-violent protests against a system that is carefully crafted in favor of the rich one percent," Nash is quoted as saying.





Producers of the album say all of the proceeds will benefit the Occupy movement. 50% of the proceeds will be donated to the Occupy Wall Street General Fund. The other half of money generated will be distributed evenly among the major occupations across the country, according to Jason Samel of Music for Occupy, who is producing the album.





According to the press release, "Occupy This Album" is supposed to be released this winter.

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN) -- A 24-year-old gang member was arrested Thursday in connection with a shooting at a Los Angeles bus stop in which eight people were wounded, city officials said.



Bystanders express shock after a shooting at a bus stop in Los Angeles Wednesday.



Billy Ray Hines is believed to have fired into a crowd of people at the bus stop. Hines was apprehended Thursday afternoon as he was walking down the street, about a half-mile from the scene of the shooting, Police Chief William Bratton told reporters.



Hines will face 10 counts of attempted murder -- one for each of the eight victims, and two more for what authorities believe to be his two intended victims, who were still being sought Thursday, Bratton said.



Authorities are also seeking the gun used in the incident, he said.



The shootings took place Wednesday afternoon at the intersection of Central and Vernon avenues, in an area where police are concerned about gang violence.



Five of the victims were children. An 11-year-old girl was shot in the chest, and another girl, age 11, was shot in the right arm. Three boys were wounded -- ages 10, 12 and 14.



One was shot in the leg, one in the buttocks and the third in the ankle, police said. One man was wounded in the leg and another in the ankle, and a woman was shot in the face.



"While no one died yesterday, the bullets unleashed shot through the core of the entire community," Los Angeles Mayor Antonio Villaraigosa said in announcing the arrest Thursday. "The decent people of this community responded with force."  Watch mayor, authorities discuss arrest of gunman »



Witnesses came forward after the incident to identify the gunman as Hines, Bratton said. The shooting was believed to stem from a dispute between the gunman and the two intended victims, he said. E-mail to a friend

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Vladimir Putin spent the Russian New Year boogying to the hits of ABBA after spending $30,000 to fly a tribute band to a lake town north of Moscow.

Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin flew an ABBA tribute band to Russia for a private concert.

According to Bjorn Again founder, Rod Stephen, Putin disco pointed to the ABBA classics "Super Trouper" and "Mamma Mia" at a gathering of only eight guests.

Stephen said he received a phone call from the Kremlin prior to Christmas.

"It was pretty mad. It was the type of phone call everyone gets everyday from Moscow. I thought someone was taking the piss."

Stephen said an agent in Moscow then set the gig up, and he was told it was for Russia's "number two."

He said the band were flown to Moscow and then had a nine-hour bus trip to Lake Valdai -- where Putin has held high-level meetings in the past -- on January 22 (the traditional date of Russian New Year's eve).

"The band and crew were searched at checkpoints by people with appropriately sized weapons," Stephen said.

He said the band played behind a heavy gauze curtain, which made it hard for them to see the audience.

However, the could make out Putin's profile and that of the other seven guests.

Stephen said it was initially "roaring" at the venue.

"When the band started people were sitting on sofas. But then Putin was up and dancing to Super Trouper and Mamma Mia, pointing fingers up and down."

The band played for an hour before being shown out as the guests went to watch a fireworks display.

Stephen said they were paid $30,000 and their expenses covered.

He described it as the "weirdest" gig the band had done.

"I've had phone calls from the agency saying 'don't talk to anyone else we are getting grief from the Kremlin,' but there was no non-disclosure contract."

***

(CNN) -- A struggling German soccer team is offering a refund to its fans who traveled to another city to watch it suffer a 4-0 loss.



Cottbus are second from the bottom of the German Bundesliga.



More than 600 Energie Cottbus supporters saw their team suffer its sixth loss in seven games when it received a 4-0 drubbing Friday at the hands of another team, Schalke.



Cottbus are second from the bottom in the German Bundesliga's ranking and is in danger of being relegated to a lower league at the end of the season.



The team posted a Web statement Saturday headlined, "Sorry, Energie Fans!"



In it, the team said its players "did not manage at any time to stand up to a high-class opponent with our particular qualities of passion, dedication and one-on-one duels."



"Certainly one can lose at Schalke," the team manager Steffen Heidrich said in the statement. "Nevertheless we did not put up enough defense against the class of the individuals of this opponent."



The team said it will announce details in the coming weeks of how fans can receive a refund on their admission ticket.



"I welcome the apologetic gesture of the team to its fans," Heidrich said. "Real compensation must actually be given in the coming matches."



CNN's Ben Brumfield contributed to this report.

***

(CNN)  -- Chennai Super Kings won the third staging of the Indian Premier League (IPL) as they beat Mumbai Indians by 22 runs in the final of the Twenty20 tournament on Sunday.





Mumbai with home advantage and with an in-form Sachin Tendulkar in their ranks fell well short in their pursuit of the 168 for five wickets posted by Chennai in their allocated overs.





Suresh Raina was the star for Chenna with an unbeaten 57 in their knock and a tight spell of bowling including the wicket of lower-order dangerman Harbhajan Singh.





He posted a blistering 72-run stand with Chennai and Indian captain Mahendra Singh Dhoni (27) but their total still looked only respectable with the likes of Tendulkar and Keith Pollard in the Mumbai ranks.





But off-spinner Ravichandran Ashwin immediately piled on the pressure with an opening maiden over to Shikhar Dhawan, who fell in the next over to Australia paceman Doug Bollinger as he edged to Dhoni.





Tendulkar and Abhishek Nayar (27) shared a 66-run stand but just when they were upping the ante, Nayar was run out and Raina, introduced for the first time in the 12th over, also got rid of Harbhajan in the same over.





The killer blow came in the 15th over when left-arm spinner Shadab Jakati had  Tendulkar caught for 48 on the boundary and then removed Saurabh Tiwary.





With the Indians needing 55 from the last three overs, the crowd were silent until Pollard, who had been mysteriously kept back, smashed Bollinger for two sixes and two fours in the 18th which yielded 22 runs.





However, both Rayudu (21) and Pollard fell in the penultimate over from Albie  Morkel and the game was up for Mumbai with the final action played out in near silence among the capacity crowd.

***

BAGHDAD, Iraq (CNN) -- Iraq awarded a lucrative oil contract to BP and China National Petroleum Corp., government spokesman Ali al-Dabbagh said Wednesday, while rejecting other companies' offers for other oil fields.



BP and China National Petroleum Corporation have won a lucrative oil contract in Iraq.



The joint BP-CNPC bid was for the al-Rumeila oil field, one of the largest in the world. The energy companies are expected to increase production at the oil field by 50 percent, to 285,000 barrels a day, for a service charge of $2 for each additional barrel produced, al-Dabbagh said in a statement.



The Iraqi government rejected bids for five other oil fields and a natural gas field because the bidders did not agree to the service charge set by the Ministry of Oil, he said.



The Ministry of Oil rejected the idea that the failure to award more than one contract made the much-anticipated auction a flop.



Iraq did not say how much the BP-CNPC bid was worth. It runs for 20 years.



Oil Minister Hussein Shahrastani chaired the government-sponsored auction for the oil and natural gas field contracts Tuesday, after a day's delay due to a sandstorm.



Much of the auction was broadcast live on state television, which Ministry of Oil spokesman Assem Jihad told CNN was a sign of the transparency of the process.



He said the government was satisfied with the auction, even though only one contract was awarded, because the contract was for Iraq's largest oil field.



Iraq plans to open bidding this year on 10 more oil fields and one natural gas field, all of which are undeveloped, Jihad said.



The companies whose bids were rejected Tuesday have been given time to review their offers, he said.



Iraq has some of the largest oil reserves in the world, with an estimated 115 billion barrels -- tying Iran for second place, behind Saudi Arabia's 264 billion barrels, according to estimates from the Energy Information Administration in the United States.



CNN's Jomana Karadsheh in Baghdad contributed to this report.

***

London, England (CNN) -- British police said Wednesday they have arrested a BBC television presenter on suspicion of murder after he told viewers he carried out a so-called mercy killing on a former lover.





Ray Gosling, 70, a freelance broadcaster, admitted on a BBC show aired in central England that he had smothered the unnamed partner in hospital where he was being treated for AIDS. Assisting in another person's death is illegal in England.





Police in Nottinghamshire, 160 kilometers (100 miles) north of London, confirmed they had made an arrest after the apparent confession on the BBC's "Inside Out" show.





Gosling made his admission in a taped segment of a 30-minute show about death, recounting how he smothered his partner to end his "terrible, terrible pain."





He told viewers: "Maybe this is the time to share a secret that I have kept for quite a long time. I killed someone once.





"He was a young chap, he'd been my lover and he got AIDS.





"In a hospital one hot afternoon, the doctor said 'There's nothing we can do,' and he was in terrible, terrible pain.





"I picked up the pillow and smothered him until he was dead. The doctor came back and I said 'He's gone'. Nothing more was ever said."





Gosling, who has not revealed details of his former lover's identity or the exact date of the incident, insisted he was not "making a cause" of assisted dying.





In a BBC Radio interview he said: "Sometimes doctors do it on their own. Sometimes people do it on their own.





"And if it happens to a lover or friend of yours, a husband, a wife, and I hope it doesn't, but when it does sometimes you have to do brave things and you have to say - to use Nottingham language - bugger the law."

***

(CNN) -- Frozen winter conditions are helping slow the spread of a pipeline leak on Alaska's North Slope, an environmental official said.





An estimated 46,000 gallons of a water-and-oil mixture was spilled before the source of the leak -- a pipe rupture -- was identified Monday, according to the Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation (ADEC).





The ruptured 18-inch line, owned by oil company BP and which usually carries a mixture of 75 percent water and 25 percent oil, has been repaired.





The frozen conditions make the spill less mobile, Matthew Carr of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency said late Wednesday.





"Any spill is regrettable," Steve Reinhart, a BP spokesman in Anchorage, told CNN. "We will clean this up thoroughly and our investigation will find out what happened so that we can ensure this doesn't happen again."





Reinhart said the spill, which occurred entirely on land, has had no impact on production or wildlife in the area, and is contained to a small fraction of the much larger Prudhoe Bay oil field.





"It is not a pool of oil spreading out across the ground," Reinhart said, comparing its consistency to that of a snow cone. "It's a partially solidified mass that's piled up in one area, and as we speak, truckloads of this material is being moved off this site and to a collection depot."





According to officials, the rupture was approximately 24 inches lengthwise, running along the bottom of the pipeline.





In an incident report on its Web site Wednesday, ADEC described the rupture as being "consistent with an overpressure scenario," caused by ice inside the pipe.





The leak was discovered early November 29 by a BP worker conducting a routine inspection.





The North Slope's biggest spill to date happened in 2006 when a corroded pipeline dumped 200,000 gallons of crude oil.





CNN's Nick Valencia contributed to this report.

***

BAGHDAD, Iraq (CNN)  -- The Iraqi government says it has banned all organized visits to Saddam Hussein's grave amid concern over support for the late dictator's former party.



An Iraqi poet, left, gives a recital while children carry pictures of Saddam Hussein over his grave.



A Cabinet statement on Monday said it had directed authorities in Salaheddin province and the Education Ministry to "take all necessary measures" to prevent such outings.



The former dictator, along with his two sons and other relatives, is buried in his hometown of al-Ouja near Tikrit in Salaheddin north of Baghdad. And, Hussein supporters and schoolchildren have made visits there on the late dictator's birthday and hanging date.



There have been videos on sites such as YouTube of people at the site.



One video shows schoolchildren at the grave in December; they carried banners at Hussein's grave that said "We won't forget you father" and they read pro-Hussein poetry.



The government move was made after a recent visit by schoolchildren to the grave, but no reason was given for the decision.



However, the move reflects the concern of Iraq's government over the presence of the Baath Party in Iraq, Saddam Hussein's political movement.



The party and its symbols have been banned in Iraq.



On Saturday, government spokesman Ali al-Dabbagh told reporters that while there can be government reconciliation with individual Baathists who have not committed crimes such as killing Iraqis, there can never be national reconciliation with the party itself.



Salaheddin Gov. Mutasher Hussein Alaiwi, said he had not received any official directives yet, but said he would implement Cabinet orders when he receives them.



The governor said that would apply to organized group visits, but they would not stop individual ones.



A resident of al-Ouja told CNN the government had no right to stop visitors from going to their former president's tomb.



"Even if they put police and army outside the door, they will not stop us from visiting our president, our leader and our father," said Mohammed al- Nasiri.



Hussein was executed in 2006 after an Iraqi court sentenced him to death for crimes against humanity.

***

Washington (CNN) -- Tables set in apple green, ruby and gold with arrangements of roses, hydrangeas and sweet peas awaited guests to Tuesday's White House state dinner.



The place settings in fine china from three previous administrations -- Eisenhower, Clinton and George W. Bush -- are flanked by crystal glasses and five pieces of silverware. Place cards are handwritten, including two that read "The President" and "Mrs. Obama."



The first state dinner of Barack Obama's presidency, in honor of visiting Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, will take place in a tent set up on the White House South Lawn, with a view of the Washington Monument.



Guests will sit at round tables for 10, with the floral arrangements intended to pay homage to the state bird of India, the Indian peacock, and the dinner featuring a seasonal menu reflecting American and Indian flavors, according to the White House.



The first course will be a potato and eggplant salad made with White House-grown arugula and accompanied by an onion-seed vinaigrette. Red lentil soup with fresh cheese follows, and then a choice of entrees: roasted potato dumplings with tomato chutney, chickpeas and okra for vegetarians, or green curry prawns and caramelized salsify with smoked collard greens.



Dessert will be pumpkin pie tart or pear tatin with whipped cream and caramel sauce. Each course is paired with its own wine, all of American vintage.



Michelle Obama worked with guest chef Marcus Samuelsson and White House Executive Chef Cristeta Comerford to "create a menu that reflects the best of American cuisine, continues this White House's commitment to serving fresh, sustainable and regional food, and honors the culinary excellence and flavors that are present in Indian cuisine," the White House said.



The herbs and lettuces were harvested from the White House Kitchen Garden started by the first lady, and honey from the White House beehive is being used to poach the dessert pears.

***

(CNN) -- Researchers have discovered the oldest piece of gold jewelry ever found in the Americas, an academic journal reported Tuesday.



A gold and turquoise necklace, made 4,000 years ago, was found in a burial site near Lake Titicaca.



A team found the gold necklace near Lake Titicaca in Peru, according to the journal Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. It's 4,000 years old -- 600 years older than any other gold jewelry discovered in the Western Hemisphere.



The anthropologist who discovered the gold, Mark Aldenderfer, told CNN on Tuesday night that he sensed the importance of his find after noticing a glint while excavating a site with human remains.



"It appeared to be gold. That's when I knew we had something special," he said. "This was a complete shock."



He found the necklace about seven years ago, he said, but researchers kept quiet for fear that looters would raid the site. They also wanted to allow time for chemical analysis before announcing their discovery on Tuesday.



Video footage from Peru shows a necklace of nine gold tubes separated by 10 stones.



The find is important, Aldenderfer said, because it signals the early emergence of a desire for status among people who lived as relative equals without a formal leadership system.



The Andean people of that time, Aldenderfer said, had recently settled down after many generations as hunter-gatherers. Formal kings would not emerge for hundreds of years.



The person who wore the gold necklace may have sought to distinguish himself with a status symbol, Aldenderfer said.



The artifact is in the custody of the National Institute of Peru and may be displayed in a museum, he said. E-mail to a friend

***

ISLAMABAD, Pakistan (CNN) -- The new leader of the Pakistani Taliban vowed revenge on Pakistan, the United States and NATO forces for drone attacks along the Afghan border, two local journalists who attended a meeting with him told CNN.



File picture taken on November 26, 2008 of Pakistani Taliban commander Hakimullah Mehsud



Leader Hakimullah Mehsud met reporters Sunday in South Waziristan, according to the journalists, who spoke on condition of anonymity because they are not authorized to talk to the news media.



Taliban commanders Wali-Ur Rehman and Qari Hussein, and spokesman Aazam Tariq, were at the meeting as well, the journalists said.



Mehsud also vowed to avenge the recent death of Taliban leader Baitullah Mehsud, they said. Officials think he was killed by a drone attack in August.



The leader said the Taliban would not disarm as a condition for talks, and added that the militants' withdrawal from the Swat Valley was a strategic move and not a retreat or a defeat, the journalists said.



South Waziristan is one of seven districts in Pakistan's tribal region along the Afghan border.



The Pakistani military is fighting Taliban militants in the country's north, and missile attacks from suspected U.S. drones have targeted militant leaders.



The United States is the only country in the region known to have the ability to launch missiles from drones, which are controlled remotely.



U.S. officials do not comment on suspected drone strikes, which have caused tension between Pakistan and the United States.

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- Pfizer is near a deal to buy rival drugmaker Wyeth for $68 billion, according to news reports late Sunday citing people familiar with the deal.



Pfizer's world headquarters is in New York.



A deal was imminent and likely to be announced Monday, The Wall Street Journal and The New York Times reported.



"It is our policy not to comment on rumor or speculation," said Michael Lampe, a Wyeth representative. Pfizer was not immediately available for comment.



Pfizer, the world's leading drugmaker in terms of sales, has been in talks to buy Wyeth. Pfizer's stock slipped 1 percent on the news Friday, while Wyeth gained about 8 percent.



On January 13 Pfizer said it was cutting up to 8 percent of its R&D staff, about 800 jobs. Spokesman Raymond Kerins said that was to "raise productivity."



But analysts say Pfizer is clearly trying to beef up its drug pipeline through an acquisition, adding that the company seems to have given up on its own R&D staff coming up with a blockbuster to replace Lipitor. This cholesterol-cutting drug peaked in 2006 with nearly $13 billion in annual sales but will lose its patent protection in 2011, when generic versions will become available.



Les Funtleyder, pharma analyst for Miller Tabak, said Pfizer is "not feeling that they're getting the efficiency out of their R&D unit." He said Pfizer would probably rather do a deal with Wyeth over other competitors, because there is less overlap in the companies' pipelines.



Funtleyder said Pfizer already has a diabetes franchise, which would overlap with Eli Lilly & Co. and Bristol-Myers Squibb, both of which also focus on diabetes treatments. Pfizer probably has its eyes on Wyeth's Alzheimer's drug pipeline, he said. But he cautions that a merger won't be a success unless Wyeth's pipeline is successful, which remains to be seen, he said.



"If Wyeth comes out with an Alzheimer's drug that works, then the deal works," he said.



Pfizer is probably also focused on Wyeth's blockbuster children's vaccine Prevnar, as well as its experimental biotech drugs, said Michael Krensavage of Krensavage Asset Management.



Sales of Prevnar, which combats meningitis and blood infections, jumped 12 percent in the first nine months of 2008 compared with the same period the prior year, to $2.1 billion.



If a deal does go through, Funtleyder warns, Wyeth staffers should brace for layoffs.



"I can say with pretty good confidence that this is going to lead to some head count reduction," he said.

***

(CNN) -- Universities nationwide were recovering Friday, a day after protests over education budget cuts hit campuses from coast to coast.





Though many of the demonstrations were peaceful, some turned chaotic.





On the West Coast, the University of California, Santa Cruz, was scheduled to reopen Friday. The crush of demonstrators on Thursday caused administrators to close the northern California campus.





"Please check back for information on the campus's planned return to service on Friday," the university Web site said.





The protest, dubbed the March 4 National Day of Action, sent thousands of students, educators and supporters to the streets to challenge budget cuts and tuition increases.





In Oakland, California, police arrested 160 protesters who shut down a freeway, authorities said.





Police stopped students from shutting down a freeway near the University of California, Davis, in northern California.





Demonstrations occurred in other states including Colorado, New York and Wisconsin. A blog called Student Activism, which compiled a list of the protests, said 122 events were slated in 33 states,  most on campuses and some at state capitols.





Many of Thursday's demonstrations focused on cuts in state funding for colleges and universities, which supporters say drive up tuition, limit classes and make higher education unobtainable to many.





State funding for the California State University system was reduced by nearly $1 billion for the academic years between 2008 and 2010. Schools have responded by increasing fees, canceling classes, cutting student support programs and furloughing professors. Fees have increased 182 percent since 2002. Class waiting lists have doubled or tripled.





"The less affordable education becomes, the less likely low-income students will be able to get a college education," said Lillian Taiz, president of the California Faculty Association and a professor of history at California State University, Los Angeles.

***

(CNN) -- A Pennsylvania woman told police she was attacked at an ATM in Pittsburgh by a robber who became angry when he saw a John McCain bumper sticker on her car, a spokeswoman for the Pittsburgh Police Department said Thursday.



Police cannot confirm whether a man attacked this woman because she had a McCain sticker on her car.



Public Information Officer Diane Richard said police cannot substantiate her story, however, and the investigation is ongoing.



Richard said the 20-year-old told investigators a man approached her Wednesday night at an ATM in the city's East End, put a blade to her neck and demanded money.



She said she gave him $60 and stepped away from him, Richard said.



But the woman said the man "became very angry"  when he noticed her car had a bumper sticker supporting the GOP presidential nominee, according to Richard. The woman said he punched her in the back of the head, knocked her to the ground and "continued to punch and kick her while threatening her," the spokeswoman said.



Before he left, the woman said, he carved the letter "B" into her face with a knife, according to Richard. There was no indication what the "B" indicated.



The alleged assailant fled on foot, Richard said.



"We, the police, cannot substantiate this yet," she said. "This is what she told police."



The woman, who is not from Pittsburgh, refused medical attention, Richard said, although she told the investigating officer she would see a doctor Thursday. There was no update on her condition, she said.



Richard said the woman described her alleged attacker as a dark-skinned African-American, 6 feet 4 inches tall with a medium build and short dark hair, wearing dark clothing and shiny shoes.



McCain spokeswoman Jill Hazelbaker told CNN that McCain and running mate Sarah Palin "spoke to the victim and her family after learning about the incident earlier this afternoon."



Hazelbaker said the campaign would not offer more detail out of respect for the woman's privacy.



The campaign of Democratic presidential candidate Sen. Barack Obama responded to the report with a statement saying, "Our thoughts and prayers are with the young woman for her to make a speedy recovery, and we hope that the person who perpetrated this crime is swiftly apprehended and brought to justice."

***

(CNN) -- They were fathers and daughters, tycoons and spiritualists, Westerners and Asians, who were in Mumbai for different reasons. But they met the same fate in the indiscriminate path of gunfire and explosions in a string of terror attacks across the Indian city this week.



Kia Scherr, left, has told CNN that her husband, Alan Scherr, and daughter Naomi were killed in Mumbai.



At least 183 people were killed this week in attacks on several high-traffic landmarks, many of which tourists frequent. Their deaths have torn families and communities apart, and many more have yet to be confirmed.



Small snapshots of the victims have begun to emerge, most of them pertaining to foreigners. Limited reports have circulated about victims from India.



A father and daughter from a Virginia meditation group were among five Americans confirmed dead, the U.S. State Department said Friday.



Kia Scherr told CNN on Friday that her husband, Alan, 58, and daughter, Naomi, 13, were killed.



She said she knew her husband and daughter were dining at the Oberoi, a Mumbai hotel, when gunfire broke out Wednesday night. Scherr said she last spoke to them Thursday.  Watch friends tell the story of the Scherrs' visit to Mumbai »



The father and daughter had been in India since November 17 and were due to leave Monday, Scherr said.



A spokeswoman for The Synchronicity Foundation, a meditation group based near Charlottesville, Virginia, said the two were among 25 members of the group who were visiting India.



The other Synchronicity people who were staying at the Oberoi "are accounted for and safe," the group's Web site said.



Hemant Karkare, Anti-Terrorism Squad chief for Maharashtra state, was among at least 16 members of Indian law enforcement officers killed in the attacks. Mumbai is in Maharashtra.



Karkare was leading an offensive against gunmen late Wednesday when he was shot three times in the chest, CNN sister network CNN-IBN reported.



Karkare, who joined the Indian Police Service in 1982, became ATS chief in January after spending seven years in Austria at the Research and Analysis Wing, Indian's external foreign intelligence agency, according to CNN-IBN.



Five hostages, including a rabbi and his wife, were killed in a standoff at the Chabad House, said Rabbi Zalman Shmotkin, a spokesman for Chabad-Lubavitch International in the United States.  Watch: Rabbi and wife killed in Mumbai »



Rabbi Gavriel Noach Holtzberg, the city's envoy for the community, and his wife, Rivka, had been held hostage at the Chabad House, known as the Nariman House in Mumbai. The building houses the Mumbai headquarters of the Chabad community, a Hasidic Jewish movement.



Gavriel Holtzberg, 29, was born in Israel and moved to Brooklyn, New York, with his parents when he was 9. Rivka, 28, was a native of Afula, Israel, the organization said.  Watch the Chabad community in New York react »



The Holtzbergs arrived in Mumbai in 2003 to serve the Jewish community there, Chabad-Lubavitch International said.



"As emissaries to Mumbai, Gabi and Rivky gave up the comforts of the West in order to spread Jewish pride in a corner of the world that was a frequent stop for throngs of Israeli tourists," said Rabbi Moshe Kotlarsky, vice chairman of Merkos L'Inyonei Chinuch, the educational arm of Chabad-Lubavitch, in a statement.



Gavriel Holtzberg made a phone call to the Israeli Consulate to report that gunmen were in his house, the organization said.



"In the middle of the conversation, the line went dead," the organization said. It did not say when the phone call took place.



A cook at the center, who had barricaded herself in a room, grabbed the couple's son and escaped with another person, the Israeli newspaper Haaretz reported.



The boy's 2nd birthday is Saturday, said Rabbi Yehuda Krinsky, chairman of the Educational and Social Services arms of the Chabad-Lubavitch Movement.



"Today, he became an orphan," Krinsky said at a news conference in

***

Vero Beach, Florida (CNN) -- Louis Schacht's family has been growing citrus in Vero Beach, Florida, for 60 years, contributing to a multibillion-dollar industry. But this year, he's worried.



The winter weather blasting much of the country has made it to Florida, and the cold front now moving through is expected to last longer than usual. That could prove disastrous for Schacht and his fellow growers at the peak of the picking season.



A chill can enhance the taste of the oranges and grapefruit that the Schacht family business grows and ships around the world. But if the temperature drops to 28 degrees Fahrenheit or below and stays there for four hours, fruit across Florida could be frozen and the crop destroyed.



"If it stays just above freezing, it can really help sweeten the fruit, but it's a fine line to walk. If it gets too cold, you can definitely have some damage," Schacht said.



He has flooded his 280-acre grove in a bid to protect his fruit, as have larger growers across the state.



"What that does is create a little layer of warmth, usually about 20 to 25 feet from the surface, which is all we really need," Schacht said.



And Schacht said that's just about all he can do. He said the fate of his fruit is now out of his hands.



"We've basically done what we can do," he said. "You say a prayer and go to bed."



CNNMoney.com: Will prices rise for orange juice?



Schacht ships directly to customers around the world. "As a small grower, you try to sell everything that you can, direct to the consumer," he said.



His crop contributes to Florida being the No. 1 producer of oranges in the country. "The citrus industry has a 9 billion-dollar annual economic impact," says Florida Citrus Mutual spokesman Andrew Meadows.

***

BAGHDAD, Iraq (CNN)  -- At least 6,000 Christians have fled the northern Iraqi city of Mosul in the past week because of killings and death threats, Iraq's Ministry of Immigration and Displaced Persons said Thursday.



A Christian family that fled Mosul found refuge in the Al-Sayida monastery about 30 miles north of the city.



The number represents 1,424 families, at least 70 more families than were reported to be displaced on Wednesday.



The ministry said it had set up an operation room to follow up sending urgent aid to the displaced Christian families as a result of attacks by what it called "terrorist groups."



Iraqi officials have said the families were frightened by a series of killings and threats by Muslim extremists ordering them to convert to Islam or face death.



Fourteen Christians have been slain in the past two weeks in the city, which is about 260 miles (420 kilometers) north of Baghdad.



Mosul is one of the last Iraqi cities where al Qaeda in Iraq has a significant presence and routinely carries out attacks. The U.S. military said it killed the Sunni militant group's No. 2 leader, Abu Qaswarah, in a raid in the northern city earlier this month.



In response to the recent attacks on Christians, authorities have ordered more checkpoints in several of the city's Christian neighborhoods.



The attacks may have been prompted by Christian demonstrations ahead of provincial elections, which are to be held by January 31, authorities said.



Hundreds of Christians took to the streets in Mosul and surrounding villages and towns, demanding adequate representation on provincial councils, whose members will be chosen in the local elections.



Thursday, Iraq's minister of immigration and displaced persons discussed building housing complexes for Christian families in northern Iraq and allocating land to build the complexes.



Abdel Samad Rahman Sultan brought up the issue when he met with a representative of Iraq's Hammurabi Organization for Human Rights and with the head of the Kojina Organization for helping displaced persons.



A curfew was declared Wednesday in several neighborhoods of eastern Mosul as authorities searched for militants behind the attacks.



CNN's Mohammed Tawfeeq contributed to this report.

***

(CNN)  -- The head of Pakistan's ruling coalition announced Thursday that the government will move to impeach President Pervez Musharraf.



President Pervez Musharraf took control of Pakistan in a military coup in 1999.



"The coalition reaffirmed the resolve of democracy and democratic forces will work jointly to make a transition to genuine democracy," the head of Pakistan People's Party Asif Ali Zardari said, reading a joint communique with his coalition partners.



Before pursuing impeachment proceedings, Pakistani lawmakers will demand Musharraf take a vote of confidence in the newly elected parliament, which he had vowed to do last year, Zardari said.



"The people of Pakistan gave a clear mandate in favor of democracy and democratic forces and voted for the change to oust Gen. Musharraf by defeating his ... party," Zardari added.



"In spite of his clear commitment that if his party was defeated in the election he would resign, he continues to cling to the office of the president."  Watch an expert talk about the impact of a possible impeachment »



If Musharraf does not request a vote of confidence, the National Assembly will meet on Monday to consider impeachment proceedings, PPP spokesman Capt. Wasif Syed told CNN. Speaking a short time before Thursday's announcement, Syed said there are enough votes in parliament right now to impeach the president.



But Musharraf may still have one card up his sleeve: he could move to dissolve parliament and dismiss the prime minister.



Amid the political upheaval, Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gilani will replace Musharraf at the opening ceremony of the Olympics on Friday in Beijing, Pakistan's state-run news agency reported.



Musharraf, who seized power in a 1999 bloodless military coup, has seen his power erode significantly since he stepped down as the country's military ruler last year and since the opposition parties' victory in February's parliamentary elections.



The new civilian government is under a lot of pressure to control Taliban and al Qaeda militants in its tribal region along the Afghan border. The CIA recently accused Pakistan's intelligence service of providing support for the militants who bombed India's embassy in Kabul, Afghanistan last month.



Fighting on Thursday between Pakistani paramilitary troops and Taliban forces killed 25 Taliban and five soldiers along the Afghan border, an army spokesman told CNN.



Asked about the situation, Dr. Ishtiaq Ahmad -- an Islamabad-based political analyst -- told CNN on Wednesday that he believes Musharraf "will fight back" against any attempt to remove him from power.



"Before they impeach the president, he might pre-empt them by using article 58(2b)," he said, referring to the constitutional article that gives the president power to dissolve parliament and dismiss the prime minister.



Ahmad, a professor of international relations at Islamabad's Quaid-i-Azam University, said any attempt to remove Musharraf would be a "next to an impossible task" because the president still has support.



"The army doesn't want him to be eliminated. The Americans are still favoring him," he noted.



CNN's Reza Sayah contributed to this report

***

(PEOPLE.com) -- Getting engaged made "Biggest Loser" contestant Vinny Hickerson feel like he had "a million pounds of weight off my shoulders."





Figurative weight, that is.





Hickerson, 28, a singer in the country duo Trailer Choir, proposed to his longtime girlfriend, Lori Diaz, 29, during a date at the Grand Ole Opry that was filmed for the reality weight loss competition, and will air on Tuesday night's episode of "The Biggest Loser."





"I wanted to take her there because it's a place where so many dreams have come true, right there on that stage," Hickerson tells PEOPLE exclusively. "My biggest dream is to be a great husband and a great father, and fall in love."





"There was no one there but us and a camera crew," says Diaz. "We sat down in the front row and he gives me a spiel about how he loves me more than anything."





Hickerson popped the question with a ring from Nashville's King Jewelers. "I thought it looked like the Eiffel Tower, which makes people think of beauty and romance," he says. "Just like the first time I saw Lori, out dancing in a zebra dress, I had that same feeling like, 'Oh my gosh, this is the one.' "





The second biggest surprise of the evening? A private concert by the country group Thompson Square, who played their Grammy-nominated song "Are You Gonna Kiss Me or Not."





"I couldn't believe they were there just for us, in this huge, amazing place," says Diaz.





Hickerson has been open on the show about his goal to lose weight in order to become a fit future husband and father to Diaz's 9-year-old son, Brennon.





Before, "I wasn't out playing ball with Brennon and even watching him skateboard. I'd just sit in the car and watch," says Hickerson, who is down to 314 pounds after starting the show at 426 pounds "Now, there isn't anything I can't do!"





Adds Diaz of the proposal: "I'll never forget that night for as long as I live. It was so perfect, even more perfect than if I had planned it myself!"





See the full article at PEOPLE.com.





© 2011 People and Time Inc. All rights reserved.

***

(CNN) -- Two hijackers who took over a plane flying from Sudan's Darfur region on Tuesday and diverted it to Libya surrendered to authorities Wednesday, Libyan state media said.

The hijacked plane took off from near the Darfur refugee camp of Kalma, which was attacked earlier in the week.

The official news agency JANA said the two hijackers surrendered to Libyan authorities in the eastern town of Kufra, where the plane landed, and they were being detained in a hall in the airport there. Their identities were not released.

Earlier, the hijackers had released all 87 passengers aboard the plane, but had held on to six crew members while they negotiated with Libyan officials through the pilot about passage to France, JANA said.

Libyan officials tried to persuade the hostage-takers to surrender as the hijackers demanded fuel to fly the plane to Paris, France.

No details were provided as to how the two surrendered. All of the remaining hostages were freed, and JANA said 20 Sudanese officials were en route to the airport.

Libya will send a plane to return the passengers and crew to Khartoum, Sudan, the plane's original destination, JANA said.

The Sun Air Boeing 737 airliner was about 10 minutes into a flight from Niyala, Sudan, to Khartoum on Tuesday when the pilot called the control tower and told officials the plane had been hijacked and was heading to Kufra, Sun Air airlines official Murtada Hassan Jumaa told the Al-Arabiya news channel.

The hijackers at first wanted to land the plane in Egypt, but the Egyptian government refused them permission, John Ukec, Sudan's ambassador to the United States, said Tuesday.

Khaled Deeb, an Al-Jazeera reporter in Tripoli, Libya, said Libyan authorities allowed the plane to land only because the hijackers said they were low on fuel -- "for humanitarian reasons and nothing else."

"The fact that the plane was kidnapped from Darfur indicates that one of the militant groups may have prepared for this operation, and the fact that they want to go to France adds more to that theory," Deeb said Tuesday. "The hijackers don't have any clear demands except for fuel and then heading to France."

-- CNN's Mustafa Al-Arab contributed to this report

***

Moscow (CNN) -- Russian election authorities officially registered Prime Minister Vladimir Putin Monday as a candidate for president in next year's election, they announced on their website.





Putin will represent his United Russia party, the Central Election Commission said.





The move is the latest step toward Putin's reclaiming the presidency after switching to the prime minister's office because of a law barring him from serving more than two consecutive terms as president.





Russia's third-richest man, the billionaire New Jersey Nets owner Mikhail Prokhorov, announced this month that he will run against Putin for president.





Many ordinary Russians suspect the Kremlin put Prokhorov up to it to give the impression the contest is fair.





Last week, Putin brushed off widespread criticism that the December 4 parliamentary elections in Russia were falsified.





He said their results "reflect the actual line-up of forces in the country, as well as the fact that the ruling force -- the United Russia party -- has lost certain positions."





Tens of thousands turned out to protest the election results that returned Putin's United Russia party to power, but with a smaller majority.





Police estimated crowds in Moscow on December 10 at 25,000, while organizers said the total was 40,000, the state-run RIA Novosti news agency reported. Either figure would make the protests the largest in the Russian capital in 20 years.





Claiming the results of parliamentary elections were rigged, protesters chanted "Putin out."





They also braved freezing temperatures in other Russian cities to demonstrate against what they said was vote fraud.





Putin said in his question-and-answer session that protesters were positioning themselves for the presidential vote in March.





"It is obvious to me that the attacks on the latest election are secondary; their primary goal is the next election, the Russian presidential election," Putin said December 15.





The Organization for Security and Cooperation said in a preliminary report that some political parties had been prevented from running and the vote was "slanted in favor of the ruling party." Its election-observer mission detailed alleged attempts to stuff ballot boxes, manipulate voter lists and harass election monitors.





Secretary of State Hillary Clinton also said the United States had "serious concerns" about the election and called for a "full investigation" of apparent irregularities.

***

NEW DELHI, India (CNN) -- More than a dozen trucks loaded with fruits, spices and other goods Tuesday crossed the line dividing Kashmir as India and Pakistan opened a symbolic trade route in the disputed region for the first time in more than 60 years.



Kashmiris watch as Indian trucks cross into the border town of Chakothi in Pakistani-administered Kashmir.



To cheers and band music, the first trucks rumbled from the Pakistani side across a white bridge to a brightly decorated trade center festooned . Apple-laden Indian trucks heading the other way were also warmly welcomed.



It is hoped the move will ease tensions in the troubled Himalayan region, which has been a conflict flashpoint between nuclear-armed neighbors India and Pakistan who both lay claims to the territory.



"Today, we have regained our lost market," said Ghulam Rasool Bhat, president of the Kashmir fruit growers' association.  Watch more about the historic day »



"We are sending the sweet Kashmir apple as the first consignment. This is sure to sweeten the relation between the two neighbors. The beginning of the trade between the two Kashmirs will further improve the relations and lead to a peaceful resolution of the bitter problem," he said.



The trucks were subjected to thorough security checks before they crossed the bridge, one of the few crossing points in the heavily militarized 742-kilometer (460-mile) Line of Control, the de facto frontier that divides the region.



Kashmir has been a major source of dispute between India, and Pakistan since the two countries were partitioned at the end of British rule in 1947. Muslim Kashmiris sided with Pakistan to the north, while the Hindu south joined India.



For the past 18 years, Kashmir has been wracked by a bloody separatist campaign. Authorities say up to 43,000 people have died, but rights groups and non-governmental organizations put the death toll at twice that.



Violence had dropped off since the countries began a peace process in 2004, but it surged after the state government in Indian-controlled Kashmir announced plans in June to donate land for a Hindu shrine.



Muslim protests following the decision prompted a government U-turn that triggered Hindu demonstrations calling for it to be restored. Subsequent violence left 40 dead and hundreds wounded.



It is hoped Tuesday's route opening will bolster the peace agreement and combat lingering mistrust between India and Pakistan. A bilateral cease-fire has been holding in the region for more than four years.



A bus service connecting the divided Kashmir began amid much fanfare in 2005 but struggled under the weight of elaborate security checks and stifling bureaucracy.



"This is a great emotional moment, as it brings to mind my grandfather, who used to drive lorries on this road," said Muzhar Hussain Naqvi, who drove the leading Pakistani truck.



CNN's Sara Sidner and Mukhtar Ahmad contributed to this report

***

(CNN)  -- Could humans one day live to be 1,000, and would that be a good thing?



CNN's global health show Vital Signs has teamed up with world renowned anti-aging experts to bring you an in-depth discussion on the search for immortality.



Vital Signs host and CNN Chief Medical Correspondent, Dr. Sanjay Gupta will be joined by best-selling author Dan Buettner who has done extensive studies on the areas in the world people live the longest, healthiest lives, known as Blue Zones, and shares their formula for a long life.



The other panelist is geneticist Dr. Aubrey de Grey, best-selling author of "Ending Aging: The Rejuvenation Breakthroughs That Could Reverse Human Aging in Our Lifetime." He believes regenerative medicine could, in a matter of decades, extend life expectancy to 1000 years.



This special edition of Vital Signs: The Clinic will be broadcast LIVE on CNN.com and we want you to take part in the conversation. You can do that by using the soundoff comments box below, post on iReport.com or e-mail vital.signs@cnn.com. You can also send questions via Twitter.



What would you ask the experts? Do you want to learn how to live until 100 and beyond? Or find out which diets or exercise to follow for living longer? Do you have concerns about how an aging population might impact on resources?



The best questions will be featured on the show where the experts will give you tips on how to live longer. Dr. Gupta will also investigate the longevity hot spots around the world and you can tap into the secrets of their success.



Watch Vital Signs: The Clinic LIVE on CNN.com on Monday November 30, at 1200 GMT. (0700 ET, 2000 HK, 1300 CET)

***

(CNN) -- Ecuadorian President Rafael Correa said Friday he will not pay interest on the nation's foreign debt and that he was prepared to accept any consequences.





Correa made the comments to reporters in Guayaquil, Ecuador, about the interest payments, one of which was due Friday, his office said in a statement.





He said he was studying how to challenge the debt, which he called "immoral and a betrayal of the country," a reference to the way the terms of the debt were originally set.





He said that though $7 billion has already been spent to pay an original debt accrued during the 1980s of $4 billion, the principal remains about the same.





"If we have to confront international lawsuits, we will confront them and, I repeat, I assume all responsibility," he said. "I could not permit the continued payment of a debt that, in any light, is immoral and illegitimate."





Correa said he was preparing a restructuring plan to be presented to creditors within a few days, and he chafed at criticism of how the money has been spent.





"We have tried to pay this overdue social debt with a program of housing without parallel in Ecuadorian history, which certain corrupt members of the press -- in function of their political interests -- now want to discredit, pointing out the inevitable houses that -- out of 80,000 -- are going to have defects," he said.





But he said such complaints were outweighed by the "tens of thousands of happy families with their own worthy little houses ... and all the people who can testify to the success of the program."





The popular leftist economist said he would try to prove in international courts that the debt is illegal.

***

(CNN) -- Eddie Murphy announced Wednesday he would not host next year's Academy Awards, one day after colleague and show producer Brett Ratner quit over an anti-gay remark he made over the weekend.





"I appreciate how Eddie feels about losing his creative partner, Brett Ratner, and we all wish him well," said Tom Sherak, president of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. The 84th Academy Awards program is scheduled for February 26.





Murphy worked with Ratner, a director, in the newly released action comedy "Tower Heist."





"First and foremost I want to say that I completely understand and support each party's decision with regard to a change of producers for this year's Academy Awards ceremony," Murphy said in a statement. "I was truly looking forward to being a part of the show that our production team and writers were just starting to develop, but I'm sure that the new production team and host will do an equally great job."





Ratner met with the representatives of the Gay & Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation before announcing his resignation, GLAAD said in a news release Tuesday.





When asked during a question-and-answer session whether he rehearses with his actors before shooting a scene, Ratner replied, "Rehearsing is for f*gs," GLAAD said in its release, citing New York Magazine's Vulture blog.





"Over the last few days, I've gotten a well-deserved earful from many of the people I admire most in this industry expressing their outrage and disappointment over the hurtful and stupid things I said in a number of recent media appearances," Ratner said in a letter about this resignation, which was given to CNN by his representative, Allan Mayer. "To them, and to everyone I've hurt and offended, I'd like to apologize publicly and unreservedly."

***

(CNN) -- Big Ben, arguably the world's most famous clock, celebrates on Sunday 150 years of keeping London on time. The British landmark has lived through war, bad weather and disasters.



Big Ben's distinctive bongs have been a part of the London scene for 150 years.



Big Ben is the 14-ton bell inside the world's largest four-faced chiming clock, although most people use the name to describe the tower that houses it.



The clock is perched on a 96-meter (310-foot) elegant tower at the Westminster Bridge end of the Palace of Westminster.



The Victorian masterpiece, which provides distinctive chimes known as bongs, was voted Britain's favorite monument in 2008. It has been featured in films such as "101 Dalmatians" and "Harry Potter and the Order of The Phoenix."



Big Ben has been disrupted a few times over the years for various reasons, including weather and breakages. Its bongs went silent for about two months in August 2007 to allow a crew to repair its mechanism system.



During that time, the rest of the clock was running on an electric system. It was fully restarted again October 1.



The clock pays tribute to Britain's royal history: It has a Latin inscription of the phrase: "O Lord, save our Queen Victoria the First."



The ornate masterpiece has some quirky features.



The hour hand, which weighs 300 kilograms (661 pounds), is made of gun metal while the minute hands are made of copper sheet.



The minute hands would not work when they were first made of cast iron because they were too heavy. The clock started working on May 31, 1859, after the lighter copper hands were installed.



The origins of the landmark's name are obscure. Some say it was named after the 1850s heavyweight boxer Ben Caunt while others suggest it was named after Sir Benjamin Hall, a former member of parliament. Hall, the commissioner of works in 1859, was responsible for ordering the bell.



Alan Hughes, the director of the Whitechapel Bell Foundry that made the bell, prefers the latter.



"I suppose I like it chiefly because it was a nickname of a man who was big and loud and pompous, and never used one word if 27 would do," he said in a 2008 interview.



Hughes' company also made America's Liberty Bell and a number of others for cathedrals and churches around the world.

***

COLOMBO, Sri Lanka (CNN) -- Sri Lankan soldiers have seized a key rebel stronghold after launching a surprise attack early Sunday morning, the head of Sri Lanka's army announced.



Sri Lankan army chief Sarath Fonseka says a key Tamil town has been taken in a national TV broadcast Sunday.



Troops crossed a lagoon and entered the town of Mullaittivu before encountering heavy resistance from Tamil fighters, according to the government-run news agency.



"Our troops fought their way through a 40 km (25 mile) thick jungle track," Lt. Gen. Sarath Fonseka said in a televised address on Sunday.



"This is the long awaited victory and I am happy to say that our heroic forces today captured the Mullaittivu town after 12 years," the Sri Lanka Army chief said.



There is no confirmation from the rebels that the strategic garrison has been overtaken.



The Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) -- commonly known as the Tamil Tigers -- have fought for an independent homeland for the country's ethnic Tamil minority since 1983. The civil war has left more than 70,000 people dead.



The rebels gained control over Mullaittivu in 1996 and established a military garrison there, according to the government.



In recent days, the military has made significant progress in its campaign to recapture rebel strongholds.



Earlier this month, troops regained control of the northern town of Elephant Pass, the point at which mainland Sri Lanka links to the northern Jaffna peninsula.



It had been in rebel hands for more than nine years.



The re-capture enabled the government to use a highway linking the mainland to the peninsula to move troops and supplies. Previously, it was done by air and sea.



"The area that the LTTE has dominated has shrank phenomenally," Sri Lankan High Commissioner to India, C.R Jayasinghe, told CNN. "They lost... about 90 percent of what they had."



Despite major government gains, critics point to ongoing civilian casualties resultant from the conflict.



"This is an important strategic success for the army, but literally tens of thousands of people, children, are in the line of fire," United Nations spokesman James Elder said in a phone conversation Sunday.



"Some Sri Lankan U.N. staff are trapped there," he added. "Convoys are going to the area, delivering emergency supplies, but these are not sufficient for the number of people in need."



Sri Lankan authorities are barring journalists and humanitarian aid workers from areas where heavy fighting is taking place.



Amnesty International spokesman Shuransu Mishra estimated that "over a quarter of a million of the population, mostly Tamils, are trapped between the two sides."



The organization says greater access and protection for aid workers and journalists are needed as news agencies struggle to report an accurate picture of the conflict.



"The Sri Lankan authorities are doing little to ensure the safety of the country's media, or to prosecute those responsible for murdering or attacking them," Amnesty International spokeswoman Yolanda Foster said in a written statement on Friday.



"They (Sri Lankan authorities) are also directly responsible for subjecting journalists to harassment and interrogation," she said.



At least 14 journalists have been killed since the start of 2006, according to the statement.



Others have been driven from the country by death threats, or in fear of detention and torture by government authorities, it said.

***

Editor's note: Campbell Brown anchors CNN's "Campbell Brown: No Bias, No Bull" at 8 p.m. ET Mondays through Fridays. She delivered this commentary during the "Cutting through the Bull" segment of Wednesday night's broadcast.



CNN's Campbell Brown says The Huffington Post has audio of an executive talking about the "awards."



(CNN) -- And timing is everything when it comes to cashing in during the bailout.



The soon-to-be-combined Morgan Stanley and Citigroup's Smith Barney will be doling out bonuses to its financial advisers, even as both firms take $60 billion of your bailout dollars.



And it gets better. The bonuses, which could total $3 billion, will be based on the companies' 2008 numbers, which, while bad, will almost certainly be better than this year.



How do we all know this? Someone gave The Huffington Post Web site audio from a conference call where, by the way, a Morgan Stanley executive told them not to use the "b" word.



Conference audio: "There will be a retention award. Please do not call it a bonus. It is not a bonus. It is an award. And it recognizes the importance of keeping our team in place as we go through this integration."



Sounds like a bonus to us.



The dictionary describes a bonus as a sum of money granted to an employee on top of their regular pay, usually in appreciation for work done, length of service, or accumulated favors.



Semantics aside, the companies have good reason to want to hide the truth.



But in the middle of a bailout, we have good reason to call this bonus -- bogus.



Jim Wiggins, spokesman for Morgan Stanley, would not confirm the authenticity of the tape, but he did defend their practice of so-called retention programs.



The opinions expressed in this commentary are solely those of Campbell Brown.

***

Beijing, China (CNN) -- Prominent Chinese dissident Liu Xiaobo, who was arrested in 1989 for his role in the Tiananmen Square protest, faces trial Wednesday for allegedly "inciting subversion" in a more recent case.





Liu, a former university lecturer and literary critic, faces a possible 15-year jail sentence, amid growing international outrage over his yearlong detention, according to media reports. The trial begins Wednesday at 9 a.m. local time (Tuesday 8 p.m. ET).





On Monday, the Times of London quoted Liu's wife, Liu Xia, as saying, "I have no hope whatsoever, I can't even attend the trial."





She said she planned to wait outside the courthouse.





"I think he will be sentenced to more than ten years," she said.





Liu, 53, was detained on December 8, 2008, and held under "residential surveillance" as police investigated the case, according to the PEN American Center, a U.S. literary and human rights organization. On June 23 of this year, he was arrested and charged with inciting subversion of state power, the organization said. Liu is on the PEN board of directors.





The case was turned over to the prosecutor's office December 8 -- one year from the time Liu was detained.





Liu co-authored Charter 08, "a declaration calling for political reform, greater human rights, and an end to one-party rule in China that has been signed by hundreds of individuals from all walks of life throughout the country," PEN says on its Web site. The group said Liu was arrested before the formal release of Charter 08.





"Liu has been engaged in agitation activities, such as spreading of rumors and defaming of the government, aimed at subversion of the state and overthrowing the socialism system in recent years," according to a police statement reported by China's state-run Xinhua news agency.





The statement claimed Liu confessed to the charge during a preliminary police investigation.





Liu served as an adviser to student leaders during the demonstrations at Tiananmen Square in 1989. Along with three other intellectuals, he took part in hunger strikes there on June 2 of that year prior to the crackdown to show support for the flagging student protests.





He was arrested two days after the Tiananmen crackdown and was released in 1991. In May 1995 he was detained again for collecting signatures for a petition calling for human rights guarantees.





The U.S. government has pressed for Liu's release.





"The U.S. government is deeply disturbed by reports that Liu Xiaobo has been formally arrested and charged with serious crimes," said Richard Buangan, deputy spokesman at the U.S. Embassy in Beijing, following Liu's latest arrest.





"We call on the government of China to release Mr. Liu and respect the rights of all Chinese citizens who peacefully express their desire for internationally recognized freedoms."

***

(CNN) -- Two hours before his scheduled execution Thursday, the Georgia Board of Pardons and Paroles commuted the death sentence of Samuel David Crowe, his lawyer said.



Samuel David Crowe's death sentence was changed to life in prison by Georgia authorities, his attorney says.



Crowe was convicted in 1988 of murdering Joseph V. Pala, the retail manager at Wicks Lumber Company in Douglas County. Crowe admitted to the crime.



The board's ruling means Crowe's sentence will be changed to life without the possibility of parole. The board did not give a reason for its decision.



When attorney Ann Fort called Crowe with the news, he was quiet.



"He was really shocked and relieved but very somber about it. He takes very seriously the deep harm that he caused when he committed this crime," she said.



Crowe had a cocaine habit that his attorney says he kicked in prison. He spent his time behind bars counseling other inmates, teaching some of them to read and writing to people outside of prison who had drug habits. "He didn't want them to go down the path he did," Fort said.



As for the Pala family, they are devastated. The Atlanta Journal-Constitution reported that Pala's widow, Fran Pala, and his daughter, Lisa Pala-Hansen, were too upset to address the parole board. A representative spoke to the board on their behalf, the newspaper said.



Crowe had been scheduled to be executed by injection at 7 p.m. ET Thursday at Georgia Diagnostic and Classification Prison in Jackson, 45 minutes south of Atlanta.



He would have been the 19th inmate in Georgia executed by injection.



William Earl Lynd was executed by injection the first week in May. He was the first inmate to die in the state since September, when the U.S. Supreme Court agreed to consider whether the three-drug combination represented cruel and unusual punishment.



Lynd was convicted of murdering his ex-girlfriend in 1988.



The U.S. Supreme Court had effectively halted all executions in the country last September, when it agreed to consider whether the three-drug combination used by most states violated the constitutional ban on cruel and unusual punishment.



Death penalty opponents have argued that if inmates are not given enough anesthetic, they could be conscious enough to suffer excruciating pain without being able to express it because of the paralyzer.



Their claims are supported by medical studies.



Of the 24 death sentences the Georgia board has considered, Crowe's is the third it has commuted.



Also this week, Mississippi executed murderer Earl Wesley Berry by lethal injection. Berry confessed to abducting Mary Bounds in 1987, beating her to death and then dumping her body in a rural road. The courts rejected Berry's attorneys' arguments that he should be spared because he was mentally retarded.



CNN's Ashley Fantz contributed to this report.

***

Islamabad, Pakistan (CNN) -- Pakistan's military said Tuesday that its forces have taken over a Taliban stronghold during the ongoing ground offensive in the tribal region of South Waziristan.



Pakistani security forces have secured Sararogha and have started to clear the town of weapons and ammunition, the military said. It comes a day after its forces gained control of Kaniguram, another key Taliban stronghold, which the military says its forces have now completely secured.



According to the military, 21 militants and one Pakistani soldier died in the past 24 hours of fighting -- most of them in the raid on Sararogha. The military is trying to rout Taliban insurgents operating along the Pakistan-Afghan border.



The restive and largely ungoverned region of South Waziristan is the headquarters of the Pakistani Taliban.



Pakistan's military suspects its leader, Hakimullah Mehsud, is still in the region backed by up to 8,000 militant fighters.



Pakistan's army has launched three similar offensives in Kaniguram and Sararogha since 2004 without success, sometimes agreeing to peace deals that eventually fall apart.



Army spokesman Maj. Gen. Athar Abbas recently told CNN that this time a peace deal is not an option.



"Certainly there is no scope of a peace deal," Abbas told CNN. "It is a fight to the finish."



The military began its ground offensive in South Waziristan three weeks ago, however the region has been affected by a broader anti-Taliban offensive that has uprooted more than 180,000 people this year, according to the United Nations. Many of those people -- more than 94,000 -- have fled South Waziristan since June, the U.N. said last week.



In recent weeks, Pakistan has been relentlessly rocked by a wave of attacks as Islamic militants retaliate against the military campaign.



On Monday, the Pakistani cities of Lahore and Rawalpindi were hit by separate suicide bombings. A suicide attacker believed to be on a motorcycle targeted people outside a bank in Rawalpindi who were lined up to pick up their monthly checks, police said. That attack killed 30 people, police said on Tuesday.



The attack happened in the Cannt area of Rawalpindi, close to Pakistan's military headquarters where the top U.S. commander in Afghanistan, Gen. Stanley McChrystal, was meeting with Pakistan's army chief Gen. Ashfaq Parvez Kayani on Monday. It was unclear if he was there at the time of the attack.



Hours later, two suicide bombers detonated their explosives at a police checkpoint in Lahore, injuring 17 police and civilians.



CNN's Samson Desta and Reza Sayah contributed to this report.

***

NEW DELHI, India (CNN) -- Vimlendu Jha is the founder and head of Swechha -- We For Change Foundation which is based in India's capital, New Delhi.



"For the rest of the world India is powerful, but for many residing in the countryside, India is still disempowered, hungry and naked."



Swechha started out as an organization to combat the pollution of the city's main waterway, the river Yamuna. Today it deals with the environmental issues that affect several aspects of Delhi.



Vimlendu leads volunteers and local children to key sites around the city to tackle the ecological problems, as well as to raise awareness of the issues. Follow his efforts in his blogs and video diaries.



October 18, 2007 We traveled, along with 100-odd kids from one of New Delhi's most progressive schools, The Shri Ram School, to the rural part of our country, to Kempty Village in Uttaranchal.



The purpose of the visit was to expose these young minds (ages 15-17) to the existence of another India.



Most of us have an illusion of India becoming a powerful nation and it is on a phenomenal growth trajectory. We are not so much seen as a developing nation but a developed nation. One wonders what actually makes a country developed, when most of the parameters of development are skewed, as is the case of our country. For the rest of the world India is powerful, but for many residing in the countryside, India is still disempowered, hungry and naked.



Up to 70 percent of Indians still live in villages. Most of the time these villages are neglected and are centers of poverty. Development around India's cities has brought a flood of people from the rural areas who come in search of jobs. This population comprises the "urban poor" which is more vulnerable than the rural poor.



Imagine, India still has more than 260 million people (26 percent of the population) living below the poverty line. In the last 10 years, we have had at least 40,000 farmer suicides in the country -- indicative of the growing gap between the poor and the rich.



The purpose of this trip was to learn, and unlearn, about village stereotypes or notions we live with. The village in Uttaranchal wasn't as extreme an experience as other remote villages of India, but it was indicative of the hardships that people live with.



Another reason for the trip was to celebrate the simplicity and generosity of the villagers vis-à-vis we, the insecure urbanites, and also to understand their hardships, due to our over-consumption and false assumption that our wrongdoing does not necessarily influence the rural population -- when we know it does.



For many students, it was a first-time, first-hand experience of a village. Some were overwhelmed with the beauty and many were saddened by the villagers' plight. The outing also gave them an opportunity to contribute in some way. Students worked in the fields, helped the villagers in agricultural work and breathed the clean air.



It was a wonderful experience, aimed at understanding the gap between the two exisiting worlds; to bridge the gap between these two worlds. E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- Local security forces and coalition soldiers in western Afghanistan killed several insurgents Thursday in what the NATO command called a "successful operation against high-priority Taliban targets."

British troops detain suspected Taliban Militants during a recent operation in Afghanistan.

The operation took place in the Shindand district of Herat province. Two Taliban leaders, Haji Dawlat Khan and Haji Nasrullah Khan, and "significant number of other insurgents" were killed, according to a statement from NATO's International Security Assistance Force.

It added there was no evidence of civilian casualties or accidental damage in the operation, in which a "number of men were discovered handcuffed and imprisoned in appalling conditions in one of the insurgent compounds."

The incident reflects the increasing violence between troops and Taliban militants across Afghanistan and the growing concern in the United States that the war there should be more of a priority than it has been.

Since May, the deaths of U.S. and allied troops have far outpaced the toll in Iraq. On Thursday, the toll in Afghanistan was 21 compared to six in Iraq. The International Security Assistance Force did not provide the nationality of the soldier who died in Afghanistan Thursday.

Two top Pentagon officials said Wednesday they expect to be able to recommend more troop reductions in Iraq this fall and will try to find ways to increase troops in Afghanistan.

One of the toughest fronts in the war has been the southern province of Helmand.

The British Defense Ministry said its troops in southern Afghanistan killed a senior Taliban leader, two weeks after another leading militant died in a British missile attack.

Mullah Bismullah Akhund was killed Saturday in the Now Zad district of Helmand, long a Taliban bastion.

The Defense Ministry, in a statement on Wednesday, called Bismullah "a senior key facilitator and logistician responsible for the northern Helmand region." The ministry says his death will disrupt the Taliban's leadership structure and hamper the group's ability to conduct attacks.

"He is believed to have commanded numerous fighters and was identified by Task Force Helmand as a key player in the insurgency, and criminality, before the strike," according to ISAF.

British troops, which are part of the assistance force, announced the killing on Thursday. Saturday's operation occurred 15 days after British troops killed another senior Taliban militant, Sadiqullah, in an Apache missile strike.

"Bismullah was closely associated with local Taliban leader Mullah Rahim, whose brother was also killed during this operation," ISAF said.

The Defense Ministry said that "combined with the elimination of Sadiqullah, this is the most significant blow struck against the Taliban logistics and facilitation chain in northern Helmand this year."

The U.S.-led coalition said it also is investigating an airstrike in western Afghanistan's Farah province. Launched after a coalition convoy was attacked Tuesday, it struck a house and killed eight civilians.

CNN's Joe Sterling contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- The recent snowstorm in China, which has stranded hundreds of thousands of people across the country and killed dozens, is related to the La Nina phenomenon, according to a Chinese weather expert



Suzhou, China, is blanketed by the most snow the city has had in 25 years, according to I-Reporter Susan Arthur.



La Nina is the opposite of El Nino, which follows El Nino and occurs every few years. During La Nina, sea temperatures over eastern equatorial Pacific are lower than normal.



La Nina enhances Arctic weather systems and causes a cold winter in Asia, including in China.



As warm and moisture air from the south meets cold air in the north under freezing temperatures, snow forms.



"The warm air is very active this year," said Li Weijing, deputy director-general of the National Climate Center of China.



As a result, persistent snowstorms occur in central and western China, paralyzing the transport and electricity systems.



The current storm, which hit just ahead of the Lunar New Year holiday -- China's busiest shopping season -- has shut much of the nation down. China's transportation system and power grid have been paralyzed this week.



The storm also has cost the nation's economy $4.5 billion, according to figures released Wednesday by the Civil Affairs Ministry.  Watch how Nanjing is coping with the unusual weather »



The winter precipitation had caused at least 49 deaths due to collapsed roofs and treacherous travel conditions, the Ministry of Civil Affairs and local officials said.



More than 177 million Chinese were expected to travel by train, and 22 million more by plane, for the February 7 Chinese Lunar New Year, also known as the Spring Festival.



China uses a color system for its snowstorm warning:



The current once-in-50-years snowstorm calls for the red warning, the first time such a warning has been issued since the system launches. E-mail to a friend



CNN's Clarence Fong contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- For astronaut Jose Hernandez, his first space flight, scheduled to be aboard the space shuttle Discovery, marks a remarkable journey from the farm fields of California to the skies.



Astronaut Jose Hernandez is an American-born son of immigrants from Michoacan, Mexico.



Hernandez, an American-born son of immigrants from Michoacan, Mexico, is getting plenty of attention at home and abroad for his journey from working the fields to operating some of the most advanced mechanics on the space shuttle.



Mexican President Felipe Calderon called the 47-year-old astronaut over the weekend to congratulate him. A transcript of the entire conversation was promptly posted online by the Mexican government. Hernandez is also reaching out to fans through Twitter, where he posts updates under the name "@Astro--Jose."



"I come from a very humble family and what I would call a typical migrant farm working family," Hernandez said in a NASA interview.



As a child, Hernandez's family split their time between Mexico and California, where they worked as migrant farm workers.



During the school year his parents emphasized his education, but on the weekends Hernandez would help the family, he said in the interview, posted on the NASA Web site.



Growing up in Stockton, California, it was Hernandez's job as the youngest child to hold up the rabbit ear antennas on the family's television set in order to get the best reception while everyone watched the Apollo missions.



"Now I kid around with my family saying that, you know, it was through osmosis that I became an astronaut because I was closest to the whole situation," Hernandez told NASA.



The real catalyst for his dream to become an astronaut, however, came when Franklin Chang-Diaz, became the first Latin American astronaut in 1981.



"There was a lot of parallels and that's when I challenged myself. I said, "Hey, if Franklin can do it, why can't I do it?" Hernandez said in the interview.



Hernandez earned undergraduate and graduate degrees in electrical engineering, and before joining NASA worked on a number of high-tech projects, including an X-ray laser to be deployed in space, a digital mammography system and the disposal of excess nuclear material in Russia, his official biography states.



According to NASA, there are nine Hispanics currently in the astronaut program, and 13 total in the program's history. Astronaut Danny Olivas, also of Mexican descent, will also fly on Discovery's upcoming 13-day mission.



The scheduled launch of Discovery on Tuesday was scrubbed twice, once because of weather and then hours later because of of mechanical issues involving a drain valve. NASA did not announce a new launch schedule.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Previously unseen footage of Diana, Princess of Wales, taken just hours before she was killed in a car crash, has been shown to the jury at the inquest into her death.



The footage showed Diana and Dodi step into an elevator at the Ritz Hotel.



Images taken from a security camera at the Ritz Hotel in Paris show the 36-year-old smiling as she and her lover Dodi Fayed step into an elevator and later walk out of the hotel.



Further footage shows Fayed visiting a jeweler's shop, images that could lend support to claims that he was buying an engagement ring.



Earlier, a British coroner at the inquest said tt may never be known for certain whether Princess Diana was pregnant when she died in the Paris car crash.



Lord Justice Scott Baker told the jury at the inquest into the deaths of the princess and her lover Dodi Fayed that scientific evidence might be unable to demonstrate "one way or the other" whether she was in the early stages of pregnancy.



But he said they would hear "intimate" details of her personal life.  Watch footage of Diana's last hours »



Baker told the 11 members of the jury -- six women and five men -- Diana may have been on the contraceptive pill and that evidence she was poised to get engaged to Dodi on the night she died was contradictory.



On Tuesday the judge, who is acting as coroner in the case, told the jury that a famous image taken in summer 1997 showing Diana wearing a swimsuit could not be proof she was pregnant with Dodi's child as she had not started a relationship with him at that stage.



The jury is set to hear "scene setting" evidence, including CCTV and a tourist video.



The inquest to establish cause of death is expected to be a six-month process.



Fayed's father, Mohammed Al Fayed, has contended from the start that Diana and his son were murdered because the royal family "could not accept that an Egyptian Muslim could eventually be step-father to the future king of England," referring to Diana's son Prince William.



"I'm hoping for justice," Al Fayed said outside court. "At last, we're going to have a jury from ordinary people and I hope to reach the decision which I believe that my son and Princess Diana have been murdered by the royal family."



Baker told the jury of Al Fayed's allegations, but again reminded them that they were responsible for deciding the facts of the case, but not to assign blame or guilt.



"You have to decide four important, but limited factual questions: who the deceased were, when they came by their deaths, where they came by their deaths and how they came by their deaths," Baker said, according to inquest transcripts.



"The first three questions are unlikely to give rise to any difficulty. The fourth is a rather wider question and is directed towards the means by which they died."



Diana, 36, and 42-year-old Dodi Fayed were killed on August 31, 1997 when the Mercedes-Benz they were traveling in hit a pillar in the Pont de l'Alma tunnel in Paris.



They were being pursued at the time by the paparazzi after leaving the Ritz Hotel. Driver Henri Paul, who was also killed, was drunk and driving at high speed. Bodyguard Trevor Rees-Jones was the sole survivor.



Next week, the jury is scheduled to travel to Paris to see the crash site, along the River Seine. They are also expected to hear testimony from the paparazzi who were present after the accident.



In its evidence section, the Web site for the inquest has posted previously unpublished pictures taken by paparazzi of the limo before and immediately after the accident.



One is a closeup -- looking into the front of the vehicle -- that shows Diana, Fayed, Paul and Rees-Jones minutes before the crash. E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- Iraq's presidency council Thursday approved the U.S.-Iraq security agreement -- the final step for the agreement to be ratified by the Iraqi government, a council spokesman said. The pact allows the presence of American troops in Iraq for three more years.

U.S. soldiers gather at the "Crossed Swords" in Baghdad's secure Green Zone on Tuesday.

The three-member presidency council -- Kurdish President Jalal Talabani, Shiite Vice President Adel Abdul Mehdi and Sunni Vice President Tariq al-Hashimi -- approved the agreement unanimously a week after the Iraqi parliament passed the measure.

Under the Iraqi constitution, unanimous approval by the presidency council is required for ratification of a law or agreement.

The security pact will replace a U.N. mandate for the U.S. presence in Iraq that expires at the end of this year.

The agreement, reached after months of negotiations, sets June 30, 2009, as the deadline for U.S. combat troops to withdraw from all Iraqi cities and towns. The date for all U.S. troops to leave Iraq is December 31, 2011.

The agreement -- which stresses respect for Iraqi sovereignty -- "requests the temporary assistance" of U.S. forces, but severely restricts their role.

The pact says that all military operations are to be carried out with the agreement of Iraq and must be "fully coordinated" with Iraqis.

A Joint Military Operations Coordination Committee will oversee military operations.

Iraq has the "primary right to exercise jurisdiction" over U.S. forces "for grave premeditated felonies," the agreement says. Suspects can be held by U.S. forces but must be available to Iraqi authorities for investigation or trial.

Iraq also will have the "primary right to exercise jurisdiction" over U.S. contractors and their employees under the agreement.

Also, the pact says that "Iraqi land, sea and air shouldn't be used as a launching or transit point for attacks against other countries."

The presidency council also approved a U.S.-Iraqi bilateral pact called the strategic framework agreement, which covers a wide range of bilateral cooperation efforts and which was approved by the Iraqi parliament last week.

U.S. Ambassador to Iraq Ryan C. Crocker and Gen. Ray Odierno, the top U.S. military official in Iraq, issued a statement welcoming the council's ratification of the measures.

"We look forward, under these agreements, to the continued reduction in U.S. forces and the normalization of bilateral relations as two sovereign and co-equal nations," the two said in their statement.

"We will undertake initiatives to strengthen our cooperation in the fields of economics, energy, health, the environment, education, culture, and law enforcement. The United States will support Iraq's request to the U.N. Security Council to continue protection of Iraqi assets," the statement said.

***

(CNN) -- US Airways announced a $5 baggage fee increase Wednesday.



A US Airways passenger's first checked bag will cost $20 if prepaid online.



The fee for a passenger's first checked bag will rise from $15 to $20 if the fees are prepaid online. Online payment for a second checked bag will jump from $25 to $30.



An additional $5 fee will be added for bags checked at the airport, bringing the fee for the first bag to $25 and the second to $35.



The airline also will implement a $50 fee for the second checked bag on international flights -- $55 if paid at the airport. The first checked bag will continue to be free of charge.



The changes will be applied to tickets purchased on Wednesday or later for travel on or after October 7.



Also on Wednesday, Continental Airlines implemented a second checked bag fee of $50 for transatlantic flights. Travelers who pay in advance will be charged $45.



Earlier this season American Airlines raised its fees for first and second checked bags on domestic flights to $20 and $30, respectively.



Continental, Delta and United airlines charge $15 for the first checked bag if the fees are paid online, and $25 for the second bag. At the airport, these airlines charge $20 and $30 for the first and second bags.

***

(CNN) -- Investigators released photographs Wednesday showing a man wanted in the case of a slain woman and her missing 7-year-old daughter.





The Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation released images taken by a security camera of 37-year-old Tonya Hobbs and her estranged husband, Lester Williams Hobbs, as they shopped for food just hours before Tonya Hobbs was killed.





Police have charged Lester Hobbs with murder in his estranged wife's death. They also have charged him with kidnapping Tonya Hobbs' daughter, Aja Daniell Johnson, the bureau said Wednesday.





"These new pictures show the suspect car that is now missing as well as what the suspect, Lester Hobbs, looks like and the clothes he may be wearing now," a bureau spokeswoman, Jessica Brown, said in a statement.





Investigators have asked anyone with information about Hobbs or Aja to call a new hotline number at 1-800-THE-LOST.





The images released Wednesday were taken about 5:15 p.m. Saturday at a store in Lawton, Oklahoma. Shortly after that, the couple and Aja apparently went to the home of Lester Hobbs' sister to eat, police said.





Hobbs was found dead in a parked RV the next day in Geronimo, Oklahoma. Her daughter has been missing since then.





"We've got to find that little girl," Special Agent Ray Homer of the Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation said this week.





The girl has a medical condition that requires medication, police have said, though they declined to elaborate.





Lester Hobbs, 46, and Aja are presumed to be in Hobbs' car -- a white 1992 Toyota Paseo with an Oklahoma tag number 577-BPW, police said.





Police have searched for them in Oklahoma and Texas.





Lester and Tonya Hobbs were separated, but apparently Tonya Hobbs was visiting her estranged husband in an attempt to reconcile, Richard Goss, agent in charge of the state bureau of investigation's Lawton, Oklahoma, office, told reporters this week.





Lester Hobbs is not Aja's biological father, police said. He has an extensive criminal history, Goss said, without elaborating.





Aja's biological father was awarded emergency custody of her in November, according to Oklahoma County District Court documents obtained by CNN affiliate KWTV of Oklahoma City.





At a hearing, Tonya Hobbs -- identified as Tonya Dunkin in the documents -- and the girl's father, John Johnson, agreed that she would have supervised visitation with Aja and keep the girl away from Lester Hobbs, the documents said.

***

Beijing, China (CNN) -- The world economy is placing a bet on its future with China, but some Chinese are placing bets on their future with plastic.



In rebalancing the world economy, analysts have said U.S. citizens should take cues from the Chinese, where 40 cents of every dollar of disposable income is saved, compared to 3 cents of every dollar in the U.S.



But there are worrying signs in China that some young consumers are starting to emulate the worst habits of U.S. consumers -- like 27-year-old Yuan Shuai in Beijing, whose credit card bets on his future have turned into overwhelming debts. In the last two years, he got seven cards from seven banks and wracked up $29,000 in debts.



"I spent money on eating and having fun," he said. "That's all."



Unemployed and studying to be a taxi driver, Yuan now has debt collectors from banks turning to his father, Yuan Yizhong, for bill payment. "The banks told me they could lend to him because he's an adult," his father says. "Now they hold me responsible and threatened me."



With no laws for bankruptcy protection in China, those threats can be real. "If you cannot pay it back you either have to go to parents or friends to pay back for you, or you got to jail," said Yeongwen Chiang, a consumer expert.



Credit card issuance is up 32 percent in China in the past year, according to China Market Research and the National Bureau of Statistics. Credit card debt is up more than 130 percent to $838 million. That still pales compared to U.S. credit card debt, but the quick rise have some observers alarmed.



With the decrease in exports during financial crisis, China has been working to build domestic consumption, offering subsidies on cars, home appliances and other big ticket items. That has helped China to continue to grow through the recession. During the October holiday week celebrating the 60th anniversary of the People's Republic of China, Chinese poured $83 billion into the economy - a 20 percent increase in spending from the same holiday period last year.



By comparison, retail spending in the United States fell 6 percent in September compared to the same time last year.



But some of the increased spending in China is with money the consumers didn't have. In the first six months of this year, the number of Chinese consumer with credit card debts more than two months overdue rose 133 percent.



For the Yuan family, credit card debt will take years to pay back. "I have only one son, and he failed to live up to my expectations," Yuan's father said.



CNN's Emily Chang, Fareed Zakaria and Kevin Voigt contributed to this report

***

(CNN) -- Fighting in the volatile Sudanese region of Darfur has sparked another wave of refugees into Chad and left a Red Cross employee dead, according to international agencies.



Refugee camps in eastern Chad house about 300,000 people who fled violence in the Darfur region of Sudan.



The U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees said on Monday that more than 12,000 people have fled militia attacks over the last few days from Sudan's Darfur region to neighboring Chad, still recovering from a recent attempt by rebels there to topple the government.



"Most of the new arrivals in Chad had already been displaced in Darfur in recent years. They are really tired of being attacked and having to move," said UNHCR's Jorge Holly. "All the new refugees we talked to said they did not want to go back to Darfur at this point, they wanted to be transferred to a refugee camp in eastern Chad."



This latest influx of refugees in Chad aggravates an already deteriorating security situation across this politically unstable region of Africa.



Before the latest flight into Chad, the UNHCR and its partner groups "were taking care of 240,000 Sudanese refugees in 12 camps in eastern Chad and some 50,000 from Central African Republic in the south of the country." Up to 30,000 people in Chad fled the country for Cameroon during the rebel-government fighting.



The International Committee of the Red Cross said on Monday that one of its employees was killed in western Darfur last week during fighting. The victim is a 45-year-old Sudanese national and father of six children.



He was killed in the area of Seleia, one of the three towns where reported government-backed Janjaweed militia attacks on Friday left around 200 people dead.



U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon last week deplored the acts, urged all parties to stop hostilities, and said "all parties must adhere to international humanitarian law, which prohibits military attacks against civilians."



The United Nations says "more than 200,000 people have been killed and 2.2 million others forced to flee their homes since fighting began in 2003 among government forces, rebel groups and allied militia groups known as the Janjaweed."



The recent fight between Chad's government and rebels is seen as a proxy war over Darfur. Sudan's government believes Chad is supporting rebels in Darfur. Chad's government believes Sudan is supporting the rebels that moved on Chad's capital of N'Djamena. E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- The Marine husband of a slain Fort Bragg soldier was charged with murder Monday and another Marine was charged with aiding the crime, a local police chief said.



Fayetteville, North Carolina, police released this undated photo of 2nd Lt. Holley Wimunc.



Authorities have been searching for the missing soldier, Army 2nd Lt. Holley Wimunc, 24, since a fire torched her North Carolina apartment on July 10.



Marine Cpl. John Wimunc and fellow Marine Lance Cpl. Kyle Alden were initially charged with arson, but after police interviews Wimunc was charged with first-degree murder, said Fayetteville Police Chief Tom Bergamine.



Alden was charged with felony accessory after the fact to first-degree murder, Bergamine said.



Both were taken to Cumberland County's jail and held without bond, he said.



Earlier, a witness found a charred body in woods, but Detective Jeff Locklear told reporters that police were still awaiting a positive identification from the medical examiner and could not say for certain it was Holley Wimunc.



The lieutenant's father released a statement about the death Monday in which he said his daughter was a nurse at a military hospital and had two children.



"It is with profound sadness that our family just received the news from authorities that our beloved daughter Holley is dead," Wimunc's father said in a statement released to CNN affiliate WRAL in Raleigh, North Carolina.



"Since last Thursday's shocking news about Holley's burned apartment and her missing person status, our family through the country has nonetheless been holding on to a thin thread of hope that she would be found alive."



Military officials said both Marines were stationed at Camp Lejeune, which is about two hours away from Wimunc's Fayetteville home.



Joe Lenczyk -- resident agent-in-charge for the federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives -- said Wimunc and her husband were estranged and lived apart.



Wimunc is the second female soldier from Fort Bragg to die under suspicious circumstances in recent weeks.



Spc. Megan Lynn Touma, 23, was seven months pregnant at the time of her death in June, authorities said. Investigators say they are treating that death as a homicide.



Camp Lejeune also has had a suspicious death of a female soldier this year. Twenty-year-old pregnant Marine Lance Cpl. Maria Lauterbach's charred body was found January in the back yard of another Marine stationed at the base.



That suspect, U.S. Marine Cpl. Cesar Laurean, was captured in April in Mexico.

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN) -- Pop singer Ricky Martin declared publicly this week what he avoided discussing for years: He is gay.





"I am proud to say that I am a fortunate homosexual man," Martin wrote on his official Web site. "I am very blessed to be who I am."





A decade ago, when ABC's Barbara Walters pressed Martin to address rumors about his sexuality, he declined to confirm or deny them. "I just don't feel like it," Martin said.





Now, Martin wrote, "these years in silence and reflection made me stronger and reminded me that acceptance has to come from within and that this kind of truth gives me the power to conquer emotions I didn't even know existed."





The 39-year-old Puerto Rican native started off with the Latin boy band Menudo before launching his solo career in 1991.





His song "Livin' La Vida Loca" rose to the top of the music charts in 1999 and propelled Martin to stardom.





Martin said he decided years ago to not share "my entire truth" with the world because people he loved warned him that "everything you've built will collapse."





"Allowing myself to be seduced by fear and insecurity became a self-fulfilling prophecy of sabotage," he wrote. "Today I take full responsibility for my decisions and my actions."





The decision to come out was initiated a few months ago, when he began writing his memoirs, he said. "I got very close to my truth," he wrote.





"From the moment I wrote the first phrase I was sure the book was the tool that was going to help me free myself from things I was carrying within me for a long time," he wrote. "Things that were too heavy for me to keep inside."





Martin said that disclosing his secret is important because of his two sons, born via surrogate.





"To keep living as I did up until today would be to indirectly diminish the glow that my kids were born with," he wrote.





"Enough is enough. This has to change. This was not supposed to happen five or 10 years ago, it is supposed to happen now. Today is my day, this is my time, and this is my moment."





Writing the seven paragraphs, he said, "is a solid step towards my inner peace and vital part of my evolution."





"What will happen from now on? It doesn't matter. I can only focus on what's happening to me in this moment."

***

(CNN) -- Ramping up pressure on Honduras' interim government, the United States has revoked the visa of the beleaguered country's leader, a senior Honduran official told CNN en Espanol on Saturday.



Roberto Micheletti and his supporters say Honduras underwent a constitutional transfer of power, not a coup.



De facto President Roberto Micheletti and 14 supreme court judges had their visas revoked, said Honduran Foreign Minister Carlos Lopez. Lopez said he, too, lost his visa privileges.



The U.S. State Department recently announced that it would pull the visas of members of Honduras' de facto regime.



In recent weeks, the United States has stepped up its call for the current Honduran government to restore ousted President Jose Manuel Zelaya to power. Zelaya was seized by the Honduran military in his pajamas and sent into exile on June 28.



On Wednesday, the board of the Millennium Challenge Corporation, a U.S. government agency, voted to cut $11 million in aid to the government in Honduras, senior State Department officials told CNN. Prior to the vote, the board had only suspended the aid, the State Department said.



The Millennium Challenge Account is a program started under the Bush administration to reward good governance.



The agency's cuts followed an announcement last week by the United States that it was terminating all nonhumanitarian aid to Honduras to pressure the interim government to end the political turmoil and accept the terms of an agreement known as the San Jose Accord. The accord calls for Zelaya's return to power.



The political crisis stemmed from Zelaya's plan to hold a referendum that could have changed the constitution and allowed longer term limits. The country's congress had outlawed the vote and the supreme court had ruled it illegal.



Micheletti and his supporters say that Zelaya's removal was a constitutional transfer of power and not a coup. The United Nations has condemned Zelaya's ouster and does not recognize Michiletti's government.



While the United States has called Zelaya's ouster a coup, it has not formally designated it a "military coup," which, under U.S. law, would have triggered a cutoff of all non-humanitarian aid regardless. Senior State Department officials said the Obama administration was reluctant to make the formal designation in order to preserve its flexibility for a diplomatic solution.



A presidential campaign in Honduras kicked off last week. However, the United States said it would not support the outcome of the elections unless Zelaya was restored to power.



CNN en Espanol's Maria Elisa Callejas contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Hundreds of people filled a college auditorium Wednesday to pay their last respects to an El Reno, Oklahoma, woman slain along with her four children last week.

Summer Rust's children -- clockwise from top, Autumn, Kirsten, Evynn and Teagin -- carve pumpkins.

About 300 people attended the service at Redlands Community College for Summer Rust, 25; her son, Teagin, 4; and daughters Evynn, 3, and Autumn and Kirsten, both 7, CNN affiliate KOCO reported.

Rust's white coffin was placed in front of the podium, flanked by the smaller caskets carrying her children.

Each casket had a picture of the victim, surrounded by flowers. A slide show of the family played on an overhead screen throughout the service.

"I've preached a lot of funerals, but none like this one," said the Rev. Gerald Van Horn.

"This has been on my heart ever since I heard about it. I first learned of it from the news, and I said, 'In El Reno? No way.' ... We don't have to deal with tragedy very often, but it has come, and the reality of it has sunk in. Searching my heart on what to say, I have found it difficult."

He told mourners that God is near and feels their pain but acknowledged that Rust and her children "will be greatly missed."

The bodies were found January 12 in Rust's apartment in El Reno, about 30 miles west of Oklahoma City.

According to the document, each of the victims was suffocated and strangled. Crime scene investigators said each body had ligature marks around the neck.

Rust's boyfriend, Joshua Steven Durcho, 25, admitted choking her to death but said the children were not there at the time, according to an affidavit filed last week.

He was arrested in Hamilton County, Texas, officials said. A spokeswoman at the Canadian County, Oklahoma, Sheriff's Office said Durcho was being held in the county jail after waiving extradition.

Durcho's cousin found Rust's body and called officers, who found the children's bodies in the apartment, says an affidavit written by a special agent with the Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation.

An apparent acquaintance of Durcho's told police he came to her apartment Monday afternoon and told her he had "choked" Summer Rust to death and he was leaving Oklahoma, according to the affidavit.

The affidavit says Durcho told the woman "that the children were at their grandmother's residence ... while he and Summer worked out their relationship problems."

Rust's mother, Susan Rust of Carson City, Nevada, said Durcho was unemployed and had been living with Rust and her children.

Authorities in Texas said Durcho was arrested after a state trooper attempted to stop his car because the trooper suspected that the driver was drunk. When the trooper ran the license plate on the car, it matched the tag number of a vehicle sought by Oklahoma police.

***

(CNN) -- Cholera has already killed almost 3,000 Haitians. Now it is threatening to cause misery in another vital way.





A chunk of Haiti's rice harvest will probably be lost because of farmers' fears of cholera contamination, the United Nations said Wednesday. On top of that, consumers are afraid to buy rice grown in areas affected by the cholera outbreak.





The U.N. Food and Agriculture Organization and the Haitian Ministries of Agriculture and Health are providing hygiene information to farmers who are reluctant to step into rice paddies, fed by rivers and canals, to harvest the crops.





The U.N. food agency, concerned that lost crops may lead to food shortages, urged more outreach and hands-on training in rural communities.





The effects of the cholera outbreak were magnified by floods in November caused by Hurricane Tomas.





"Without a timely response to the damage caused by floods and cholera to Haitian agriculture, food security could plunge, worsening the effects of last January's earthquake on the poor rural population," the FAO said in a statement.





Cholera has sickened more than 130,000 people in Haiti and 2,761 have died. But those numbers from the Haitian health ministry are from December 18.





Medicins Sans Frontieres (MSF or Doctors Without Borders), which has been operating cholera treatment centers throughout Haiti, warned that the disease is still spreading.





Symptoms of the acute, bacterial illness, which is caused by drinking tainted water, can be mild or even nonexistent. But sometimes they can be severe: leg cramps, profuse watery diarrhea and vomiting, which can cause rapid loss of body fluids and lead to dehydration, shock and death.





Some aid groups, including MSF, have criticized the cholera response in Haiti as woefully inadequate, given the fact that about 12,000 aid groups operate within the country.





"I recently went to Haiti's capital, Port-au-Prince, and found my Medicins Sans Frontieres colleagues overwhelmed, having already treated more than 75,000 cholera cases," MSF International President Unni Karunakara wrote in a commentary published this week in a British newspaper, the Guardian. "In the 11 months since the quake, little has been done to improve sanitation across the country, allowing cholera to spread at a dizzying pace."

***

(CNN) -- Jaycee Dugard will testify against the couple that allegedly held her captive in an elaborate compound hidden in their backyard for 18 years if there is a trial, a lawyer for her family said at a news conference Thursday.



This photo of Jaycee Dugard was taken at the 1991 Rose Bowl parade. She was abducted later that year.



Attorney McGregor Scott admitted it has been a difficult transition for Dugard and her two children -- who police say were fathered by her captor -- given her captivity spanned more than half her life and was the only world she knew for so long.



"But there is no question that she knows that terrible and wrong things were done to her and that those people must be held accountable," Scott  said.



Scott said he had no idea when a trial would be set for Phillip and Nancy Garrido, who have both pleaded not guilty to charges relating to Dugard's alleged kidnapping and subsequent abuse.



He acknowledged Dugard would have to relive the "trauma" in court by sharing the "very, very sordid tale."



Scott also said that because of Phillip Garrido's previous criminal history, which includes a kidnapping and rape charge for which he was registered as a sex offender, Garrido would automatically receive a sentence of 25 years to life if he were found guilty on only one felony charge.



But Scott said the family is trying not to focus on any of that  and instead work on building a new life together. He said he had met with Dugard and her family twice for a couple of hours and was happy to see "how well they had been doing."



"Even more encouraging was the second time I met with them, I saw progress," he said.



"I'm just very pleasantly surprised watching the dynamics, and I think it's a very positive thing going forward."



Scott said Dugard's daughters, who police said never went to school or a doctor, were receiving tutoring. Dugard has been participating and observing.



"This is a woman whose [own] formal education ended in the fifth grade," he said. "She has a brain that she wants to develop, so it's a very positive thing."



The family received medical attention and counseling beginning the day Dugard and her children were discovered, Scott said. He also said they had received donations of more than $100,000 from the public, which would help the girls as they get older.



He praised law enforcement and family members for helping protect Dugard and her children after her discovery.



"[They are] very guarded in allowing the girls access to TV news, Internet, etc.," he said. "Because they're being a mother, a grandmother, protecting the girls from too much information too early."



He said he knows there is a curiosity about where the family is, but pleaded that the public and the media give the family time to heal.



More than anything, Scott said, Dugard's family is working to make life as normal as possible and allow them to make up for lost time.



"To watch the interaction between Jaycee and her mother ... after 18 years is remarkable," Scott said.  "The emotions there, I think they're still wrestling with all of that but I think they're making great progress."

***

(CNN)  -- Four years since a 9.0-magnitude earthquake spawned massive walls of water that swept across the Indian Ocean, leaving more than 230,000 dead according to a United Nations estimate, improvements can be seen in many of the devastated areas, humanitarian groups said.



Laborers work on a construction site in a fishing village in Indonesia's Aceh on December 21.



Hundreds of thousands were left homeless and jobless after the tsunami, and poor and isolated communities were left even worse off.



Today, new schools have been constructed, and armies of workers -- many of them volunteers -- have cleared and rebuilt homes and towns, and helped get people back to work.



"The tsunami, despite being a horrific event, also provided a lot of opportunities for those countries," said Jonathan Cauldwell, chief of UNICEF's Tsunami Transition Support.



"It brought a peace dividend within Banda Aceh (Indonesia) where you still see peace in an area which had long term localized conflict in place. It allowed those areas to be built up as well, to have investments in the infrastructure in the social sectors ...," he added.



Agencies such as UNICEF said that while the immediate emergency was over, they remain committed to improving the lives of millions of children across the region.



"The lessons of the tsunami will never end. The funding will end, we can complete the construction, we can complete the project, but the intervention never ends ...," Cauldwell said.



Oxfam International, which said it will close its response to the tsunami at the end of December, said it has provided housing to tsunami survivors in Aceh, helped restore the livelihoods of people in India and Sri Lanka, and funded the reconstruction of eight tsunami-affected secondary schools.



"The money we received allowed us not only to help meet the immediate emergency needs of tsunami-affected populations, but also to try to address the factors that made them vulnerable: not least poverty and a lack of influence over their own lives," Barbara Stocking, chair of the Oxfam International Tsunami Fund Board, said in a statement.



"What has been achieved is astounding. Hundreds of thousands of people are now living in better conditions than they were in before the tsunami ...," she added.



UNICEF said the basic needs of children affected by the tsunami have been met -- more children are going to school as a result of improved facilities, and better nutrition, post-natal care and other life-saving interventions are helping those countries worst hit transition to developing regular services and programs.



But long-term improvement of water and sanitation is critical, the agency said, and so is building new schools that are better able to withstand earthquakes.



According to UNICEF and Oxfam, the response to the tsunami and the lessons learned have changed the way they deal with such emergencies. It highlighted the need for better coordination among partners and other organizations, and contributed to reforms in the way humanitarian relief is delivered.

***

MOSCOW, Russia (CNN) -- A leading human rights activist was abducted and killed in Russia Wednesday, the organization she worked for told CNN.



Estemirova, pictured in 2007, had been openly critical of Chechnya's president, Ramzan Kadyrov.



Natalya Estemirova, of the Russian human rights group Memorial, was kidnapped outside her home in Grozny, Chechnya, Oleg Orlov said, citing eyewitness reports.



She was later found dead in the neighboring Russian republic of Ingushetia, said Orlov, the head of the organization's Moscow office.



Estemirova, 50, was a leading human rights activist in the North Caucasus area who had been openly criticizing Chechnya's authoritarian president, Ramzan Kadyrov, and his methods.



Russian President Dmitry Medvedev expressed indignation at the murder and said her killers should be punished to the full extent of the law, his office said.



He expressed his condolences to her family, press secretary Natalya Timakova said.



Estemirova shouted that she was being kidnapped as she was forced into a white Lada automobile that had stopped on the road in front of her house at 8:30 a.m. (12:30 a.m. ET), Orlov said.



An unidentified man grabbed her and shoved her into the car, he told CNN. "This is a kidnapping," she yelled, he said.



Estemirova studied history at Grozny University, then taught history before turning to journalism and human rights in 1998, Memorial said.



She joined the organization in March 2000.



In a written statement, U.S. State Department spokesman Ian Kelly said the United States is "deeply saddened" by the report of Estemirova's death.



"We call upon the Russian government to bring those responsible to justice," he said.



He described Estemirova as "uncompromising in her willingness to reveal the truth regardless of where that might lead. She was devoted to shining a light on human rights abuses, particularly in Chechnya."



The Committee to Protect Journalists, in a written statement, demanded that the killing be thoroughly investigated immediately.



"As she uncovered massive, ongoing human rights violations in Chechnya by the federal and regional authorities, Estemirova was often at odds with Chechen authorities, according to her colleagues," the advocacy group said.



She won three international awards for human rights activities -- including the inaugural Anna Politkovskaya Award, named for the Russian investigative journalist who was herself murdered almost three years ago.



Estemirova was Politkovskaya's "most frequent companion during travel and investigations in Chechnya," the organization Reach All Women in War said in announcing the prize for Estemirova.



"They investigated a number of cases together -- about which Anna wrote for (the newspaper) Novaya Gazeta and Natalya wrote for Memorial's Web site and for local newspapers."



"President Medvedev must make good on his promise to investigate this shocking killing by ensuring that the inquiry is thorough and transparent," said CPJ Deputy Director Robert Mahoney. "The killers of this courageous reporter, one of the few left in Chechnya, must not be allowed to walk free like so many before them."



CNN's Maxim Tkachenko in Moscow, Russia, contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Switzerland's Massimo Busacca has been selected to referee Wednesday's Champions League final between Barcelona and Manchester United in Rome on Wednesday -- UEFA have confirmed on their official Web site UEFA.com



Massimo Busacca refereed the 2007 UEFA Cup and one of the semifinals from Euro 2008.



Busacca, 40, will be assisted by his compatriots Matthias Arnet and Francesco Buragina, while the fourth official will be Claudio Circhetta.



Busacca has been an international referee since 1999 and has taken charge of 32 Champions League matches, including six this season.



Among the top club matches he has overseen are this year's Champions League quarterfinal second leg between Porto and Manchester United and the 2007 UEFA Cup final between Sevilla and Espanyol in Glasgow.



On the international stage, Busacca was also in charge of the Euro 2008 semifinal between Germany and Turkey and the 2006 World Cup last 16 match between Argentina and Mexico.



Meanwhile, authorities in Rome have enforced a blanket ban on the sale of alcohol as they attempt to stave off the threat of trouble between 67,000 Barcelona and Manchester United fans.



In a bid to avoid incidents, local authorities have banned the sale of alcohol throughout the city and in airports and stations from 11pm on Tuesday until 6am on Thursday morning.



"It will not be a militarised city," Rome authority spokesman Giovanni Pecorari told Press Association Sport. "All the necessary measures have been taken in order to give the best possible image of this city."

***

Mojave, California (CNN)  -- Billionaire entrepreneur Richard Branson on Monday unveiled the winged rocket his company developed to give paying customers a brief taste of space.





The 300 people who have given Branson's Virgin Galactic $20,000 deposits toward the $200,000 space-ride tickets were invited see SpaceShipTwo in its Mojave, California, hangar. CNN was given an early peek.





The first flight in 2011 -- after 18 months of testing -- will launch from a spaceport under construction in New Mexico, Branson said.





Another aircraft will carry the 60-foot-long SpaceShipTwo to 60,000 feet above the Earth, where "they will drop away and they will then go to 2,000 miles per hour in 10 seconds, where they get propelled into space," Branson said.





Its hybrid rocket motor -- still under development -- will reach a suborbital altitude high enough to reach the edges of space and weightlessness, according to Branson.





"Once in space, [passengers] will unbuckle their seats," he said. "There are enormous windows, which no spacecraft has had before, for them to look back at the Earth. They can float around and become astronauts."





The cabin, which seats six paying passengers, is 90 inches -- nearly 8 feet -- in diameter, which provides "lots of room for zero-G fun," Branson's Web site said.





The first voyage will carry Branson, his wife, mother and children, the entrepreneur  said. "Actually, that's my mum on the side -- a younger version of my mum on the side of the spaceship," he said.





After just a few minutes of space tourism, SpaceShipTwo will glide back to Earth, landing where it began the trip in New Mexico, he said.





About 80,000 people have placed their names on the waiting list for seats on SpaceShipTwo and its successors.





"What we want to be able to do is bring space travel down to a price range where hundreds of thousands of people would be able to experience space, and they never dreamed that [they] could," Branson said.





He said he hopes the technology will lead to a new form of Earth travel, jetting people across oceans and continents faster through suborbital routes.





"We would love at some stage, obviously subject to government approval, to take the engineers and start looking at shrinking the world," Branson said.





The spacecraft was based on the technology and carbon-composite construction developed for SpaceShipOne, which won the Ansari X Prize in 2004 for the first privately funded human flight to the edge of space.





The reusable spacecraft is a joint effort by aviation designer Burt Rutan's Scaled Composites and Virgin Galactic, a space tourism venture that is a subsidiary of Branson's Virgin Group.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- The British mother of a child who died after being brutally abused has been jailed indefinitely.



A police computer image of some of the facial injuries suffered by baby Peter.



The child's -- originally known as Baby P --horrifying death caused a furor in Britain, with the media, public and politicians united in demanding to know how his terrible injuries were missed by social workers, police and medical staff.



Judge Stephen Kramer also Friday jailed the 27-year-old mum's boyfriend for life with a minimum of 12 years and their lodger, Jason Owen, 37, indefinitely but with a minimum of three years, the British Press Association reported. The boyfriend, 32, was also convicted of raping a two-year-old girl.



Baby P's mum has to serve a minimum of five years. She and her boyfriend cannot be named.



Baby P -- he could not be known by his first name, Peter, until the recent lifting of a court order -- was only 17 months old when he was found dead in his blood-spattered cot in August 2007.



He had more than 50 injuries, including a broken back and fractured ribs, despite being on London's Haringey council's at-risk register and receiving 60 visits from social workers, doctors and police over eight months.



The resulting public outrage saw the government's child secretary, Ed Balls, step in to demand the removal of the council's head of children's services, Sharon Shoesmith, with two other leading officials also stepping down.



Shoesmith had to be placed under police guard after death threats were made.



Judge Kramer told Peter's mother that she was "a manipulative and self-centered person, with a calculating side as well as a temper."  Watch more on the case »



"Your conduct over the months prevented Peter from being seen by social services. You actively deceived the authorities... you acted selfishly because your priority was your relationship," he told the court, PA reported.



Judge Kramer's comments echoed the country's response to the case.



"Any decent person who heard the catalogue of medical conditions and non-accidental injuries suffered by Peter cannot fail to have been appalled."



A second serious review of the case commissioned by Balls and released Friday, also reiterated that Peter's death  "could and should have been prevented."



Graham Badman, the chairman of Haringey Local Safeguarding Children Board, which conducted the review said: "I believe the most important lesson arising from this case is that professionals charged with ensuring child safety must be deeply skeptical of any explanations, justifications or excuses they may hear in connection with the apparent maltreatment of children.



"If they have any doubt about the cause of physical injuries or what appears to be maltreatment, they should act swiftly and decisively.



Badman said the review found that if "doctors, lawyers, police officers and social workers had adopted a more urgent, thorough and challenging approach, the case would have been stopped in its tracks at the first serious incident."



"Baby Peter deserved better from the services that were supposed to protect him," Badman said.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Leading British Cabinet minister Jacqui Smith's political future is in doubt after her husband admitted to paying for adult movies with taxpayers' money.

Jacqui Smith surrounded by media outside her sister's home, whom she lives with in London.

The home secretary's husband, Richard Timney, has apologized for the "embarrassment" he caused his wife, while she has promised to repay the money spent, including the £10 ($14) charge for the two films, the British Press Association reported.

According to British media reports, Smith had not seen the videos and was "mortified" that they had "mistakenly" been paid for using her MP's expense account.

Timney, who Smith pays £40,000 ($56,000) a year to be her office manager, submitted an expense claim last June for a £67 ($95) Virgin Media bill for television services in the couple's family home in Redditch, Smith's constituency, The Guardian newspaper reported.

It reported the bill included two adult films, at a cost of £5 ($7) each, as well as two viewings of the heist movie "Ocean's 13" and one of "Surf's Up," a children's film about a  penguin.

The revelations could not come at a worse time for Smith, who is already being investigated by the Parliamentary Commissioner for Standards over her decision to claim at least £116,000 ($164,000) in second-home allowances for her family home since becoming an MP.

She has claimed the second-home allowance for her family home while living with her sister in London. Smith designated her sister's house as her "main" residence, allowing her to claim the money for her family home.

Conservative and opposition leader David Cameron described the latest news as "deeply embarrassing" for Smith.

He said Smith had "questions to answer," PA reported.

"I do not think this individual thing is the issue. I think she has got some questions to answer about the second home issue. It does seem to me pretty incredible to claim that the home where her family is, that is not her main home.

"I think this goes to a deeper problem, which is the second home allowance for MPs. The prime minister has ordered a review but he has sort of kicked it into the long grass.

"The review doesn't start until September, it is not going to report until after the next election. That is hopeless. We have got to get on with it."

Prime Minister Gordon Brown defended Smith.

"The home secretary is doing a great job and I do not think this issue should be allowed to detract from everything she is doing to ensure we protect the public and keep our neighborhoods safe," he said.

"She has done the right thing by taking steps to rectify the mistake that was made as soon as she became aware of it.

"This is very much a personal matter for Jacqui. She has made her apology, her husband has made clear that he has apologized."

Last week Brown ordered a review of the complex and opaque system of MPs' pay and allowances.

Do you think Smith should resign?

***

Miami (CNN) -- The 4-year-old girl sobbed as rescuers rushed her ashore. In the boat behind her, the faces of her fellow survivors were painted with "a thousand-yard stare," one witness said Monday.





That girl and three others spent 20 hours stranded in stormy water after their 22-foot boat capsized off the Florida Keys over the weekend. They were picked up Sunday afternoon by Coast Guard rescuers.





A few hours earlier, David Jensen was maneuvering the Snap Shot, his fishing charter boat, from Duck Key to the open sea when he and others "saw a big object floating in the distance."





"The closer I got, I could see a guy waving," Jensen said.





They found three men clinging to part of what had been their boat. One charter customer quickly jumped in to help, while others threw life jackets to the men, only one of which could muster the energy to swim over, Jensen said.





Once aboard, a language barrier -- the rescued men were Spanish-speaking -- and raw emotions made it difficult to ascertain exactly what had happened. One who did speak English was very upset: "He lost his mother," Jensen explained.





Officer Robert Dube of the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission said Monday that a son had tried to hold onto his 79-year-old mother in the hours after their ship went down around noon Saturday. But she slipped away into the rough waters, Dube said, before rescuers could reach her.





This victim, later identified as Zaida San Jurjo Gonzalez, and the men had clung to the capsized boat's hull. But four others -- three women and the young girl -- couldn't hold on, and drifted off, Jensen said, based on his conversations with the survivors and authorities.





The charter boat captain contacted the Coast Guard after learning others were unaccounted for, and he took his boat out five miles in the direction where the four had drifted away.





He saw no signs of them. But rescuers did come upon the four Sunday morning, bringing them aboard near Marathon, which is roughly halfway between Key Largo and Key West, according to a Coast Guard statement





Authorities later learned that the three women, wearing life jackets, had held tight to a floating cooler and took turns holding the girl through the afternoon, night and next morning.





"That definitely saved their lives," Dube told CNN. "It could have been a lot worse situation."





Wayne Crosby of Captain Hook's Marina and Dive Center said he watched rescuers bring the four to a dock in Marathon on Sunday. They handed the girl off the boat first, he told CNN affiliate WSVN.





"They had her all wrapped up. ... She couldn't stop crying. She was panic-stricken," Crosby said.





At the dock, rescuers scrambled to tend to all the victims.





"They just had that look on their face, like a thousand-yard stare," Crosby told WSVN.





The group had suffered multiple jellyfish stings over the course of their ordeal, Dube said. And by Monday, the 4-year-old had been treated for mild hypothermia and exhaustion. But the wildlife officer added that, by then, she appeared to be "in very good spirits."





Ernie Perroncello, owner and operator of Sea Tow in Marathon, said weather in the area Saturday when the boat went down was terrible.





"You can get yourself in trouble real quick " on the area's water, said Perroncello, whose company salvaged the capsized boat.





CNN's Suzanne Malveaux and Dave Alsup contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Changing winter conditions are causing Scotland's wild Soay sheep to get smaller, according to a study that suggests climate change can trump natural selection.



Can't see me now: Climate change could be shrinking Soay sheep in Scotland.



The authors of the study published in "Science" believe that it highlights how wide-ranging the effects of global climate change can be, adding further complexity to the changes we might expect to see in animal populations in future.



"It's only in the last few years that we've realized that evolution can influence species' physical traits as quickly as ecological changes can. This study addresses one of the major goals of population biology, namely to untangle the ways in which evolutionary and environmental changes influence a species' traits," said Andrew Sugden, deputy and international managing editor at Science.



The researchers analyzed body-weight measurements and life-history data for the female members of a population of Soay sheep. The sheep live on the island of Hirta in the St. Kilda archipelago of Scotland and have been studied closely since 1985.



They selected body size because it is a heritable trait, and because the sheep have, on average, been decreasing in size for the last 25 years.



According to the findings lambs are not growing as quickly as they once did as winters have become shorter so do not need to put on as much as weight in the first months of life to survive.



The results suggest that the decrease is primarily an ecological response to environmental variation over the last 25 years. Evolutionary change, the report says, has contributed relatively little.



"Sheep are getting smaller. Well, at least the wild Soay sheep living on a remote Scottish island are. But according to classic evolutionary theory, they should have been getting bigger, because larger sheep tend to be more likely to survive and reproduce than smaller ones, and offspring tend to resemble their parents," said study author Tim Coulson of Imperial College London.



"Our findings have solved a paradox that has tormented biologists for years -- why predictions did not match observation. Biologists have realized that ecological and evolutionary processes are intricately intertwined, and they now have a way of dissecting out the contribution of each. Unfortunately it is too early to tell whether a warming world will lead to pocket-sized sheep," said Coulson.

***

HONG KONG, China (CNN) -- In Hong Kong, where the alert level has been raised to "emergency" after reporting its first case of swine flu, authorities are trying to keep the H1N1 virus from spreading through the metropolis of 7 million people through quarantine, stepped-up border measures and surveillance.



Quarantined guests and hotel employees wave through the glass of the main entrance of Hong Kong's Metro Park Hotel.



The quarantine has extended beyond the single confirmed case, a 25-year-old Mexican man, to include more than 340 people.



They include: two taxi drivers, two fellow taxi passengers, a local friend, 36 passengers within a three-row vicinity of the patient aboard a China Eastern flight from Shanghai to Hong Kong, and 300 guests and staff at the Metropark Hotel he checked into.



All have been put on the antiviral drug, Tamiflu.



Among the two cab drivers, one was suspected of taking the patient from the airport to the hotel, and another was believed to have taken him from the hotel to the hospital.



Authorities are seeing another 40 to 50 guests whose names are on the hotel's guest list. Some of them left their luggage behind.



"They are gambling with their health, jeopardizing public health safety," said Dr. York Chow, secretary for Food and Health, appealing to the guests to come forward.



In addition to the Metropark Hotel in Wanchai district, the Lady Maclehose Holiday Village is being used as an isolation center during the one-week quarantines.



The government has assured that people under quarantine will have their visas automatically extended, their hotel lodging fees waived and their onward journeys prepared. The Wanchai hotel is providing guests $200 worth of free overseas telephone calls daily.



The isolation order, which went into effect Friday night, is to expire Friday at 8:30 p.m. (8:30 a.m. ET) -- the length of an incubation period for swine flu.



The isolation order did not extend to the air crew or remaining passengers aboard the China Eastern flight.



An airplane's air exchange rate is high compared to that in an office or hotel, explained Yuen Kwok-yung, chair of infectious diseases at the University of Hong Kong. "Risk is very low on a plane," he said.



So far, there have been no further confirmed cases of swine flu, and no Hong Kong pigs have tested positive for the virus, Yuen said.

***

UNITED NATIONS (CNN) -- U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon is "urgently dispatching" a special envoy to Myanmar, a statement from his office said Wednesday, following reports of violent clashes in that country between security forces and protesters.



Protests at the crackdown have taken place overseas, including one outside the Myanmar embassy, London.



"He calls on the senior leadership of the country to cooperate fully with this mission in order to take advantage of the willingness of the United Nations to assist in the process of a national reconciliation through dialogue," said a U.N. statement.



The envoy, Ibrahim Gambari, is scheduled to lead a briefing on the situation in Myanmar for the U.N. Security Council Wednesday afternoon.



"Noting reports of the use of force and of arrests and beatings, the secretary-general calls again on authorities to exercise utmost restraint toward the peaceful demonstrations taking place, as such action can only undermine the prospects for peace, prosperity and stability in Myanmar," Ban's statement said.



There's been no official word yet if the military junta ruling Myanmar will accept the offer from the U.N. secretary-general.



Speaking at the Labour Party conference Wednesday, British Prime Minister Gordon Brown underscored that any trampling on human rights would not be accepted.



"The whole world is now watching Burma and this illegal and oppressive regime should know that the whole world will hold it to account," he said.



U.S. President George W. Bush, speaking to the U.N. General Assembly's annual session Tuesday before the crackdown, said his administration would impose stiffer sanctions against the country's military regime.



"The United States will tighten economic sanctions on the leaders of the regime and their financial backers. We will impose an expanded visa ban on those responsible for the most egregious violations of human rights, as well as their family members," he said.



"We will continue to support the efforts of humanitarian groups working to alleviate suffering in Burma (the country's traditional name) and urge the United Nations and all nations to use their diplomatic and economic leverage to help the Burmese people reclaim their freedom."



His comments were echoed by French President Nicolas Sarkozy, also at the U.N. General Assembly. "I'm deeply concerned about the situation in Burma and Myanmar, and I would like to appeal for the peaceful, spontaneous demonstrations which are expressing just political and social concerns that they not be repressed by force in any way," Sarkozy said.



Soe Aung, National Council of the Union of Burma spokesman, called for the world to take action.



"There should be some action -- decisive action -- taken by the international community. At least there should be an urgent meeting of the Security Council level," he said.



Aung also commented that the demonstrators do not seem content to back down.



"The monks are very determined that they are going to go ahead with the demonstrations unless their demands are met," he said.



Such demands include an apology from ministry authorities for the mistreatment of monks in central Myanmar, a reduction in the price of gasoline -- which originally sparked protests in late August -- and the release of protesters detained since demonstrations began, Aung said. U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations Zalmay Khalilzad.



"We are concerned about the situation, particularly now, because we see a worsening of the political situation and that is affecting the well-being of the people of Burma.



"We have urged Mr. Gambari and he plans to visit Burma as soon as possible," Khalilzad said, referring to Ibrahim Gambari, the U.N. special envoy to Burma. E-mail to a friend

***

New York (CNN)  -- Authorities have identified a teenager believed to be suffering from amnesia who was found on the streets of New York two weeks ago.



Police say a CNN viewer in Maryland identified the young woman, who mysteriously turned up in Manhattan two weeks ago, claiming to have no memory of her family, her home or even her own name.



The 18 year old whose name is not yet being released, is in the process of being reunited with her family. They are from Washington state and are on their way to New York, New York Deputy Police Commissioner Paul Browne said on Saturday.



A photo of the woman, who has been referred to as Jane Doe, was circulated by police and aired on CNN this week. The viewer in Maryland was familiar with her situation and knew she had been missing from her family earlier this month.



The girl was found in Midtown Manhattan around 12:30 a.m. October 9 outside the Covenant House youth shelter, although the organization said that she was not a resident at the time and did not appear as if she intended to seek refuge at the facility.



"I just want to know who I am," the girl said in a statement from the New York City Administration for Children's Services. "I want to know who I am and what happened to me."



According to its Web site, "Covenant House New York is the nation's largest adolescent care agency serving homeless, runaway and at-risk youth." Nearly 7,000 youths reportedly seek shelter there per year.



A security guard for the shelter noticed the girl walking on the sidewalk near Covenant House and approached her. Finding her unresponsive, he called the New York City Police Department.



Police officers interviewed the young woman, but it became clear that she couldn't provide authorities with any information about herself. The police said she was wearing military green camouflage pants, a black shirt and a pair of black sneakers when she was discovered.



The children's services agency said the girl recently wrote down the name "Amber" and has responded to it on one occasion, but she has no idea whether it is her true name.



On another occasion she is said to have recalled certain words, which turned out to be an excerpt from the fantasy novel "Fool's Fate" by Robin Hobb. The girl also is apparently writing a fantasy story of her own that features a heroine named Rian, "who's been raised by the commander of the guard post on the edge of a fantasy kingdom," the young woman said.



Judging from her poor dental hygiene, said Lt. Christopher Zimmerman, she appeared to have been living on the streets for some time.



Evan Buxbaum, Susan Candiotti and Vanessa Juarez contributed to the report.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- French scientists have unveiled a working prototype of a fully artificial heart which is based on the technology of satellites and airplanes.





The artificial heart based on satellite and airplane technology was presented in Paris.





The device could save millions of lives and beats almost exactly like the real thing using electronic sensors to regulate heart rate and blood flow.





Developers Carmat, funded by the European space and defense group EADS, presented the device at a press conference in Paris on Monday.





Carmat's chief operating officer Patrick Coulombier told The Associated Press: "it's the same principle in the airplane as in the body."





Coulombier explained that the same tiny sensors that measure air pressure and altitude in an airplane or satellite are also in the artificial heart. This should allow the device to respond immediately if the patient needs more or less blood.





The French design has so far only been tested in animals, and now needs approval from its authorities before pushing ahead with clinical trials.





Previous artificial hearts have been unable to automatically vary their pumping speed and must be tweaked externally.





The French heart is also the most lifelike, with two pumps to send the blood into the lungs and the rest of the body, just like a real heart. Past artificial hearts have only had one pump.





The French model is made from natural materials including polymer and pig tissue, which have already been used in heart valves implanted into people.





The artificial heart would initially be for patients who had suffered a massive heart attack or who had heart failure, but might eventually be used in patients who are not that sick.





Heart disease is the world's top killer, claiming some 17 million lives a year. According to the American Heart Association, about 2,200 heart transplants were performed in the U.S. in 2006. Thousands more patients would benefit if more donor hearts were available.





The artificial heart is expected to cost about 150,000 euros or $192,140.

***

(CNN) -- Spanish underdogs Levante kept up their remarkable early-season form by beating Real Sociedad 3-2, their seventh successive victory, to stay top of La Liga.





Levante, a team that has played second fiddle to city rivals Valencia during their 102 year history and who have never finished higher than 10th, has remarkably fended off the attentions of Spanish giants Real Madrid and Barcelona with a quarter of the season gone.





But it took an injury time free kick by Ruben Suarez to make sure of all three points after Real Sociedad's Inigo MartÃ­nez had scored a late equalizer.





Sociedad had taken an early lead through Daniel Estrada before Nano Rivas and Valdo Lopes put Levante in front. But despite a late equalizer, Levante came back with Suarez's stunning free kick, which saw them leapfrog Barcelona into top spot.





Real Madrid did their best to keep up with Levante after blowing Villarreal away in the first half an hour at the Santiago Bernabeu.





Villarreal, perennial UEFA Champions League qualifiers in recent years, have endured a torrid start to the season, made worse when Karim Benzema scored an early goal. Kaka was then set up by Argentine international Angel Di Maria, who capped a fine half by scoring the third. The match petered out in the second half, finishing 3-0 and sending Real Madrid second above Barcelona.





In Italy's Serie A Udinese missed the chance of returning to the top of the league after losing away to Napoli 2-0. Two first half strikes from Ezequiel Lavezzi and Christian Maggio ended Udinese's unbeaten start to the season.





But the result of the night saw AC Milan score four goals in successive games after beating Parma 4-1.





Milan found themselves 3-0 down against Lecce last week before mounting a thrilling comeback. A second half Kevin Prince Boetang hat-trick secured an unlikely 4-3 victory and it was another three-goal haul that guaranteed all the points against Parma.





This time Antonio Nocerino was the hero. His first half double put Milan in control before Zlatan Ibrahimovic put the victory beyond Parma, who scored a late consolation before Nocerino completed his hat-trick in the 90th minute.





"Right now the important thing is to return to the top and we can do that," coach Massimiliano Allegri told AFP.





"This is an important result to give us consistency. The table is starting to get stretched and we must stay amongst the leaders."

***

(CNN) -- David Letterman has been taking some heat and issuing some apologies for the off-color joke he made last week about Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin's daughter, but he found a sympathetic critic in comedian Jeff Foxworthy on Monday.



Jeff Foxworthy, the father of two teenage daughters, says David Letterman's joke was flawed.



The best-selling comedy recording artist in history paid a visit to CNN's "Larry King Live" to talk about Letterman's gaffe.



"As a father of two teenage daughters, it was a flawed joke," Foxworthy said.



Letterman joked last Tuesday that Palin's "daughter was knocked up by Alex Rodriguez" at a recent Yankees game, stirring up an angry reaction from the Palin family. Letterman has since apologized twice for what he called "inappropriate" humor.



And Foxworthy agreed: "I don't think any kind of joke about someone having sex with a teenage girl is funny."  Watch Foxworthy comment on joke »



But Foxworthy's rebuke of the joke was gentle in tone, and he showed empathy for Letterman as well as the Palin family.



"As a comedian, you look at what Dave does," Foxworthy said. "You're trying to do this night after night, year after year, decade after decade -- at some point in the road, are you going to throw one out there you shouldn't have? Yeah."



Foxworthy said it's probably time to forgive and forget.



"It's about forgiveness," Foxworthy said. "He came back and apologized and said: 'Hey, the joke is flawed.' And to me you move on."



King asked what advice he'd give Sarah Palin if she received an invitation to appear on Letterman's "Late Show."



Foxworthy said he'd encourage the Alaska governor to accept it. "Life is about forgiveness. I think that makes her bigger to go on there and say 'I accept your apology'."



Letterman has insisted he was referring to Palin's 18-year-old, Bristol, who gave birth to a boy in December, and not her 14-year-old, Willow, in the joke.



Palin has called that a "weak, convenient excuse" for a joke that was"inappropriate" no matter which daughter was the target.



Foxworthy, the author of "How to Really Stink at Work," also made some "confessions" about his pre-comedy career in corporate America.



"I was at IBM for five years; I don't know how much work I did," Foxworthy said.



The comedian, who said he used to make prank phone calls to his boss at work to lure him back and forth from his desk, had this tongue-in-cheek advice for people about how far to take things on the job:



"You don't really want to get fired; you want to have a job. But you don't want to do it well, because you're going to be promoted, and that's a lot of pressure. Who can have any fun with that kind of anvil hanging over your head?"



Foxworthy is also the host of "Are You Smarter Than a 5th Grader" and talked about the appeal of a game show that spotlights how much people tend to forget after all those years of cramming in facts at school.



"It's a strange thing why the brain keeps some things," Foxworthy said. "Like I don't know why my brain has all the words to 'The Brady Bunch' theme song, but it deleted everything about triangles."

***

(CNN) -- West Indies pace bowling legend Michael Holding has launched a passionate defence of Test cricket, claiming that the 20/20 version of the game is threatening to completely destroy the five-day format.





Speaking exclusively to CNN, Holding -- who has just released his autobiography "No Holding Back" -- admitted he disliked the limited-overs game so much that he turned down television work on the recent world 20/20 championship in his native West Indies.





"I am not interested in 20/20 at all. Maybe I am an old fogey but I think it is destroying Test cricket," said Holding.





Blog: 20/20 broadening cricket's appeal





"Kids should be playing Test cricket and then maybe progressing to 20/20 once established. But now, with all the money available in 20/20, top young players are not going to be interested in playing the five-day game.





"When you can earn $800,000 for playing six weeks in the Indian Premier League (IPL), why waste six years trying to earn that sort of money in Test cricket?





"If this isn't controlled properly, Test cricket will die. When I was playing, people said: 'Test cricket is too slow,' so they brought in 50-over one-day cricket. Now it's down to 20-overs. What happens next? 15 overs? 10 overs?.





Holding also believes that Test cricket is not being helped by the way the sport's governing body, the International Cricket Council (ICC) is managing the game.





"The ICC needs to see how football's governing body FIFA runs things. The ICC are letting the Indian Cricket Board (BBCI) dictate how cricket is run and that is all wrong. India is where the money is in cricket at the moment but that doesn't mean they should have a say in how cricket is governed.





"FIFA wouldn't let Brazil dictate how to run football and cricket shouldn't let India have more of a say just because they have money there.





"Basically, the ICC are governing cricket so badly that soon nobody will pay any attention to them at all. If Test cricket is boring it is because the ICC are handling the calendar all wrong.





"Bangladesh are playing a series in England soon, but who cares?. Imagine there was a two-division system, six teams in each, with promotion and relegation. India to face Pakistan with the losers being relegated to Division Two -- now that would be a Test series to watch!"





Holding also told CNN that he would suspend any player found to have been betting on matches, although would stop short of banning them for life.





"No cricketer, in fact no sportsman, should be betting on matches -- to win or lose. If there is irrefutable evidence that a player has been caught betting on matches, they have to be banned.





"However, not for life, I believe in people getting second chances, but if it happened twice -- then ban them for life."

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Libya has paid $1.5 billion to the families of terrorism victims, overcoming the final obstacle to full relations with the United States, the State Department said Friday.

Police officers survey the wreckage of Pan Am Flight 103 in Lockerbie, Scotland, in December 1988.

The payment ends Tripoli's legal liability in U.S. terror cases and paves the way for increased U.S. involvement in the oil-rich nation.

President Bush signed an executive order Friday restoring Libyan immunity from terrorism-related lawsuits and dismissing pending cases over compensation as part of a deal reached this summer.

David Welch, the top U.S. diplomat for the Middle East, who negotiated the agreement, called Libya's rehabilitation from a terrorist nation to a U.S. ally "historic."

The pact closes the book on a contentious period in U.S.-Libyan relations, which began in the 1980s with a series of attacks involving the two countries, including the bombings of Pan Am flight 103, a German disco and U.S. airstrikes over Libya.

U.S. business executives hope the new relationship will lead to billions of dollars of new investment in Libya, a country rich in petroleum reserves but lacking a developed infrastructure.

This summer, the United States and Libya signed a deal for the State Department to create a $1.8 billion compensation fund to finalize the claims for the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, and the 1986 bombing of La Belle disco in Berlin, Germany. It also compensates Libyan victims of U.S. airstrikes in the 1980s.

Congress unanimously adopted the Libyan Claims Resolution Act, sponsored by Sen. Frank R. Lautenberg, D-New Jersey, which cleared the way to end the feud and created the victim compensation fund.

Under the agreement, Libya pays more than $500 million to settle remaining claims from the Lockerbie case and more than $280 million for victims of the disco bombing. It will also set aside funds to compensate victims of several other incidents blamed on Libya, although Libya has not accepted responsibility.

In exchange, Libya will now be exempt from legislation passed this year enabling terrorism victims to be compensated using frozen assets of governments blamed for attacks. Tripoli sought the protection to encourage U.S. companies to invest in Libya without fear of being sued by terrorism victims or their families.

An initial payment of $300 million was received this month, after the opening of a U.S. trade office in Libya and a historic visit by Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice. Another $600 million was received Thursday and the remaining $600 million Friday, Welch said, adding that the families could start receiving payments within days.

The remaining $300 million will go to Libyan victims of the bombing in Libya by U.S. warplanes in 1986. Libyans say dozens of people died in the U.S. air attack, including an adopted daughter of Libyan leader Col. Moammar Gadhafi.

President Reagan ordered the attacks on Tripoli and Benghazi after two U.S. soldiers were killed and 79 Americans were injured in the 1986 Berlin disco bombing.

The bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 killed 270 people, including 189 Americans. Of the dead, 259 people died on board the plane and another 11 on the ground.

Libya has paid 268 families involved in the Pan Am bombing $8 million each of a $10 million settlement. But it withheld the remaining $2 million owed to each family over a dispute regarding U.S. obligations to Tripoli.

A group of relatives of Pan Am victims said in a statement Friday that they applauded Libya's fulfillment of the agreement.

"The Pan Am 103 families deeply appreciate Sen. Lautenberg's work to urge the administration to take every step to bring the agreement to fruition," spokeswoman Kara Weipz said in the statement. "While our loved ones will never be forgotten, we are glad this chapter in our efforts is finally over."

Ties between the two countries began to improve in 2003, when Libya gave up its weapons of mass destruction program and began compensating Lockerbie victims. But lingering lawsuits prevented the two countries from fully normalizing ties.

The State Department has said the deal was pursued on a "purely humanitarian basis and does not constitute

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Profits at celebrity chef Gordon Ramsay's British restaurants plunged by nearly 90 percent in the last 12 months.





Gordon Ramsay has become as successful on television as he has been off-screen.





Run by the Scottish-born chef and his father-in-law Chris Hutcheson, Gordon Ramsay Holdings reported a drop in annual turnover from £41.6 million ($68 million) to £35 million ($57 million) in the year to August 2008, Britain's Press Association reported Friday.





Pre-tax profits plummeted by over £3 million ($4.9 million) to £383,325 ($627,000), while net debt in the group, which includes London restaurants such as Claridges, Maze and the flagship Royal Hospital Road, soared to almost £9.5 million ($15.5 million).





With spiraling debts and crippling tax bills, the star of TV shows such as "Ramsay's Kitchen Nightmares" and "Hell's Kitchen" was forced to pump huge amounts of his own money into the business, even selling his prized Ferrari to raise funds, The Guardian newspaper said.





Ramsay has attributed his business problems to over-ambitious expansion plans, in addition to the closure of two of his 11 London eateries. The Michelin-starred chef opened ten restaurants between 2007 and 2008, while The Savoy Grill was forced to close as the Savoy hotel was refurbished, and the lease at the Connaught expired.





The 42-year old was also forced to review his company's international operations, closing restaurants in Paris, Los Angeles and Prague, The Times newspaper reported.





"Ambition overtook me. We thought we could do anything, that we couldn't fail," PA quoted Ramsay as saying recently.





A full review of the group's operations was instigated in December as part of a refinancing deal with the Royal Bank of Scotland and to help the business get through the troubled economic times.





"2008 brought its own challenges, not just for our group, but for the industry as a whole and the broader economy," Hutcheson told PA.





"Whilst the restructuring has benefited the group, the significant contribution and commitment of all 750 staff to the business has been integral to moving us to a position of strength."





Ramsay has endured a difficult time recently. Last month he was criticized by Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd after reportedly comparing television star Tracy Grimshaw to a pig during a live cooking show in Melbourne.





His trademark colorful language also came under fire last year by another Australian lawmaker. However Ramsay told the country's Channel Nine Network, which broadcasts Kitchen Nightmares and Hell's Kitchen, that the shows emphasize the "pressures of working in a restaurant kitchen."

***

(CNN) -- The best way to get tongues wagging is to say nothing at all, and it's a skill Rihanna has down to a science.



Rihanna apparently revealed the release date for her new album over Twitter.



The Barbadian songstress arrived a bit late to the Twitter party when she -- or her people -- created a "rihanna" tag yesterday and sent out a single, sparse tweet: "The Wait Is Ova. Nov. 23 09."



Whether that's the name of a new single, the beginning of a viral marketing campaign -- or both -- is unknown, but a representative for Rihanna told Entertainment Weekly that though the date "looks accurate" for her album release, "The Wait Is Ova" is not the album title.



The only other object fans can mine for clues about the singer's upcoming release is the logo, a metallic nail fashioned into a crudely shaped "R" that has swarmed the Internet.



The new record would be her fourth since her debut at 17. In the four years since, she's evolved from an unknown, breezy pop singer to a sonically and fashionably more distinct persona. One can only expect that her latest effort would continue to show that growth.



Yet there are extra layers of anticipation surrounding the unnamed work: Not only is this Rihanna's follow-up to "Good Girl Gone Bad," the album that made her an international superstar, it's also the first time she is piping up as a solo artist since the infamous fight with her ex-boyfriend, Chris Brown, in February.



Those who've worked with the star on the record have said to expect something with more ferocity. "Expect an edgier, almost angrier Rihanna on this one," Ne-Yo told E! Online. "Rihanna says some things on this album that you've never heard her say before."



But, said Mariel Concepcion, associate editor for Billboard.com, that statement shouldn't be taken too literally.



"She has changed a bit, but I think she's simply grown. Fans are expecting her to reveal some details, but I think she's going to subliminally let it be known that 'Yes, [Chris] hurt me, but I'm moving forward with life.' This issue was such a serious issue, it calls for more than putting out an angry song about it."



Tracey Johnson, who said she's been a fan of the singer since the beginning, has high expectations for the upcoming release, but not because she expects to hear about Rihanna's personal life.



"[Some fans] feel like it would be good for her to represent abused women in some sort of way and say something, but in my perspective, she doesn't owe us anything," Johnson said. "She's always been pretty private about the relationship, and she's never opened a lot in her music anyway."



If Rihanna maintains her silence, Johnson said, it will be "kind of a hit back at the critics who said she disappeared after not becoming the spokesperson for domestic abuse. She's saying this is what you should be paying attention to: I'm a fashion icon, and I make great music."



Johnson, co-founder and editor of celebrity Web site NeonLimelight.com, has paid close attention to Rihanna's reported studio time over the past few months, but said he didn't expect to see the album appear so soon -- and with a tweet, no less.



"I'm definitely expecting more for this album," she said. "Rihanna has a platform now that she didn't have before 'Good Girl Gone Bad.' She's gone a step forward with each album, and I think it's going to be a little more of what we heard on 'Good Girl Gone Bad,' but to the next level."



That's a prediction that Concepcion agrees with, considering that the people who have been pulled in on this album resemble the team who worked on "Good Girl": Justin Timberlake, Ne-Yo and Tricky

***

(CNN) -- Saudi King Abdullah has pardoned a rape victim who had been sentenced to 200 lashes and six months in prison in a case that sparked international attention, a Saudi newspaper has reported.



The case cast light on the treatment of women under Saudi Arabia's strict Islamic law.



Al-Jazirah newspaper quoted a Saudi Justice Ministry official saying King Abdullah issued a royal pardon Monday -- the same day that the Hajj, the annual Muslim pilgrimage to Mecca, begins in Saudi Arabia.



The victim's husband told CNN he has not received an official letter regarding her pardon, but considers it to be legitimate since it was announced in an official Saudi newspaper.



He thanked King Abdullah for the pardon, saying: "This fatherly care and noble gesture will help (in) lifting the emotional and psychological stress and suffering that our family has been enduring."



"This is not something new because we know that the King was always generous in dealing with his people and the entire world," the husband said. "This week, we have two holidays to celebrate; the Eid and this great news of the pardon."



Saudi sources told CNN that the king's pardon was not related to the beginning of the Hajj nor the Eid al-Adha festival that follows, which is normally when the Saudi monarch issues amnesty for prisoners. Watch how Arab media is reporting the story. »



Saudi Arabia's Justice Minister Abdullah Bin Mohammad al-Sheikh told al-Jazirah newspaper that the king felt the pardon would be in the best interests of the Saudi people, and the decision did not reflect any lack of confidence in the Saudi justice system.



The White House welcomed King Abdullah's decision, but National Security Council spokesman Gordon Johndroe stressed that "this is obviously a matter for the Saudi Arabians and King Abdullah."



A Saudi court ruled the 19-year-old had an "illegitimate relationship" with a man who was not her husband, and that she was raped after she and the man were discovered in a "compromising situation, her clothes on the ground."



The rape took place in Qatif in March 2006 when the woman was engaged to be married.



The case has drawn international attention, provoked outrage in the West and cast light on the treatment of women under strict Islamic law in Saudi Arabia.



The woman was meeting with a man -- described by the woman's attorney as a former friend from whom she was retrieving a photograph -- when they both were abducted last March.



Seven men, convicted of abducting the pair and raping her, were sentenced from two to nine years in prison.



Abdul Rahman al-Lahim, the lawyer who represented the woman, faced a disciplinary hearing for "insulting the Supreme Judicial Council and disobeying the rules and regulations" of the judiciary.  The hearing has been postponed.



The woman's husband has been outspoken in his support for his wife. He called a Lebanese TV show to defend her, when a former Saudi judge claimed on the program that she "spoil(ed) their marital bed" by meeting an unrelated male "in secret" and admitted her guilt.



Al-Lahim has said he hopes the case changes the Saudi justice system.



"We want to highlight the rape crimes in Saudi Arabia and the way they are handled and sentenced in court," he added. "This is a new era for all of us."



He said that the rape case had elicited a fierce response, including calls for his beheading.



U.S. President George W. Bush said last week that King Abdullah "knows our position loud and clear" on the case.



Under Saudi law, women are subject to numerous restrictions, including a strict dress code, a prohibition against driving and a requirement that they get a man's permission to travel or have surgery.  E-mail to a friend



CNN's Mohammed Jamjoom, Saad Abedine and Isha Sesay contributed to this report

***

(CNN) -- Two goals in five minutes at the start of extra-time helped defending champions Egypt book their place in the African Nations Cup semifinals with a battling 3-1 victory over Cameroon.





The game, though, was marred by a controversial third goal by midfielder Ahmed Hassan which was allowed to stand by referee Jerome Damon despite replays showing the ball had clearly not crossed the line.





By that time the Pharaohs' captain, who was winning a record 170th cap for his country, had already scored an own goal to put the Indomitable Lions ahead after 26 minutes.





Hassan scored again at the other end to pull his side level with a powerful long-range strike before half-time which eventually forced the game into an additional 30 minutes in Benguela.





Substitute Mohamed Gedo then capitalized on an error from Geremi Njitap to put Egypt ahead in extra-time, before Hassan's controversial strike handed them a two-goal cushion.





To make matters worse for Paul Le Guen's Cameroon, Aurelien Chedjou was sent off late on as the north Africans set up a tantalising last-four clash with old foes Algeria.





Cameroon took the lead following a spell of intense pressure. A succession of Achille Emana corners had the Egyptian defence wobbling -- and the seventh one resulted in Hassan's weak-header on the line dropping into his own net.





Cameroon pressed for a second goal but were taken by surprise when Hassan unleashed a fierce 35-yard strike in the 37th minute that deceived goalkeeper Carlos Kameni before finding its way in.





Emad Moteab could have won the game for Egypt right at the death after he was picked out at the back post by a sweeping pass from Hassan, but the Al-Ahly forward could only find the side netting as the game entered extra-time.





However, Hassan Shehata's side wasted no time in killing off the tie going 3-1 up after 95 minutes -- after being gifted both goals.





The first came  when Geremi's poor back-pass from the right was intercepted by Gedo, who and tucked away with ease through the legs of Kameni two minutes after the resumption.





The second seems certain to land South African referee Damon in the spotlight after Hassan's free-kick from the left was pushed onto the underside of the crossbar by the Espanyol goalkeeper and did not cross the line when it hit the ground.





However, it was still allowed to stand much to the dismay of the Cameroon players. It also seemed to knock the stuffing out of Le Guen's men as they failed to create any major openings in the closing 25 minutes.





To add insult to injury, Chedjou was shown a straight red for hauling down last-man Gedo midway through the second period of extra-time with Egypt going on to seal a memorable win.





Meanwhile, Nigeria became the fourth team to reach the semifinals after defeating Zambia in a dull final quarterfinal showdown in Lubango.





Neither side could find the net after 90 minutes and 30 minutes of extra time, but Nigeria progressed 5-4 on penalties and will now face near-neighbors Ghana in the last four on Thursday.





Goalkeeper Vincent Enyeama scored the decisive penalty for Nigeria after Thomas Nyirenda had missed for Zambia.





Enyeama dived to his right to stop Nyirenda's penalty after Sikombe Chivhuta and Christopher Katongo and Emmanuel Mayuka had all scored for Zambia.





Obefemi Martins, Victor Nsofor, Peter Odemwingie, and John Obi Mikel all scored for Nigeria.

***

(CNN) -- The Federal Aviation Administration has suspended two air traffic controllers over last week's collision of two aircraft over the Hudson River that killed nine people, a spokeswoman said.



The wreckage of a plane that collided with a helicopter is lifted this week from the Hudson River.



A controller at New Jersey's Teterboro Airport handling the flight of a Piper airplane carrying three people "was involved in apparently inappropriate conversations on the telephone at the time of the accident," FAA spokeswoman Laura Brown said in a statement Thursday.



A source with knowledge of the investigation said the controller was on the phone with his girlfriend "after he cleared the pilot for takeoff; he was still on the phone at the time of the crash."



In addition, "the supervisor was not present in the building as required," Brown said.



"While we have no reason to believe at this time that these actions contributed to the accident, this kind of conduct is unacceptable, and we have placed the employees on administrative leave and have begun disciplinary proceedings," she said.  Watch amateur video of the moment of impact »



"These are serious violations of the FAA regulations," said Mary Schiavo, former inspector general for the Transportation Department.



The union for air traffic controllers urged caution.



"We support that any such allegation is fully investigated before there is a rush to judgment about the behavior of any controller," said a statement from the National Air Traffic Controllers Association.



The National Transportation Safety Board is working with the FAA in investigating Saturday's collision of the Piper, which had taken off from Teterboro, with a sightseeing helicopter that was carrying five Italian tourists and a pilot.



No one aboard either aircraft survived the crash.



The NTSB has said the pilot of the small plane was cleared electronically and handed off to Newark, New Jersey, air traffic controllers, a standard procedure.



However, Newark's control tower never got a verbal response from the pilot of the small plane.



The controller put on leave was described as a longtime employee, the source said.



He and the supervisor face disciplinary action that could include their firing.



Also Thursday, FAA Administrator Randy Babbitt said the agency may reissue advisories to pilots using the busy airspace over the Hudson.



Pilots are urged to use a radio frequency dedicated to traffic in that corridor, fly no faster than 140 knots and turn on their lights as they enter that airspace.



Babbitt made the comments at an event at the agency's research facility in Atlantic City, New Jersey.



CNN's Susan Candiotti contributed to this report.

***

London, England (CNN)  -- A Canadian graduate student has found the only known printed copy of Haiti's Declaration of Independence, tucked away in Britain's National Archives, researchers said.





Duke University student Julia Gaffield found the eight-page pamphlet, dated January 1, 1804, while researching Haiti's early independence, Duke said in a statement Thursday.





The discovery sheds light on the early history of Haiti and the relations it had with its Caribbean neighbors at the time, Gaffield and Duke Professor Deborah Jenson said.





Gaffield is researching early 19th-century Haiti for her doctoral dissertation in history, Duke said. She did research in France, Haiti and Jamaica, where she saw a handwritten copy of the declaration in the papers of Jamaica's governor at the time, George Nugent.





It indicated there was a printed version somewhere, but it wasn't enclosed.





In late January, Gaffield went to London for research at the National Archives, where she found the printed declaration.





"I wasn't specifically looking for it, but I had an eye out for it because I knew it was missing," Gaffield said. "We figured there was an original somewhere, but didn't know if it still existed."





The declaration had not been misplaced and had been in the archives for a long time, Gaffield said. The period had simply not been studied in detail, and Gaffield said she figures people who saw the document before probably didn't realize what they had.





Gaffield said she was thrilled by the discovery, but had to wait until the end of the day to notify her advisers at Duke, in North Carolina.





"The archives are not the place to make a big scene," she said.





Haiti's declaration is only the second of its kind in the world, the first being the U.S. Declaration of Independence, written by Thomas Jefferson and others, Duke said.





The pamphlet, written in French, has three distinct parts, the National Archives said. The first two pages are titled "Liberte ou La Mort," which translates to "Freedom or Death," in which the generals of the Haitian army sign their names to an oath swearing to renounce forever the French yoke or die rather than live under its domination.





Next, Jean-Jacques Dessalines, the general-in-chief, addresses the citizens of Haiti in an impassioned defense of independence and the destiny of the nation.





On the final page, Haitian army generals proclaim Dessalines governor-general for life and swear to obey without question laws issued under his authority.





"To bring this document to light in Haiti's darkest hour may be seen as a symbol of renewal and rejuvenation, helping Haiti rebuild its national spirit following the recent earthquake," said Ian Wilson, president of the International Council on Archives. "Julia's achievement in recognizing the significance of this printed document deserves high recognition."





Oliver Morley, the acting chief executive of the National Archives, said they were pleased to play a role in the discovery.





"It's incredible that the long search for this important document should finally end at the National Archives," Morley said. "This declaration sent to the British government by Haiti's first independent leader is of great historical importance to both Haiti and the British people, and provides unique insight into the first successful slave rebellion of modern times."





Jenson, a professor of French studies at Duke who has researched the U.S. publication of Haiti's independence documents, said the discovery also shows Haiti had a fully functional printing apparatus at every moment of the new nation's independence.





Researchers had looked for the printed declaration before, without success, said Laurent Dubois, a Duke professor of French studies and history and one of Gaffield's advisers.





In 1952, Haiti asked intellectual Edmond Mangones to find an original or printed copy so it could be displayed for the nation's 150th anniversary, Dubois said. Mangones searched in many archives in Haiti and elsewhere before writing with exasperation that all his searching had been "in vain," Dubois said.





"It is

***

TEHRAN, Iran (CNN) -- Three leading Iranian reformists who have rejected the results of last month's election questioned the legitimacy of President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad's government Wednesday.



Mehdi Karrubi is vowing to "stand by the people and the revolution, until the end of my life."



This comes as Ahmadinejad is set to take office at the end of the month.



Presidential candidate Mehdi Karrubi wrote a letter in his party's newspaper, saying he would not recognize the government and vowing to "stand by the people and the revolution, until the end of my life."



His statement prompted Iran's government to block publication of the newspaper. Read Karrubi's letter PDF



Ahmadinejad's main political rival, Mir Hossein Moussavi, also released a statement Wednesday criticizing the government and its crackdown on the media, which he said has created a "bitter, coup d'etat atmosphere" in Iran.



"We will stand firmly in order to preserve this valuable accomplishment [revolution]," Moussavi said. "Unless we succeed in this, this government will not have legitimacy. The system and the heritage of the Islamic revolution are the fruits of our 200-year-old struggle against oppression."Read Moussavi's statement PDF



Iran's former reformist President Mohammad Khatami called on Iranians to keep up the struggle, noting that "all doors are not yet closed." Read Khatami's letter PDF



"We must not lose our social capital this easily," Khatami told progressive Iranian newspaper Tahlile Rooz. "I know Moussavi as one of the faithful, original and valuable capitals of our revolution, and considered his return to the political scene as a great chance."



In a separate posting on his Web site, Khatami accused the government of having restricted communications in the country. "The state-owned media outlet shows the same scenes over and over again, in order to provoke people's feelings," he said. "Where was this media outlet when tens of people were killed and hundreds of people beaten?"



In his statement, Moussavi called for the release of jailed reformists and said he will participate in the creation of a "legal organization" that will release proof of fraud in the June 12 presidential election and take its case to the courts.



He said the current political issue is a "family dispute" and cautioned against asking for outside help, warning, "We will regret it."



"Many" have asked Moussavi to end his struggle and "close my eyes," but he warned, "If we do not stand our grounds now, then we will have no guarantees that we won't be at this exact point in the future, face to face with the bitter events of this election."



Karrubi called the actions of the government before and after the controversial June 12 voting "the foundation for the annulment of the elections," according to a copy of his letter on the party newspaper's Web site.



"I will not recognize the legitimacy of the government which has resulted from this process," Karrubi said in the letter.



The 72-year-old cleric also said he "will not participate in any of its processes, in any way" and said he is "ready to cooperate with pro-change people and groups."



Karrubi's party, Etemed Melli, said Iran's Ministry of Culture and its attorney general prevented the publication of its newspaper because it carried the letter.



He and Moussavi have questioned the legitimacy of the vote count of the presidential election that gave Ahmadinejad an overwhelming victory. That outrage sparked bloody street protests and a clampdown on international media coverage, as well as access to certain Web sites.



At least 20 protesters were killed in the chaos and more than 1,000 were detained in Tehran, the head of Iranian internal security forces Brig. Esmaeil Ahmadi said, according to Iranian state-run media reports on Wednesday.



The actual death toll may be higher, but restrictions on media have made it difficult to verify.



Human Rights Watch on Wednesday called on Iran to release prominent Iranian reformist Saeed Hajjarian, who has been imprisoned since June 15. He

***

(CNN) -- Mohsen Rezaie may have little chance of winning Friday's presidential election in Iran, observers say, but they believe he's running with a purpose: getting rid of Mahmoud Ahmadinejad.



Mohsen Rezaie could garner enough conservative votes to swing Iran's election, experts say.



"He came there just to defeat Ahmadinejad. He didn't come to win," said Mehdi Khalaji, a senior fellow with the Washington Institute for Near East Policy.



Hardliners disappointed with Ahmadinejad and reformers eager for new leadership are both glad Rezaie is running, Karim Sadjadpour wrote in a recent article for the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, where he is an associate.



"Intimidating in appearance and lacking in popular appeal, reformists are happy to have Rezaie in the race, believing he can take some of the votes from Ahmadinejad in the first round," Sadjadpour wrote.



Khalaji said the incumbent will lose votes at both ends of the political spectrum.  Watch how the campaign is a watershed for Iran »



"Look, everybody in this country wants Ahmadinejad out," Khalaji said, "except the Supreme Leader and his organizations."



Rezaie, no ally of Supreme Leader Ayatollah Sayyed Ali Khamenei, was a founder of the Revolutionary Guard in 1979 and its leader from 1981 to 1997, a period that included the devastating eight-year war with Iraq.



"Iranian people don't like the military at all, " Khalaji said. "He's considered a military man, despite his claims that 'I'm a civilian.' But his image is associated with war, and people don't like it."



Many people blame Rezaie for prolonging the war and failing to achieve victory, Khalaji said.



In an interview this week in the Los Angeles Times, Rezaie said the conflict taught him "that war is a terrible thing, that we should do everything to avoid war."



"Look at what happened to us, the chemical weapons attacks on Iranian cities and Halabja [in Iraq]," he told the newspaper. "War is a terrible thing. I saw dead people and crushed children, families destroyed and fleeing from their homes, here in Iran but also there in Iraq.



"I also learned the value of unity," he went on. "The war created a fusion between the population and the state. Everybody was together and everybody was united. I learned the value of self-sacrifice and martyrdom."



Rezaie has been linked to terrorism. The 1983 bombing of the U.S. Marine barracks in Beirut, Lebanon, by Revolutionary Guard client Hezbollah occurred under his watch. The blast killed 241 Americans. Rezaie is one of several people indicted in Argentina for the 1994 bombing of Jewish and Israeli sites in Buenos Aires. He has denied responsibility for those attacks.



In the Los Angeles Times interview, Rezaie said he sees an opportunity for improving relations with the United States.



"I propose to put together a package of eight or nine topics that the U.S. and Iran would work toward," he told the paper. "What is important is to just start the talks. It can be on drug trafficking, it can be anything, but the idea is just to start some kind of dialogue. If we solve one or two problems, we're on our way."  Watch how the campaign has heated up at the end »



Rezaie is a member of Iran's Expediency Discernment Council, a "council of elders" from many parts of government and society whose job is to reconcile the needs of the state with the rulings of the Council of Guardians, the arbiter of Islamic law in Iran.



Rezaie was raised in a poor family in southern Iran and founded the Manssouroun, a paramilitary force that resisted the reign of the Shah, Khalaji said. That experience led directly to his role in founding the Revolutionary Guard, a force created by revolutionary leader Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomenei to protect against coup attempts by army officers who remained loyal to the Shah. The Revolutionary Guard eventually came to dominate the military.



In 1998, Rezaie's son Ahmad fled Iran and sought political

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Sen. Hillary Clinton's chief presidential campaign strategist is quitting his post amid criticism of his public relations firm's contacts with the Colombian government over a pending free-trade deal, Clinton's campaign announced.



Mark Penn will continue to advise Hillary Clinton's presidential campaign.



Mark Penn and his political consulting firm will continue to advise the New York senator's Democratic presidential bid, but Penn will give up his job as chief strategist, campaign manager Maggie Williams said.



"After the events of the last few days, Mark Penn has asked to give up his role as chief strategist of the Clinton campaign," Williams said.



Clinton did not answer reporters' questions about Penn's exit during a campaign stop in New Mexico on Sunday.



Penn is CEO of public relations giant Burson-Marsteller and is president of Penn, Schoen and Berland, his political consulting firm.



Friday, he acknowledged he had met with the Colombian ambassador to the United States earlier in the week in his role as Burson-Marsteller's chief to discuss the pending U.S.-Colombia trade pact, which Clinton has criticized on the campaign trail.



Penn called the meeting "an error in judgment that will not be repeated," and apologized. That prompted Colombia's government to fire the company Saturday, calling the remarks "a lack of respect to Colombians."



Clinton and top aides were sharply critical of rival Democrat Barack Obama in February when reports indicated that his top economic adviser had suggested to a Canadian official that Obama was not as supportive of changes to the North American Free Trade Agreement as the Illinois senator claimed to be on the campaign trail.



Penn said Friday that Clinton's opposition to the U.S.-Colombia pact, which the Bush administration is trying to push through Congress, "is clear and was not discussed" during his meeting with the ambassador. And Clinton spokesman Mo Elleithee said Penn's meeting was "not in any way done on behalf of the campaign."



But Pennsylvania Gov. Ed Rendell -- a key Clinton backer in his state's April 22 primary -- suggested Sunday that Penn needed to go.



"I think you've got to make it very clear for someone who is a consultant, who you are representing and who you are not representing, and I would hope that Mr. Penn, when he talked to the Colombians, made that clear. And it doesn't sound to me like he did, and that's something the campaign should take into question," Rendell told NBC's "Meet the Press."



Sources in the Clinton campaign said that Penn realized this weekend that he needed to step aside, and that Clinton was disappointed that he had met with the Colombians. E-mail to a friend

***

WASHINGTON (CNN)  -- The swine flu virus that has sparked fear and precautions worldwide appears to be no more dangerous than the regular flu virus that makes its rounds each year, U.S. officials said Monday.



Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano said swine flu is no more danerous than the regular flu virus.



"What the epidemiologists are seeing now with this particular strain of U.N. is that the severity of the disease, the severity of the flu -- how sick you get -- is not stronger than regular seasonal flu," Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano said Monday as the worldwide number of confirmed cases of swine flu -- technically known as 2009 H1N1 virus -- topped 1,080.



The flu has been blamed for 26 deaths: 25 in Mexico and one in the United States, according to the World Health Organization.



Still, Napolitano noted, the seasonal flu results in "hundreds of thousands of hospitalizations" and roughly 35,000 fatalities each year in the United States. There are still concerns that the virus could return in the fall, in the typical flu season, as a stronger strain.



"We are cautiously optimistic that this particular strain will not be more severe than a normal seasonal flu outbreak," Napolitano said.  Watch Napolitano assess the swine flu risk »



Napolitano acknowledged claims by health officials in Mexico, the epicenter of the H1N1 outbreak, who believe their cases have peaked and said, "I have no reason to think that is inaccurate."



The WHO said there were no immediate plans to raise its alert to the highest level, Phase 6. That designation would mean "that we are seeing continued spread of the virus to countries outside of one region," Assistant Director-General Keiji Fukuda said.



"If you are seeing community outbreaks occur in multiple regions of the world, it really tells us if the virus has established itself and that we can expect to see disease in most countries in the world."



In the United States, the CDC on Monday reported confirmed 279 cases across 36 states -- 60 more than were confirmed the day before. Several states, including New York and Massachusetts, confirmed dozens more cases Monday that were not immediately added to the CDC tally.  See where the H1N1 virus has spread across the world »



Earlier, Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal said the CDC "erroneously" doubled the cases in his state. Jindal confirmed his state's total is seven, and the CDC dropped its nationwide count from 286 to 279.



Many of the cases are among children; the median age is 16, said Dr. Richard Besser, acting director of the CDC. The youngest confirmed case is a 3-month-old, he said.



There are also more than 700 probable cases across 44 states, Besser said.



"This likely represents an underestimation of the total number of cases across the country," he said, because not everyone with flu-like symptoms goes to the doctor and gets tested.



The numbers are expected to increase. Dr. Anne Schuchat, the CDC's interim deputy director for public health, said Sunday, "We believe we're just on the upswing here."



But in Mexico, where the first cases were reported, illnesses may have peaked for now.



Mexico City will reopen government offices and restaurants Wednesday, and museums, libraries and churches Thursday as officials cited improvements in the battle against swine flu.



Officials said university and secondary students can return to class Thursday while younger students will wait until May 11.



In another sign of improving conditions with the H1N1 virus, federal officials lowered the nation's health alert level Monday from red, or "high," to orange, or "elevated."



"The measures we have taken, and above all the public's reaction, have led to an improvement," Mexico City Mayor Marcelo Ebrard said at a news conference.



"But I insist that the virus is still present, that we need to remain on alert, and the resumption of activities will be little by little, not all at once."



The Mexican and Chinese government sent chartered flights to each other's countries

***

URUMQI, China (CNN) -- Several hundred people staged a new protest in Urumqi on Tuesday, demanding the release of relatives detained in connection with weekend demonstrations by ethnic Uyghur residents in China's far western Xinjiang region.



Ethnic Uyghur women grab the arm of a policeman as they protest in Urumqi on July 7.



The crowd of 200 to 300 -- mostly women and elderly -- quickly formed as local authorities were taking members of the media on a tour of a neighborhood that was heavily damaged during riots over the weekend, witnesses said.



Riot police quickly moved in to defuse the standoff as the demonstrators shouted the names of family members they wanted released.



The protest is the latest sign that tensions are still simmering in the Xinjiang capital, where violent demonstrations have left 156 people dead and more than 1,000 injured, according to the regional public security department.



In southern China, police have detained 15 suspects in connection with an incident that may have spurred the deadly rioting in Urumqi, state-run media reported.



There is speculation that Sunday's protest, which took place in the predominantly Uyghur-populated Bazaar district, may have been a reaction to ethnic violence in southern China.



The violence took place late last month at a toy factory in Guangdong province, where many migrants, including Uyghurs, have moved in search of work. A massive brawl reportedly broke out between workers of Uyghur and Han nationalities. Two Uyghurs reportedly died.



The unrest in Urumqi had been brought under control with a massive presence of soldiers and anti-riot squads, the government said Tuesday. Curfews were in force in major districts of the capital.



At least 1,434 suspects had been detained by Tuesday morning, the Xinhua news agency reported, citing government officials.



"The police have started interrogations with the suspects," said Li Yi, a spokesman for the Communist Party in Xinjiang. Those convicted would be dealt with severely, he said.  Watch more on violence in Xinjiang »



In a rare public display of dissatisfaction, thousands of Uyghurs -- many of whom feel they are treated as second-class citizens by the majority Han Chinese -- took to the streets Sunday chanting and screaming, prompting a police lockdown of the city.



State-run media reported that protesters attacked passersby, burned public buses and blocked traffic. The report did not say how many people took part or what their grievances were.



But a witness in Urumqi told CNN that, soon after the protest started about 5 p.m., hundreds of demonstrators "grew into easily over 1,000 -- men, women and children, all ethnic Uyghurs -- screaming and chanting."



Police arrived quickly and tried to control the swelling crowd by erecting barriers in the street, but "people pushed them over," the witness said. "They were throwing rocks at passing cars and buses." As the violence escalated, hundreds of riot police arrived, the witness said.



"They used tear gas and fire hoses to disperse the crowd. I saw fire trucks, ambulances, armed personnel carriers and what looked like tanks. I heard random gunshots." iReport.com: Are you there? Share photos, video, commentary



Late Sunday, the witness said, Urumqi was in a lockdown, with hundreds of People's Liberation Army soldiers in the streets. He reported seeing riot police chasing protesters into alleys and rounding up many of them.



Xinjiang is home to many Uyghurs. China's constitution guarantees ethnic minorities equal rights and limited autonomy. However, ethnic tensions run deep. Minority groups such as the Uyghurs complain that they are subjected to discrimination by the majority Han.  See a map of Xinjiang »



Tensions also ran high in Han communities in the capital on Tuesday as neighbors organized to protect themselves and their businesses. Groups of men carrying pipes, sticks and cleavers milled in front of shops before police dispersed them.



"The Uyghurs will attack any Han they see," one man said.



The World Uyghur Congress, a dissident Uyghur group based in Munich, Germany, condemned the crackdown on what it described in a written statement as Sunday's "peaceful protest"

***

(CNN) -- Some Democrats say they fear their party's method of picking a nominee might turn undemocratic as neither presidential candidate is likely to gather the delegates needed for the nomination.



The Democrats' superdelegate system is supposed to avoid turmoil at the party's conventions.



Sens. Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama are running neck and neck toward the party's August convention in Denver, Colorado. Most projections show neither getting the necessary 2,025 delegates in the remaining nominating contests before then.



Party rules call for the votes of superdelegates -- 800 or so party officers, elected officials and activists -- to tip the balance. The party instituted the system to avoid the turmoil that a deadlocked race would create at a convention.



But even some superdelegates are questioning the system, as the party heads toward the conclusion of a race in which they might determine the outcome.



"It's not the most democratic way of doing things," said Maine superdelegate Sam Spencer.  Watch the scenario for a "civil war" in the Democratic Party »



At least two organizations have launched petition drives to reflect how the vote went in primaries and caucuses.



MoveOn.org, which has endorsed Obama, is trying to get 200,000 signatures this week and plans to run an ad with its petition in USA Today. And Democracy for America, headed by Democratic National Committee Chairman Howard Dean's brother Jim, said it will deliver signed petitions to all the superdelegates.



While pledged delegates are allocated with the understanding they'll vote the way their state went in its primary or caucus, superdelegates are free to vote however they want. And even if they pledge their support to a candidate, they're free to change at any time.



Clinton already has 234 superdelegates and Obama has 157. But Obama has a sizable lead in pledged delegates, 1,096 to 977, and is on a roll, having won all eight nominating contests since Super Tuesday.  See which states pledged delegates come from »



If the superdelegates were to tip the balance against the popular vote, the turmoil would last long beyond the convention, longtime Democratic Party strategist Tad Devine said.



"If a perception develops that somehow this decision has been made not by voters participating in primaries or caucuses, but by politicians in some mythical backroom, I think that the public could react strongly against that," Devine said.



"The problem is [if] people perceive that voters have not made the decision -- instead, insiders have made the decision -- then all of these new people who are being attracted to the process, particularly the young people who are voting for the first time, will feel disenfranchised or in some way alienated," he said.



Superdelegates were established in 1982 to bring more moderate Democrats back to conventions, where their attendance had been dropping since the 1950s, and to relect the party's mainstream more accurately.



"[Superdelegates] are the keepers of the faith," said former San Francisco, California, Mayor Willie Brown. "You have superdelegates because this is the Democratic Party. You don't want the bleed-over from the Green Party, the independents and others in deciding who your nominee will be."



Devine was part of the first campaign to benefit from the roles of superdelegates -- that of former Vice President Walter Mondale in 1984.



Mondale's 1984 campaign went into the party convention with too few delegates to secure the nomination against the campaigns of former Sen. Gary Hart and Jesse Jackson. Mondale had received more votes, but Hart had won more states.



Mondale was able to line up the superdelegates going into the convention and avoid a fight on the convention floor.



Each campaign actively is trying to encourage the unpledged delegates to pledge to their side.



Jason Rae, a 21-year-old Wisconsin superdelegate, said he's gotten calls from former President Clinton and former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright from Hillary Clinton's camp, and Obama's wife, Michelle, visited with him during a campaign stop Tuesday in Wisconsin.



Rae said he hasn't yet decided how he'll vote in Wisconsin's primary on Tuesday.



Crystal Strait, a

***

BEIJING, China (CNN) -- A third baby has died and at least 6,200 children have fallen ill after drinking formula tainted with the same chemical involved in a massive pet food recall last year, Chinese officials said Wednesday.



China's largest producer of milk, Mengniu Dairy Group, announced the recall of three batches of formula made in January after tests showed they were contaminated with melamine, said Li Changjiang, China's director of quarantine and inspection.



Though it should not be added to food ingredients, suppliers in China sometimes put it in food to make a product appear to be protein rich. Melamine has nitrogen, and standard tests for protein in bulk food ingredients measure levels of nitrogen.



More than 1,300 infants are hospitalized with illnesses including malnutrition, kidney stones and acute renal failure.



On Monday two brothers were arrested who Chinese officials say supplied three tons of milk each day to the Sanlu Group, which makes baby formula.  Watch crowds of moms get their babies tested »



They could face death if convicted, according to state-run newspaper China Daily. The siblings' raw milk had been watered down and a chemical added to fool quality checks, the newspaper said. Watch who has been arrested »



Sanlu Group, one of China's leading dairy producers, has recalled more than 8,200 tons of the tainted formula following reports of sickened babies, news agency Xinhua reported. The manufactured also sealed off more than 2,100 tons of contaminated product, and another 700 tons still need to be recalled, according to Xinhua. Watch angry parents demand answers at Sanlu »



Investigators said the brothers confessed to watering down the raw milk and mixing in tripolycyanamide, also known as melamine. The paper reported the siblings did it to recover losses suffered when the factory rejected earlier milk shipments, and that 19 other people have been detained for questioning.



Recalls of the products by the Yashili and Suokang companies have been made, and of China's 175 baby milk powder production companies, 66 have already stopped production, Li said. Investigators are testing samples at the remaining factories.  Learn more about the chemical melamine »



China's Xinhua news agency reported that worried parents started lining up at 5 a.m. Wednesday to see doctors at Renmin Hospital in Shijiazhuang, the capital of the northern Hebei Province.



Wang Lifang said she went to the hospital after medics at her local hospital 28 miles (45 kilometers) away in Xingtang County found problems with her two-month-old daughter.



"The county hospital found my daughter has kidney stones that are smaller than 4mm [less than a fifth of an inch]," the farmer in her 30s told Xinhua.



"My daughter is so young that the doctors worry the stones might not be washed out themselves so they told me to go to the provincial hospital."



The report said the girl had drunk a little water.



"Doctors said I better not feed her powdered milk," Xinhua quoted a "tearful" Wang as saying.



"In the past few days, I fed her fresh milk bought from a neighbor who raises a cow but once I left home I did not know what to do."



Other parents told Xinhua they wanted their children scanned for kidney stones as a precaution.



Peng Jing, a mother in her 20s, said her 2-month-old son had drunk about two small bags of Sanlu powdered milk.



"He seems OK, but we want to be 100 percent sure he is healthy so we came to have the tests," she told Xinhua at Renmin Hospital.



The food safety scandal prompted China agricultural officials to start a nationwide inspection of its dairy industry.



Health experts say ingesting melamine can lead to kidney stones, urinary tract ulcers, and eye and skin irritation.



The chemical is commonly used in coatings and laminates, wood adhesives, fabric coatings, ceiling tiles and flame retardants.



Chinese investigators have found melamine in nearly 70 milk products from more than 20 companies, Li said Wednesday. Products made by Sanlu had the highest concentration of the chemical.



It is not the first time Sanlu has been connected

***

WASHINGTON (CNN)  -- The commander of a U.S. Navy submarine that collided with another Navy ship last month has been relieved of duty, according to a U.S. Navy statement issued Tuesday.



The submarine USS Hartford and amphibious ship USS New Orleans are shown in Navy photos.



U.S. Navy Cmdr. Ryan Brookhart was relieved by his superior officer, who cited a loss of confidence in his ability to command, according to the statement.



While the investigation into the collision is still ongoing, Brookhart's commander, Rear Adm. Michael J. Connor, decided there was enough evidence to remove him from his leadership position.



Brookhart has been reassigned to administrative duty in Bahrain.



Cmdr. Chris Harkins, deputy commander of Submarine Squadron Eight, based in Norfolk, Virginia, has taken over as commander of the USS Hartford, according to Navy officials.



Brookhart was in command of the Hartford, a nuclear-powered submarine, when it collided with the USS New Orleans (LPD 18) on March 20 in the Strait of Hormuz.



Fifteen sailors aboard the Hartford were slightly hurt in the incident, and both vessels suffered extensive damage, according to U.S. Navy officials.



The submarine also punched a hole in the fuel tank of the New Orleans, causing thousands of gallons of fuel to pour from the ship.



When the incident occurred, both vessels were headed to ports in the Persian Gulf to stock up on provisions and allow for some recreation, Navy officials said.



There were about 200 sailors in the sub and 1,000 sailors and Marines aboard the ship.



The Strait of Hormuz is between the United Arab Emirates and Iran, linking the Gulf of Oman and the Persian Gulf. It is heavily used by oil tankers.



Both vessels are on regularly scheduled deployments to the U.S. Navy Central Command area of responsibility and conduct Maritime Security Operations.

***

Jerusalem (CNN) -- Palestinians hurled rocks and burned tires in several neighborhoods in East Jerusalem Tuesday to protest the reopening of a landmark synagogue after more than 60 years.





Officers dispersed the crowd by firing stun grenades in one area, and village elders helped end the riots in another, said police spokesman Mickey Rosenfeld.





At least seven people in the Mount of Olives neighborhood were wounded when police fired rubber bullets.





In all, 91 people were wounded in the clashes, the Palestinian Red Crescent Society said.





About 3,000 officers were deployed in the city after the militant group Hamas declared Tuesday a "Day of Rage."





The group was protesting the reopening of the Hurva synagogue on Monday. However, rumors swirled that right-wing groups were planning to ascend the Temple Mount, where al-Aqsa Mosque is located.





Senior Hamas leader Khaled Meshaal, in a speech Monday in Syria, called on Palestinians to take to the street to protect Jerusalem and its Islamic and Christian shrines. The Palestinian Authority suggested Israel was "preventing citizens from reaching the Old City ... to pray in al-Aqsa Mosque, as part of increasing provocative policies violating international law and human rights."





"Pay no attention to malicious slander," said Rabbi Yona Metzger, chief rabbi of Israel, told the Jewish news agency JTA on Monday. "All we are doing is resurrecting the Hurva that was destroyed 60 years ago. All the rumors that suggest we will later march on Temple Mount are just that -- rumors."





However, the incident is only the latest to ratchet up tensions between Israelis and Palestinians. The synagogue is located in the Jewish Quarter of Jerusalem's Old City. The Old City also includes East Jerusalem, seen as Palestinians as the capital of their future state.





Israel claims sovereignty over all of Jerusalem since it took over East Jerusalem and the West Bank in 1967 in the Six-Day war. The rededication has underlined Palestinian concerns that Israel is attempting to bring more Jews into East Jerusalem and drive Palestinians out, particularly as it comes on the heels of an Israeli announcement last week that 1,600 more housing units would be built in the Ramat Shlomo neighborhood of East Jerusalem. The synagogue rededication, however, had been planned for months in advance, according to organizers.





In a statement Tuesday, the Palestinian Center for Human Rights said it "strongly condemns recent measures taken by Israel in East Jerusalem, the latest of which has been the inauguration of a synagogue in the old city. PCHR holds Israel responsible for the escalation of the situation in the occupied Palestinian territory."





Israeli Defense Minister Ehud Barak, meeting in Madrid, Spain, with the Spanish minister of defense, said, "Israel will not allow extremists to dictate and force political arrangements.





"I have said this times before and I repeat: Israel is strong ... and must reach political arrangements out of this position," Barak said. "Lack of political negotiations will strengthen and encourage the extremists of both sides and the riots in Jerusalem today proves so. A political arrangement will only be achieved by direct negotiations."





Construction on the synagogue began in 1700, but halted, according to the Web site of Sacred Destinations, which describes itself as an educational and travel resource. It was restarted in 1836 and the synagogue was completed in 1856. The synagogue was destroyed by the Jordanian Arab Legion in 1948. Conservation and investigation of the ruins began in 1977.





Meshaal also warned the international community that Israel is "playing with fire" that could lead to a regional blowup.





Speaking to reporters Monday, U.S. State Department spokesman P.J. Crowley said there were American concerns "about the tensions regarding the rededication of a synagogue in the Jewish quarter of the Old City. And we are urging all parties to act responsibly and do whatever is necessary to remain calm."





At a memorial service Tuesday for late Israeli prime ministers and presidents, President Shimon Peres said: "We cannot afford to unravel the delicate fabric of friendship with the United States.





"Today, we are also at a decisive moment and we must decide without the determination of

***

(CNN) -- A 13-year-old Minnesota boy who has cancer has resumed chemotherapy treatments and is not responding well, a family spokesman said Friday.



Doctors say Daniel Hauser's lymphoma responded well to a first round of chemotherapy in February.



Danny Hauser started a second round of chemotherapy treatment this week, Jim Navarro said in a statement on the family's Web site, dannyhauser.com.



"The doctor changed the number of chemotherapy drugs in the protocol submitted to the court. Danny is not tolerating the drugs well and has been vomiting all day. He is understandably angry and depressed about being forced to go through the ravages of chemotherapy again."



Daniel underwent his first round of chemotherapy in February, a month after he was diagnosed with Hodgkin's lymphoma. But his parents were concerned about the treatment's side effects, which typically include nausea, and decided to end the chemotherapy regimen and pursue holistic treatments instead.



When Daniel's oncologist learned of the decision to reject standard treatment, which doctors say is associated with a cure rate of as high as 90 percent, he asked a court to intervene to ensure the teen got chemotherapy.



Doctors say that, without it, the disease would likely prove fatal.



But last week, before the court could act, Colleen Hauser packed up her son and flew with him to Southern California, from where they were planning to continue to Mexico to seek alternative alternative medical treatment. She said he would have run on his own had she not helped him flee.



She changed her mind before crossing the border and returned this week with Daniel to Minnesota, where the family agreed to comply with whatever treatment the court ordered.



A medical examination revealed that the boy's tumor had grown since he was diagnosed and the boy's doctor recommended he resume chemotherapy.



After examining the boy on Monday, Dr. Michael Richards estimated the tumor's size at 5.3 inches by 5.1 inches by 6.3 inches, and said it was "protruding outside the chest wall."



He said initiation this week of standard chemotherapy treatment was "imperative."



Richards recommended at least another five cycles of chemotherapy followed by radiation, and added that the "goal will be to include alternative therapies in which the family is interested, as long as there is not data to suggest that a particular danger exists with any alternative medicine."



District Court Judge John Rodenberg originally took custody of the boy away from his parents, but returned him to his family on the condition that they comply with the recommendations of the cancer specialist.



Hodgkin's lymphoma is a cancer that affects the lymphatic system, which is part of the immune system. As the disease progresses, it compromises a body's ability to fight infection.



CNN's Aaron Cooper contributed to this story.

***

Islamabad, Pakistan (CNN) -- The death toll from Friday's attacks on a religious minority in Lahore has risen to 98, officials said Saturday.





The strikes with bombs and firearms took place at two mosques in Lahore belonging to the Ahmadi religious group, police and rescue officials said.





At the Baitul Noor place of worship in the Model Town region, two attackers on motorbikes fired at the entrance of the building and tossed hand grenades, a rescue official told CNN. Police said one of the attackers was critically injured. The other, clad in a suicide jacket, was detained.





At a mosque in the Garhi Shahu neighborhood, one witness told CNN he saw two attackers armed with AK-47s, and another witness said he saw at least four gunmen. Sajjad Bhutta, the senior official, said the heads of three suicide bombers were discovered there.





Bhutta said more than 70 people were injured in the violence.





Ahmadis regard themselves as Muslim. But the government says they aren't, and many Muslim extremists have targeted them. Sunni and Shiite Muslims do not regard followers of the religion as Muslims because they do not regard Mohammed as the last prophet sent by God.





The Human Rights Commission of Pakistan, a non-governmental organization, deplored the attacks and said it has warned the Punjab provincial government about threats to the Ahmadi community center in Model Town for more than a year. Lahore is the capital of Punjab province.





.





"An HRCP delegation had held meetings with Chief Minister Punjab Shehbaz Sharif to apprise him of the situation and had demanded enhanced security measures to protect the vulnerable minority and its worship places. HRCP is of the view that though the Punjab government apparently took some steps to bolster the security ... they were not enough to face the well-coordinated and well-planned terrorist attack as witnessed on Friday," it said.





It urged the government "to provide foolproof security and protection to the Ahmadi community."





The movement was founded in 1889. Its followers believe that Mirza Ghulam Ahmad (1835-1908) was sent by God as a prophet "to end religious wars, condemn bloodshed and reinstitute morality, justice and peace," the worldwide Ahmadi group says.





The group, which is thought to number between 3 million and 4 million people in the country, endures "the most severe legal restrictions and officially sanctioned discrimination" among Pakistan's religious minorities, according to the U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom.





The religious freedom commission, an independent, bipartisan U.S. government body, said in its latest annual report that "Ahmadis may not call their places of worship 'mosques,' worship in non-Ahmadi mosques or public prayer rooms which are otherwise open to all Muslims, perform the Muslim call to prayer, use the traditional Islamic greeting in public, publicly quote from the Koran, or display the basic affirmation of the Muslim faith."





The agency says it's illegal for the group to preach publicly, pursue converts or pass out religious material, and adherents are restricted from holding public conferences and traveling to Saudi Arabia for the hajj pilgrimage.





While the greatest number of its followers are in Pakistan and India, it has a presence in many European countries, such as Britain, where the religion's fifth and current spiritual head, Mirza Masroor Ahmad, resides.

***

HARARE, Zimbabwe (CNN) -- A power-sharing deal has been reached between Zimbabwean President Robert Mugabe and the opposition Movement for Democratic Change, South African President Thabo Mbeki said.



Zimbabwe President Robert Mugabe, left, and opposition leader Morgan Tsvangirai.



Mbeki, who mediated the talks in Harare for the Southern African Development Community, said the deal would be signed Monday but did not give details of the agreement.



Zimbabwe has had no Cabinet since the March presidential election that started the impasse.



Opposition lawmakers booed and heckled Mugabe when he spoke at the opening of the country's parliament August 26.



MDC leader Morgan Tsvangirai won the most votes in that election, but not enough to avoid a runoff, according to the government's official count.



He withdrew from the June 27 runoff days before the vote, saying Mugabe's supporters had waged a campaign of violence and intimidation against opposition supporters.



The main sticking point in the talks had been how much power Mugabe would retain.



Tsvangirai had said he would sign a deal only if Mugabe gave up some power and his presidency became a ceremonial position.



United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon welcomed the agreement, according to a statement released by his spokesperson, and "hopes that this agreement will pave the way for a durable peace and recovery in the country and contribute to rapid improvement in the welfare and human rights of the people of Zimbabwe."



The country is also reeling from hyper-inflation. In August, the country's Central Statistical Office said inflation was at 11.2 million percent, the highest in the world.



Analysts have said the Zimbabwean government's official inflation rate figures are conservative.



One of Zimbabwe's leading banks, Kingdom Bank, said the country's inflation rate was more than 20 million percent.



The economic crisis has destroyed Zimbabwe's currency and made it difficult for Zimbabweans to buy basic commodities, electricity, fuel and medicines.

***

TEHRAN, Iran (CNN) -- A newspaper aligned with Iranian reformist Mehdi Karrubi, who recently made headlines for claims that post-election detainees in Iran were raped behind bars, was shut down for running "unlawful" material, state-run media reported Monday.



Mehdi Karrubi says an "impartial committee" is needed to investigate alleged mistreatment of detainees.



An investigating judge said the popular newspaper, Etemad-e Melli, was ordered closed for what has been described as "publishing unlawful and criminal material," state-run Press TV reported.



Protesters outside the newspaper offices clashed with police Monday, the network also reported.



On Sunday Masih Alinejad, a reporter and columnist with the paper, told CNN that officers from Iran's judiciary confronted employees of Etemad-e Melli after hours as they were getting the Monday's edition to print.



She and Karrubi's son, Hossein, said the newspaper had planned to run a firm response from Karrubi to his opponents, who have dismissed the allegations of detainee rapes.



The officials told the employees that they "were not allowed to come to the newspaper tomorrow," Alinejad, who is temporarily in the United States for a reporting assignment, told CNN.



In a statement on Saham News, the official Web site of his father's party, Etemad-e Melli, or the National Trust party, Hossein Karrubi said that the paper was forced to temporarily shut down.



He cited the pending publication of his father's response to "the insults" recently hurled at him for the shutdown.



Early Monday, Etemad-e Melli's Web site was still up with a report about a ban on the newspaper.



It was not printed, and its offices were closed, Alinejad said.



Hardliners have criticized Karrubi for openly describing the mistreatment of detainees arrested in the aftermath of the Islamic republic's disputed June 12 election and calling for an investigation into prison conditions.



Karrubi and fellow reformist candidate Mir Hossein Moussavi ran against hardline President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, who was declared the overwhelming winner and was recently sworn in for his second term.



The treatment of detainees at Iran's prisons has increasingly become a high-profile issue, with human-rights groups accusing guards of conducting harsh interrogations, beatings, sleep deprivation, and threats of torture to coerce false confessions.



In an August 8 posting on the Etemad-e Melli party's Web site, Karrubi said he had heard descriptions of torture and violence that made his "body shake."



"Some of the former detainees have told of such brutal and violent, repeated rapes of the young women [in detention] that have caused irreparable damage to their reproductive systems," Karrubi said. "Others have raped our detained young men with such brutality that they [the victims] have been afflicted by depression and are no longer speaking with anyone and refuse to leave the dark corners of their houses."



He added that an investigation would "teach a lesson to the thugs and criminals in the future and prevent the smearing of the reputation of the Islamic Republic."



Iran's influential parliament speaker dismissed the allegations, calling them "sheer lies," state-run media reported last week.



Ali Larijani said a special panel of Iran's parliament, or Majlis, conducted a "precise and comprehensive inquiry" into the treatment at Tehran's Evin and Kahrizak prisons, and found "no cases of rape or sexual abuse," Press TV reported.



He challenged Karrubi to "present evidence of such outrages" for the Majlis to investigate, according to Press TV.



Earlier Sunday, Iran's official Islamic Republic News Agency reported that Karrubi had backed off the statements, quoting him as saying, "I did not say that such things have certainly occurred, rather I said that there are rumors of such ugliness having taken place and I reiterated that God willing it is a lie and nothing but rumors."



Alinejad questioned the legitimacy of the report, saying Karrubi's real response would have been in Monday's edition of Etemad-e Melli.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- It is not often that football players are actively encouraged to play dirty -- unless of course they are taking part in a unique variant of the game called "Swamp Soccer" when it is virtually unavoidable.



The competition is fierce in the 2009 Swamp Soccer World Championship held in Scotland



Originating from the bogs of Finland, the game was started by cross-country skiers who used the football matches in knee-deep mud to strengthen their leg muscles.  The first tournament took place in 1997 with 13 teams, but now annual events take place in Sweden, Iceland, Russia and Brazil which can often feature over 200 teams.  What do you think of Swamp Soccer? Do you prefer Beach Football of another form of the game? Let us know your thoughts on the 'Sound off' box below.



Glasgow Rangers fan Stewart Miller imported the concept to the United Kingdom after a chance meeting with founder Jyrki Vaananen while on a business trip to Iceland.



Miller launched the first UK tournament in 2005 and now teams travel from all over the globe to the Scottish village of Strachur to try and become the annual Swamp Soccer World Champions.  Watch the action from the bog ».



"We had teams coming from as far afield as Australia and New Zealand to take part in the tournament this year so there is an international flavor to the event," Miller told CNN.



"There is a huge appetite to try out new things and I think that's why Swamp Soccer is able to capture the imagination of people.



"The basic rules of football also apply to Swamp Soccer with the exception that matches are played in thick mud with six players on an oversized five-a-side pitch.



"It's probably one of the only sports in the world where the worse the conditions are the better the sporting spectacle!"



There is no offside in Swamp Soccer while kick-offs, throw-ins, corner kicks, free kicks and penalties are taken by using the hands to drop the ball onto a chosen foot.



Teams are also allowed to make unlimited substitutions although no shoe changing is allowed for the match duration.



Miller believes that the oft-used quote that the state of a pitch can bridge the gap between two unevenly match teams is even more applicable with Swamp Soccer.



"You could put the Brazilian national side up against an amateur team and you wouldn't know who would come out on top -- the pitch really does prove to be a leveler in this instance," he said.



"Although professional footballers are precious commodities these days -- I'm not sure we'll see any stars getting caked in mud too soon, most of them are far to pampered for that.



"Nobody's ever been injured seriously playing in the swamp, sometimes somebody's got a cut or two but nothing big -- so maybe when they retire from the game they might be prepared to give it a go."



The imaginatively titled Real Mudrid, Mudchesthair United and Cowdungbeath were unable to make it past the group stages in the 44-team event which was won by FC Full Gunge from Poole in England who retained their title with a 1-0 victory over The Chocolate Men.



This year's Swamp Soccer tournament was held in a village in the Scottish countryside but Miller revealed that he intends to bring the mud game to metropolitan areas.



He added: "The future for Swamp Soccer is in the city and of course I'm certain we'll bring all the mud with us. It will certainly make a great spectacle if set up a swamp in the middle of Glasgow or Edinburgh, so watch this space."  If you are interested in taking part in the 2010 Swamp Soccer World Championships visit the official Web site of the tournament.

***

(CNN) -- A small plane headed from New Jersey to suburban Atlanta crashed onto an interstate shortly after takeoff Tuesday, killing five people, authorities said.





Two men, one woman, two children and a dog aboard the plane died in the crash in Morristown, New Jersey, just after 10 a.m. ET, said Robert Gretz, a senior air safety investigator with the National Transportation Safety Board.





The plane, a six-seater Socata TBM700, was headed from Teterboro, New Jersey, to DeKalb-Peachtree Airport in suburban Atlanta when it crashed onto Interstate 287 about 14 minutes into the flight, Gretz said.





The plane was at about 17,500 feet when "there was some discussion between the pilot and the controller of locations of icing conditions," he said.





He told reporters Monday night the conversation seemed "routine" and was "not a distress call."





Gretz said he did not know whether the conversation concerned a cloud that might contain ice; actual icing on the airplane; or whether the pilot was inquiring where ice might be or reporting it. "I've heard this thirdhand. ... That's something I need to listen to the tapes to know," he said.





Gretz said he was not aware of any icing conditions on the ground at Teterboro that would have required the plane to be deiced.





However, he stressed that the investigation is in its infancy and it is too soon to speculate what might have caused the crash. "It's too early to tell whether it was something mechanical or something the pilot did -- we just don't know," he said.





Preliminary information is that the five were headed to Atlanta for a combination business-leisure trip, Gretz said.





Authorities did not release the names of those who died, pending positive identification by the medical examiner and notification of relatives.





But New York investment banking firm Greenhill & Co. reported that those on board were two of the firm's managing directors, Jeffrey Buckalew, 45, and Rakesh Chawla, 36; Buckalew's wife, Corinne, and their two children, Jackson and Meriwether. Ages for the children were not given.





"The plane belonged to Mr. Buckalew, an experienced pilot whose passion was flying," the company said in a statement. "The firm is in deep mourning over the tragic and untimely death of two of its esteemed colleagues and members of Jeff's family."





No one on the ground was injured, although a pickup truck narrowly missed the plane, Gretz said. The debris field from the crash was spread over about a half-mile, with part of a wing and the plane's tail found in a tree in a residential area, he said. Witnesses reported the plane was in an "uncontrolled spin" before it crashed.





A Federal Aviation Administration radar facility in New York lost radio contact with the plane, and also lost it on radar, FAA spokesman Jim Peters said. The crash site was about 30 miles southwest of the Teterboro airport, Peters said.





Gretz said Monday evening he was not sure how long after the conversation regarding icing that the plane dropped off radar, saying investigators will be determining that.





The plane struck the southbound lanes of I-287, continued through a wooded median and came to rest on the northbound lanes, New Jersey State Police Lt. Stephen Jones said.





Most of the interstate was shut down after the crash, Jones said. One northbound lane and two southbound lanes were open as of Tuesday afternoon, but officials were "still trying to recover both the pieces of the plane and the remains of the victims."





Gretz said Monday night the wreckage recovery was halted about 6 p.m. because of darkness and would resume after Tuesday's morning rush hour, at 9:30 a.m.





The New Jersey Department of Transportation said motorists had two of three travel lanes in each direction available for Monday evening's rush hour.





CNN's Mike Ahlers contributed to this report.

***

TEHRAN, Iran (CNN)  -- Dancing in public is not allowed in Iran, but thousands could hardly contain themselves at a recent presidential campaign rally in the capital city, Tehran.





Supporters hope Zahra Rahnavard will become Iran's future first lady.





On this day, the deafening cheers were not for presidential hopeful Mir Hossein Mousavi, but rather for his wife -- a woman some are calling Iran's Michelle Obama.





The comparisons to the first lady of the United States stem from the role Zahra Rahnavard is playing in her husband's quest for the presidency.





Never in the history of Iranian presidential elections has a candidate put his wife in the forefront of his campaign.





Wherever Mousavi -- a centrist candidate -- goes, Rahnavard is usually nearby.  Watch more about Zahra Rahnavard »





"We look at her and we say, 'we want to be like her in the future, ' " said Shakiba Shakerhosseie, one of 12,000 people who packed into Tehran's indoor Azadi (Freedom) sports stadium to hear Rahnavard speak.





Iran became an Islamic republic in 1979 after the ruling monarchy was overthrown and Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi was forced into exile.





The revolution also ended the ceremonial role of first lady that the last queen, Farah, enjoyed.





At this rally, Rahnavard -- a writer and art professor -- spoke for her husband, who was campaigning elsewhere.





Wearing a floral headscarf and a traditional black chador -- a full-length loose robe that women in Iran wear like a cloak -- Rahnavard called for freedoms she says were lost during President Mahmoud Ahmadijenad's term.





"I hope freedom of speech, freedom of the pen and freedom of thought will not be forgotten," she said.





The crowd, which was clad in Mousavi's trademark color green, cheered wildly. It waved placards with his picture and swayed from side to side, chanting and beating drums.





The women sat on one side; the men on the other.





The overwhelming majority were young voters, many of whom said they attended because of Mousavi's wife, a mother of three.





Iran's population -- estimated at more than 66 million -- has a median age of 27.





"I am really angry here in Iran with the position of women," said Saghar Kouhestani, adding that she supports Mousavi because of his wife.





Mousavi, a former prime minister, is considered a threat to Ahmadinejad, a hard-liner, in the June 12 elections. He is credited for successfully navigating the Iranian economy during a bloody eight-year war with Iraq in the 1980s.





Over the weekend, the Iranian government blocked access to the social networking site Facebook, where Mousavi has a page with more than 5,000 supporters, the semi-official Iranian Labor News Agency (ILNA) said.





Those attempting to visit Facebook received a message in Farsi saying, "Access to this site is not possible."





Political science professor Mohammad Marandi downplays Rahnavard's impact. She may win over reformists and women, he says, but what will win the election is a solution to the floundering economy and a strong performance in the debates.





"If Ahmadinejad does well in the debates, I don't think anyone will be able to defeat him," Marandi said.





But try selling that to Rahnavard's enthusiastic supporters.





"This is the first time after the Revolution we see a lady behind the president," said Farhad Mahmoudi. "And this is why we're so happy because we can have a first lady."

***

London, England (CNN) -- The X-ray machine was Wednesday named the most important scientific invention, in a poll marking the centenary of the Science Museum in London.





Almost 50,000 people voted in the museum or online on a shortlist of ten discoveries and inventions from past centuries in science, technology and engineering.





The X-ray machine, which was discovered in 1895 and revolutionized how doctors detected disease and injury, struck a chord with most voters who singled it out for having made the greatest impact on the past, present and future.





It gathered one fifth of the votes( 9581 votes) followed by the discoveries of penicillin and the DNA double helix structure.





Katie Maggs, associate curator of medicine at the Science Museum, told CNN that she was "pleasantly surprised" with the results, saying she "wondered whether the therapeutic benefit of penicillin might just edge in front -- or perhaps the Apollo 10 capsule as visitors find space travel so inspirational as the ultimate test of technology."





Maggs attributed the X-ray machine's popularity to the wide impact it has on people's everyday life, from the very first steps of a medical diagnosis to security control at airports.





"People are just fascinated with seeing inside their bodies --- even today. It has fundamentally changed the way we see and understand our world -- but particularly our bodies.





"But I also think visitors are aware of the immense and various benefits x-rays have brought -- revolutionizing medical diagnosis and therapy but also astronomy and material and chemical science -- it was x-rays that enabled us to discover the structure of DNA after all!"





X-rays were discovered in November 1895 by German physicist Wilhelm Röntgen.





The Science Museum also houses the Reynolds machine, which was built by a father and son John and Russell Reynolds, months after Röntgen announced his discovery.  They were so inspired by the news that they started constructing the equipment in their own home.

***

CAVITE CITY, Philippines (CNN)  -- At 16, Rhandolf Fajardo reflects on his former life as a gang member.



Efren Peñaflorida's Dynamic Teen Company offers Filipino youth an alternative to gangs through education.



"My gang mates were the most influential thing in my life," says Fajardo, who joined a gang when he was in sixth grade. "We were pressured to join."



He's not alone. In the Philippines, teenage membership in urban gangs has surged to an estimated 130,000 in the past 10 years, according to the Preda Foundation, a local human rights charity.



"I thought I'd get stuck in that situation and that my life would never improve," recalls Fajardo. "I would probably be in jail right now, most likely a drug addict -- if I hadn't met Efren."



Efren Peñaflorida, 28, also was bullied by gangs in high school. Today, he offers Filipino youth an alternative to gang membership through education. Vote now for the CNN Hero of the Year



"Gang members are groomed in the slums as early as 9 years old," says Peñaflorida. "They are all victims of poverty."



For the past 12 years, Peñaflorida and his team of teen volunteers have taught basic reading and writing to children living on the streets. Their main tool: A pushcart classroom.



Stocked with books, pens, tables and chairs, his Dynamic Teen Company recreates a school setting in unconventional locations such as the cemetery and municipal trash dump.



Peñaflorida knows firsthand the adversity faced by these children. Born into a poor family, he lived in a shanty near the city dump site. But he says he refused to allow his circumstances to define his future.



"Instead of being discouraged, I promised myself that I would pursue education," he recalls. "I will strive hard; I will do my best."



In high school, Peñaflorida faced a new set of challenges. Gang activity was rampant; they terrorized the student body, vandalized the school and inducted members by forcing them to rape young girls, he says.



"I felt the social discrimination. I was afraid to walk down the street."



Peñaflorida remembers standing up to a gang leader, refusing to join his gang. That confrontation proved fateful. At 16, he and his friends "got the idea to divert teenagers like us to be productive," he says.



He created the Dynamic Teen Company to offer his classmates an outlet to lift up themselves and their community. For Peñaflorida, that meant returning to the slums of his childhood to give kids the education he felt they deserved.



"They need education to be successful in life. It's just giving them what others gave to me," he says.



Today, children ranging from ages 2 to 14 flock to the pushcart every Saturday to learn reading, writing, arithmetic and English from Peñaflorida and his trained teen volunteers.  Watch Peñaflorida and his group in action with their push cart classroom »



"Our volunteers serve as an inspiration to other children," he says.



The group also runs a hygiene clinic, where children can get a bath and learn how to brush their teeth.



Since 1997, an estimated 10,000 members have helped teach more than 1,500 children living in the slums. The organization supports its efforts by making and selling crafts and collecting items to recycle.  Take a look at the slums where Peñaflorida and his group spend their Saturdays »



Through his group, Peñaflorida has successfully mentored former gang members, addicts and dropouts, seeing potential where others see problems.



"Before, I really didn't care for my life," says Michael Advincula, who started doing drugs when he was 7. "But then Efren patiently dug me from where I was buried. It was Efren who pushed me to get my life together."  Watch Advincula describe how he met Peñaflorida in the slums »



Today, Advincula is a senior in high school and one of the group's volunteers.



Peñaflorida hopes to expand the pushcart to other areas

***

(CNN) -- The head of JetBlue is apologizing for a "confluence of events" that left a plane filled with passengers stranded on the tarmac at Bradley International Airport near Hartford, Connecticut, over the weekend.





Chief Operating Officer Rob Maruster said in a video posted on the company's blog and its YouTube Channel that the airline had six flights divert to Hartford during the freak weekend snowstorm "due to various runway, congestion and other operational issues at Newark and JFK Airports" and that the airline "did not deplane those aircraft in our target time allotted."





One of those flights, JetBlue 504 from Fort Lauderdale spent nearly eight hours stranded on the tarmac before passengers were allowed to deplane.





"At no point in this weekend was safety ever compromised," Maruster said, stressing that safety was the airline's number one concern.





"But let's face it, you count on us at JetBlue for a lot more -- and we promise a lot more -- and we know we let some of you down over the course of this weekend and for that we are truly sorry."





Maruster said the airline intends to "fully participate with the Department of Transportation and cooperating with their investigation into events over the weekend, and we're also going to conduct an internal evaluation so that we can learn from this event because at the end of the day, you deserve better -- and we expect better from our crewmembers and our operation."





"We can only earn your loyalty and trust one flight at a time and we ask you to give us a second chance."





JetBlue Flight 504 departed Fort Lauderdale at 10:07 a.m. ET Saturday -- 32 minutes late.





The flight made it to Newark -- just not to the runway, thanks to the weather before it was diverted to Hartford. It landed at 1:07 p.m.





What came next was an eight-hour ordeal for passengers -- and crew -- as the plane sat stuck on the tarmac with little food or water.





"I got a problem here on the airplane. I'm going to need to have the cops onboard," a flight crew member told the tower in a conversation posted on LiveATC.net, a website that monitors air traffic control conversations. "I need some air stairs brought over here and the cops brought onboard the airplane."





Passenger Roseann Kozma explained the situation in a phone interview with CNN affiliate WTIC-TV from the plane.





"A couple passengers are fighting and there's a baby on here that's been crying the whole time," she said.





"We cannot go to the bathrooms anymore. There's no running water," said Todd Bailey, another passenger. "They tell us that we're going to be going in soon, going in soon, going in soon -- and it just never happens."





Adding to the frustration and tension were passengers with medical conditions.





"I have a paraplegic that needs to come off," the pilot said. "I have a diabetic here that's got an issue ... I've just got to get some help."





But the plane was still not at a gate, further frustrating the pilot.





"Look, you know, we can't seem to get any help from our own company," the pilot told the tower. "I apologize for this, but if there is any way you can get a tug and a tow bar out here to us and get us towed somewhere to a gate or something. I don't care, take us anywhere."





The pilot, though frustrated, offered thanks to Bradley International officials.





"Listen, I just want to put in my two cents worth in for whatever it worth. Thank you very much," he said. "It's Capt. Thompson over here on (Flight) 504 ... I think we've got more help from you guys than our own people."





The passengers broke into applause when the door finally opened, saying "Let us out! Let us out! Let us out!"





Passengers deplaned around 9 p.m., according to

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Heather Mills presented "less than candid" testimony about her life with former Beatle Paul McCartney during her divorce case and made more money during their marriage than before, according to a ruling released Tuesday.



McCartney's lawyer Fiona Shackleton, left, pictured after it is alleged Mills threw water over her.



Mills represented herself during the proceedings and was a "less than impressive witness" on her own behalf, Judge Hugh Bennett wrote in awarding her £24.3 million ($48.6 million) -- far less than the £125 million she had sought from McCartney in the dissolution of their four-year marriage.



"Having given in her favor every allowance for the enormous strain she must have been under and in conducting her own case, I am driven to the conclusion that much of her evidence, both written and oral, was not just inconsistent and inaccurate but also less than candid," Bennett wrote.



Mills emerged from the court Monday angry about the judge's treatment of her. She said the judge and attorneys acted like they were part of a "club." Blog: Did Mills pour water on McCartney's lawyer?



A summary of Bennett's decision was released Monday, but Mills had sought to keep the full ruling under wraps. Britain's Court of Appeals ruled against her Tuesday, and her lawyer, David Rosen, said she accepted the decision.  See a list of expensive celebrity divorces »



"She as a mother has strived to protect her child and felt there were certain issues and matters in the judgment which affected that," Rosen said.



Mills opposed the full ruling's publication because it contained private details about her and her 4-year-old daughter with McCartney, Beatrice.  Watch Mills react to Monday's decision »



Bennett had good things to say about Mills in his judgment, commending her strength in the face of disability. Mills lost her left leg below the knee in a 1993 traffic accident.



But he discounted many of the arguments the former model made about her personal wealth before and after her 2002 marriage to McCartney. He ruled that Mills earned far less before marriage than she claimed, and far more while married -- and at several points in his decision, he wrote that Mills' ideas about their marriage were "make-belief."



"I find that, far from the husband dictating to and restricting the wife's career and charitable activities, he did the exact opposite," Bennett wrote. McCartney, meanwhile, presented balanced evidence and was a consistent witness, he wrote.



"He expressed himself moderately though at times with justifiable irritation, if not anger," the judge wrote in a glimpse of the emotions aired behind closed doors. Read the full ruling (.pdf file -- Adobe Acrobat required)



Bennett found Mills failed to produce financial records to back up statements about money she claimed to have in the bank before marriage, which she said amounted to more than £2 million. In one instance, the judge pointed out McCartney's company loaned Mills money to buy a home in Hove, England -- money that she would not have needed had she had such an amount in the bank.



And Bennett found that Mills' income actually improved during the marriage. In one year, she earned £1 million ($2 million) from a single modeling contract, he wrote. And he quoted Mills' 2002 book, "A Single Step," in which she wrote that her charity work and public speaking roles had expanded "to such an extent that it has left little time for anything else."



"She is a kindly person and is devoted to her charitable causes," the judge wrote. "She has conducted her own case before me with a steely, yet courteous, determination."



The couple met in 1999, a year after the death of McCartney's wife of 30 years, Linda. The judge said McCartney continued to grieve for his late wife well into his marriage with Mills -- and he suggested Mills misrepresented her case because she had been star-struck.



"The wife for her

***

(CNN) -- Drew Peterson, who was arrested this week in the death of his third wife, joked with the media about his jail jumpsuit and chewed gum throughout his first court appearance Friday.



A judge delayed Drew Peterson's arraignment until May 18 because his lawyers couldn't attend Friday's hearing.



The 55-year-old former police officer flashed a broad smile and engaged in banter during the 10-yard walk to the courthouse.



Wearing an inmate uniform -- a bright-red short-sleeved shirt and pants, white socks and sandals -- Peterson had his hands and feet shackled as he arrived at the courtroom.



Asked how he was, he responded, "three squares a day and a spiffy outfit." He then held up the chains and said, "and I got the bling. Can't complain."



Peterson, who authorities call the prime suspect in the disappearance of his fourth wife, Stacy Peterson, was indicted on murder charges related to the death of his third wife, Kathleen Savio, the Illinois state attorney's office said.  Watch a shackled Peterson go to jail »



Peterson appeared in court Friday, but a judge delayed his arraignment until May 18.



Judge Richard Schoenstedt ordered the delay after Will County State's Attorney Jim Glasgow told him that Peterson's primary lawyer, Joel Brodsky, had asked for it because neither he nor Peterson's other attorney could attend Friday's hearing.



Peterson, chewing gum throughout the proceedings and speaking in a clear voice, told Schoenstedt that he knew both of his lawyers were out of town and that he had no objection to the delay.



Glasgow, who has said he will prosecute the case personally, said Brodsky told him that he expects to ask the judge for a reduction in Peterson's $20 million bail during the May 18 arraignment.



Illinois State Police said Peterson was taken into custody about 5:30 p.m. Thursday after a traffic stop near his home.



Police had staked out his home all day, police Capt. Carl Dobrich said, but waited for Peterson to leave before arresting him out of concern for his three young children, who were in the house.



Peterson, through his attorney, denied any wrongdoing in either case.



Glasgow said he believes that the case is strong.



"This is an extremely grave and serious matter, and it is reflected in the bond," Glasgow said.



Brodsky told CNN's Larry King that he thought the bail was excessive and would seek a more "reasonable" amount, noting that it was the most expensive bail he'd seen in 10 years.  Watch Peterson's attorney address his client's arrest »



Charles B. Pelkie, a spokesman for Glasgow, said a grand jury indicted Peterson in the murder of Savio, whose death had once been ruled an accidental drowning.



But Brodsky said in a statement that prosecutors won't be able to prove their case, because "he didn't do it."



"There is no evidence that links Drew Peterson to the death of Kathleen Savio or anyone else for that matter," Brodsky said. "Drew did not harm Kathleen; he has said so from Day One. We're obviously disappointed a grand jury indicted him. But an indictment does not mean guilt."



Pelkie said the grand jury continues to meet and is studying the possibility of charges in Stacy Peterson's disappearance.  Watch family members react to the arrest »



After Stacy Peterson went missing in October 2007, media and police scrutiny of Peterson revealed that Savio had died mysteriously during a nasty divorce a few years earlier.



Savio died just before the division of marital assets was finalized, making Drew Peterson the sole beneficiary.



Savio was found in the dry bathtub of her home. At the time, the death was ruled an accidental drowning. But her family continued to insist that Savio died as a result of foul play.



The investigation into Stacy Peterson's disappearance brought renewed interest in Savio's death. Authorities exhumed Savio's body, further tests were conducted, and her death was been ruled a "homicide staged to look like an accident."

***

(CNN) -- An Alaska judge has denied Bristol Palin's request that her court fight with ex-boyfriend Levi Johnston over custody of their son be kept private to avoid a "media circus."



The daughter of former Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin is seeking full custody of 1-year-old Tripp, contending that Johnston is too immature to be a responsible father and that his mother's felony drug conviction makes her a danger to the child.



Bristol Palin filed for full custody in November, but Johnston is seeking shared custody. Both parents are 19. Their teenage relationship fell under an intense public spotlight after Sen. John McCain picked Sarah Palin as his vice presidential running mate in August 2008.



Court documents, now unsealed, were published online Monday by the Anchorage Daily News.



Johnston joined the family at the Republican National Convention after the campaign confirmed that Bristol, then 17, was five months pregnant with his child. The couple broke off their engagement about two months after their son's birth in December 2008.



Johnston has asked that the case conducted in public to protect himself from Sarah Palin, whom he said was "powerful, politically ambitious and has a reputation for being extremely vindictive." But Bristol Palin's request that the case be sealed said public proceedings "will turn this custody case into a media circus which is not in Tripp's best interest."



"In this day and age of the Internet, media stories remain available for years, even decades, after they are first published, and anything printed in the media (whether it is true or not) will be available to Tripp when he is old enough to read," Palin said in a sworn affidavit.



She said Johnston wanted a public case so he could "continue to make a spectacle of this custody dispute for his own self-promotion." Johnston was set to take part in a reality show in Alaska, she said.



"I do not believe that it would be in Tripp's best interest for Levi's reality show to be filming this case as it unfolds, or for Levi Johnston to be capitalizing off of this custody case through his reality show," Palin said.



Johnston's sworn statement said he feared what Sarah Palin might do against him if the case were kept secret.



"I really think that closing the court could make this matter very uncivil and potentially open the door for poor influences on Bristol and her attorney that may be extremely inappropriate and potentially harmful to Tripp," he said.



While Johnston said his former girlfriend would never be malicious toward him, "her mother is powerful, politically ambitious and has a reputation for being extremely vindictive."



"So, I think a public case might go a long way in reducing Sarah Palin's instinct to attack and allow the real parties in this litigation, Bristol and I, to work things out a lot more peacefully than we could if there is any more meddling from Sarah Palin," Johnston said.



Bristol Palin's affidavit said her mother is not involved in the custody case, except as a grandmother. But Johnston's lawyer, Rex Butler, said in his own affidavit that his client does not trust closed proceedings because "Sarah Palin is known to deal forcefully with those she perceives as political enemies."



"He feels Sarah Palin, through her lawyer, under the guise of Bristol Palin's name, would run roughshod over his very bones," Butler said.



The judge's ruling, signed last week, concludes that Bristol Palin "failed to demonstrate that this case involves 'matters of a sensitive and highly personal nature' of such a magnitude that 'protection of the party's name outweighs the public's interest in disclosure.' "



Her filing for full custody argued that Levi was "not ready for the demands of parenthood and the sacrifices that would entail to a 19-year-old aspiring actor/model."



"Levi remains without a regular job or steady source of income," the petition states. While he's not enrolled in school "to learn a trade or earn a degree," he has made

***

KABUL, Afghanistan (CNN) -- Afghan President Hamid Karzai said Sunday that his country would join the strategic review of the U.S.-led war on terrorism.

Afghanistan President Hamid Karzai, right, meets with Richard Holbrooke in Kabul on February 15, 2009.

Speaking at a joint news conference with visiting U.S. diplomat Richard Holbrooke, Karzai said he is "very, very thankful" that President Barack Obama accepted his proposal to join the review.

Holbrooke is visiting Afghanistan after a trip to neighboring Pakistan. Obama and Secretary of State Hillary Clinton tapped Holbrooke as special representative for the two countries, a signal of how the new administration considers Afghanistan and Pakistan intertwined in any solution to the war in Afghanistan and the terrorist threat along their shared border.

At the news conference in Kabul, Holbrooke said Sunday that he conveyed the administration's support of the upcoming elections on August 20, a date recently set by Afghanistan's electoral commission.

"President Obama and Secretary Clinton and the United States government were very gratified to hear President Karzai reaffirm his support of the August 20 decision," Holbrooke said.

Holbrooke's visit comes as Obama plans to send another 30,000 troops to Afghanistan to fight what he's called the "central front in our enduring struggle against terrorism and extremism."

In an interview on CNN's "Fareed Zakaria GPS," which aired Sunday, Karzai said that, with a resurgent Taliban, a still-flourishing drug trade and a border with Pakistan believed to be home base for al Qaeda, his country can't afford for U.S. troops to leave any time soon.

"U.S. forces will not be able to leave soon in Afghanistan because the task is not over," Karzai said. "We have to defeat terrorism. We'll have to enable Afghanistan to stand on its own feet. We'll have to enable Afghanistan to be able to defend itself and protect for its security ...

"Then, the United States can leave and, at that time, the Afghan people will give them plenty of flowers and gratitude and send them safely back home."

At the same time, Karzai said the actions of troops currently in Afghanistan have turned some of the public against them.

"It's the question of civilian causalities. It's a question of risk of Afghans. It's the question of home searches," he said. "These activities are seriously undermining the confidence of the Afghan people in the joint struggle we have against terrorism and undermining their hopeful future.

"We'll continue to be a friend. We'll continue to be an ally. But Afghanistan deserves respect and a better treatment."

While he said he welcomes additional U.S. troops, Karzai suggested they need to work along the Afghan-Pakistan border and in the poppy fields that fuel a drug trade that threatens to turn the nation into a narco-state -- not in the villages where most Afghans live.

"We have traveled many years on. What should have happened early on didn't unfortunately happen," Karzai said. "Now, the country is not in the same mood as it was in 2002. And so any addition of troops must have a purposeful objective that the Afghan people would agree with."

The Obama administration is conducting several reviews of U.S. policy in Afghanistan, including a review by Gen. David Petraeus, the commander in the region. Defense Secretary Robert Gates has said the original mission in Afghanistan was "too broad" and needs to be more "realistic and focused" for the United States to succeed.

"If we set ourselves the objective of creating some sort of central Asian Valhalla over there, we will lose, because nobody in the world has that kind of time, patience and money," Gates said during a recent Senate hearing.

He called for concrete goals that can be reached in three to five years.

Speaking via satellite from Kabul, Karzai called former President George Bush "a great person," but said he can work with Obama -- despite the president's comments as a candidate that Karzai had "not gotten out of the bunker" to improve security and infrastructure in

***

Maryland's attorney general said Wednesday that the state may legally recognize same-sex marriages performed in other states.





The 45-page opinion from Attorney General Douglas F. Gansler was addressed to state Sen. Richard S. Madaleno Jr.





"You have asked whether those marriages may be recognized under state law. The answer to that question is clearly 'yes,'" Gansler wrote.





He noted that his opinion is "not itself the law of Maryland in the same sense as a statute enacted by the Legislature or court decision elaborating the common law or construing a statute." Rather, it is an interpretation of law intended to guide courts and government agencies, he said.





"Thus, what we say in this opinion is a prediction, not a prescription, as to the how the court would approach this issue under current law," Gansler wrote.





His office said that he cannot direct the actions of state agencies.





But Maryland Gov. Martin O'Malley said Wednesday afternoon that the state "will be guided by the attorney general's thorough analysis and legal advice on this matter."





He added, "I am confident that the attorney general and his office will provide all necessary advice to state agencies on how to comply with the law, and I expect all state agencies to work with the attorney general's office to ensure compliance with the law."





Further details were not immediately available, and the governor's office did not return phone calls seeking clarification.





It was unclear what the immediate ramifications of Gansler's opinion would be in Maryland.





One state representative, Del. Emmett Burns -- who sponsored a bill earlier this year that would have barred the state from recognizing same-sex marriages performed in other states and other countries -- said the attorney general's opinion "muddles the waters."





Burns' bill failed in committee.





Referring to the opinion, Burns said, "I don't think it's worth a bucket of warm spit. ... I don't think it's something that is going to make that big of a difference."





He said the issue is likely to be decided through legislation or in a court case. He noted that state Sen. Norman Stone is sponsoring a bill that mirrors Burns' failed one. Also, he said, the House Judiciary Committee is considering a bill that would allow same-sex marriage.





"It's going to be going pandemonium on the House floor" if that bill makes it out of committee, he said. He added he believes there is much opposition in both the state House and Senate to same-sex marriage.





"I believe that the concept is going to have be settled through [public] referendum," he said. "If it were to go to referendum, my side will win."





Maryland state law from 1973 says that only a marriage between a man and a woman is valid in the state. However, there are no laws or court cases regarding recognition of marriages legally performed in other places, the attorney general's office said.





Madaleno said in a statement released through Equality Maryland that the opinion is "welcome news" for same-sex couples legally married in states where the practice is allowed, and "nothing in the attorney general's opinion changes the fact that same-sex couples cannot obtain marriage licenses in Maryland."





Media reports said Madaleno had asked the attorney general in May whether Maryland may legally recognize same-sex marriages.





Massachusetts, Connecticut, Vermont and New Hampshire and Iowa allow same-sex marriage. The District of Columbia has also passed a law allowing same-sex marriage, although it has not yet taken effect.





CNN's Taylor Gandossy contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- A jury Friday acquitted W.R. Grace & Company and three of its former executives of having knowingly exposed mine workers and residents of Libby, Montana, to asbestos.



The W.R. Grace plant in Libby, Montana, in an undated photograph.



"We at Grace are gratified by today's verdict and thank the men and women of the jury who were open to hearing the facts," said Fred Festa, chairman, president and CEO of the company in a written statement. "We always believed that Grace and its former executives had acted properly and that a jury would come to the same conclusion when confronted with the evidence."



Festa said that during the time Grace owned and operated a vermiculite mine in Libby, "the company worked hard to keep the operations in compliance with the laws and standards of the day."



The jury began deliberating Thursday and returned its verdict Friday morning.



The Department of Justice's response to the verdict, which came after a three-month trial, was measured. "The jury has spoken, and we thank them for their service," said a written statement issued by the office of public affairs. "We are refraining from further comment at this juncture because one individual awaits trial in connection with this case."



Prosecutors plan to try another executive separately.



Asked if the Justice Department plans to appeal, department spokesman Andrew Ames said, "I wouldn't want to comment on that."



Federal prosecutors had accused the mining company and its executives of exposing Libby's 100,000 residents to asbestos for decades, resulting in more than 200 deaths and 1,000 illnesses.



The product covered patches of grass, dusted the tops of cars and drifted through the air in a hazy smoke that became a part of residents' daily lives.



"There's never been a case where so many people were sickened or killed by environmental crime," said David Uhlmann in an April  interview. He helped spearhead the case when he was the Justice Department's top prosecutor of environmental crimes before stepping down in 2007.



During the trial, those who lost loved ones testified at the federal courthouse in Missoula, about 130 miles southeast of Libby, that residents had been kept in the dark about the dangers.



Until 1990, W.R. Grace & Company operated a mine in Libby that produced vermiculite, a substance used in all sorts of products, from insulation to fertilizers.



The vermiculite was contaminated with tremolite asbestos -- linked to numerous illnesses including mesothelioma, a cancer that can attack the lining of the lungs, abdomen or heart.



The government's indictment alleged that W.R. Grace conspired to "knowingly release" the asbestos. It said the company tried to hide the dangers from employees and residents, leaving them "in imminent danger of death or serious bodily injury."



"It was a purpose of the conspiracy to conceal and misrepresent the hazardous nature of the tremolite asbestos contaminated vermiculite, thereby enriching defendants and others," the indictment read.



The indictment also said W.R. Grace tried to "defraud the United States and others by impairing, impeding, and frustrating" the Environmental Protection Agency and other government agencies once they launched an investigation in 1999.



The 10-count indictment included charges of wire fraud and obstruction of justice.



Had it been convicted, the company could have faced criminal fines of up to $280 million, which is twice the value of its profits from the mine. Grace executives, who were named as defendants, could have faced prison time.



The company did not deny that asbestos emanated from its plant. Nor did it question that some people had been sickened and killed, though a definitive number of deaths linked to the vermiculite plant probably will never be known.



But W.R. Grace denied any kind of conspiracy. In fact, the company said, it acted responsibly and took appropriate steps. It said it had voluntarily paid millions of dollars in medical bills for 900 Libby residents.



In the courtroom, defense attorneys noted that the asbestos problem dates back to about 1920, long before W.R. Grace took over the mine in 1963.



The attorneys said that

***

ISLAMABAD, Pakistan (CNN) -- Pakistani soldiers and militants battled Saturday in the country's vast tribal region, with more than a dozen insurgents killed in airstrikes, at least four soldiers slain in skirmishes and a key village seized by troops, the military said.



A Pakistani soldier pictured during operations against militants in June.



The fatalities come hours after Pakistani troops launched a massive ground offensive backed up by air power targeting the Taliban in South Waziristan, a refuge and a power base for insurgents operating in Pakistan and along the Pakistani-Afghan border.



The highly anticipated offensive, which comes after a wave of suicide attacks in Pakistan, also has prompted the exodus of tens of thousands of civilians, the U.N. refugee agency said.



One military official said Pakistani troops seized control of Kotkai, where Pakistani Taliban leader Hakimullah Mehsud has lived with fellow commander Qari Hussein, the mastermind behind some of Pakistan's deadliest suicide attacks.  Watch how the offensive began »



Another military official said the airstrikes from jet fighters and helicopter gunships targeted militant hideouts in Kotkai and the villages of Badar, Barwand and Khisur, all strongholds of the Taliban and their late leader Baitullah Mehsud. The official asked not to be identified because he is not authorized to speak to the media.



There have been confrontations throughout the day between soldiers and militants. Along with the four slain soldiers, 12 have been wounded, the military said.



Gen. Athar Abbas, the Pakistan military spokesman, said the ground offensive in South Waziristan was launched shortly after midnight after the military received clearance from the government. He said the region's eight entry and exit points have been sealed by troops.



Pakistani officials say that about 10,000 to 15,000 militants linked to the Taliban or to al Qaeda operate in South Waziristan, a harsh terrain familiar to militants but difficult for others to navigate. About 28,000 Pakistani soldiers have moved into the epicenter of Taliban activity in the region to counter their activities, officials said.



Elsewhere in Pakistan's tribal region, in the Mohmand Agency, at least eight militants and one soldier were killed Saturday when they exchanged gunfire near a military checkpoint, the military said.



For months, the military had been targeting militant hideouts in South Waziristan and other hot spots in Pakistan's tribal areas. This year, troops launched a large operation targeting militants in the Swat Valley, in Pakistan's North West Frontier Province.



But despite these efforts, insurgents have continued to strike with relative impunity inside Pakistan, brazenly targeting government, police and security locations.



The latest attack occurred Friday in the northern city of Peshawar, when a suicide car bomber detonated near a police station, killing 13 people, most of them civilians.



The recent wave of deadly attacks has raised concerns about the ability of Pakistan's security forces to maintain control. The attacks heightened internal and international pressure on the government to take swift and effective action.



In a high-level meeting Friday, army chief Gen. Ashfaq Kayani "gave a detailed briefing on the prevailing national security situation and its ramifications in the future," according to a statement from the prime minister's office.



Those who attended the meeting condemned the recent attacks and "agreed that these elements pose a serious threat to the sovereignty and integrity of the state," the statement said.



The attacks show "once again that the militants in Pakistan threaten both Pakistan and the United States," White House Deputy Press Secretary Bill Burton said. On Thursday, President Obama approved an additional $7.5 billion in assistance to Pakistan over the next five years.

***

London, England (CNN) -- The attackers who planted a car bomb outside a courthouse in Northern Ireland Monday night gave only 17 minutes warning before the explosion, the Police Service of Northern Ireland told CNN Tuesday.





"It is a miracle that no one was killed or seriously injured," PSNI Chief Constable Matt Baggott said. "It is only thanks to a member of the public contacting us that we are not dealing with fatalities this morning."





The car was packed with about 250 pounds (113 kilograms) of explosives, police estimate.





A local hospital in the town of Newry got a warning call at 10:20 p.m. local time (7:20 p.m. ET) and a business was phoned two minutes later. The bomb went off at 10:37 p.m., a police representative said.





That "is not enough time to evacuate a public area," a police representative said. British police spokesmen traditionally do not identify themselves by name.





A member of the public reported a car being abandoned at about 10 p.m., she said. That appears to have given police extra time to respond.





Baggott blamed the attack on "dissident republicans," pro-Irish militants who reject the 1998 Good Friday Agreement that sharply reduced violence in the province.





They "simply want to drag Northern Ireland back to the dark days of the past," Baggott said, condemning "cowardly attacks" by "terrorists" who "want to destroy all that is good about Northern Ireland and have no place in a modern civilized society."





"This is not an attack on a court building, this is an attack on people whose lives depend on the well-being of Newry," he added. "This is an attack that broke and damaged places of worship... damaged the ability of Newry to be at the heart of our economic success."





Newry is about 35 miles (56 kilometers) south of the provincial capital, Belfast.





Prime Minister Gordon Brown's office "strongly condemned" the bombing, saying Tuesday it was the work of a "tiny minority."





The "attack" is "entirely unrepresentative of the views of the vast majority of people in Northern Ireland," said a statement from Brown's Downing Street office.





The court building was badly damaged and businesses in the area were evacuated, police said.





Northern Ireland was wracked for decades by violence between pro-British unionists and pro-Irish republicans. About 3,000 people died in the "Troubles," as the violence was known, before the tenuous peace agreement was hammered out in 1998.





There has been sporadic violence since then. A booby-trapped car exploded on January 8, severely injuring Constable Peadar Heffron. A car bomb partly exploded outside the headquarters of the Policing Board of Northern Ireland on November 21, and another under-car booby trap exploded on October 22 in east Belfast, injuring a woman, the PSNI said.





Two soldiers and a policeman were shot dead in separate attacks in March 2009.





The two biggest parties in the province, the pro-British Democratic Unionist Party and the pro-Irish Sinn Fein, reached a deal earlier this month to bring police powers under local control, averting a crisis that had threatened to force new elections.

***

(CNN) -- Bad weather, poor planning, a lack of safety equipment. Any one could put a boater in the kind of peril that befell two NFL players and their two friends off the coast of Florida last weekend, Coast Guard officials say.



Ex-college football player  Nick Schuyler clings to an overturned boat Monday in this Coast Guard photo.



And such incidents happen all too often. The capsizing of the 21-foot fishing boat carrying the four men to a favorite fishing spot in the Gulf of Mexico was the latest of 200 such incidents reported to the U.S. Coast Guard in the past five months.



"The oceans are an unforgiving environment," said Coast Guard Lt. Cmdr. Chris O'Neil. "Weather can be unpredictable. Any time you are in an open environment, you are taking a certain amount of risk."



That risk includes being lost at sea like Victor "Marquis" Cooper, an Oakland Raiders linebacker; Corey Smith, a Detroit Lions free-agent defensive end; and their friend William Bleakly.



The fourth member of the group, Nick Schuyler, a former  University of South Florida football player, was found around noon Monday clinging to the upturned boat in rough seas about 35 miles west of Clearwater, Florida.



The four men had left for a fishing trip from Seminole Boat Ramp in Clearwater Pass on Saturday.



The U.S. Coast Guard is unable to provide specific numbers of how many people go missing from boating accidents like this past weekend's, but officials say that since last fall there have been three people who have not been found after triggering Coast Guard searches.



Those incidents can range from an unaccounted swimmer to a passenger gone missing after a boat sinks, said O'Neil, at the Coast Guard headquarters in Washington D.C.



Capsizing is one of the leading boating accidents, according to the Coast Guard's most recent report on recreational boating in 2007. Officials report there were 398 accidents from capsizing, causing 204 deaths and 284 injuries in 2007. Capsized boats cost nearly $1.8 million a year in property damages, officials say.



Collision with vessels or fixed objects and falling overboard are other major boating accidents.



Last weekend, Florida state officials recovered the bodies of a 48-year-old man and his 7-year-old granddaughter after their 15-foot bass tipped over in Lake Okeechobee, according to CNN affiliate WPTV-TV in West Palm Beach, Florida.



"The steering cable broke and the boat went out of control," family member Isabelo Santiago Jr. told WPTV.



To remain safe on any body of water, Coast Guard officials stress having the proper safety equipment and being wary of changes in the weather.



The NFL players' boat capsized off Florida in waves up to 10 feet high while being buffeted by winds up to 45 miles per hour, Coast Guard officials said. They reported 110 cases since this fall where a boat has been beset by weather.



Boaters should wear a life jacket at all times, officials say, because an accident can occur so quickly that passengers may not have time to put their life jackets on. A life jacket that is bright or has deflecting tape to help catch the eyes of rescuers is recommended.



Boaters should also keep a bag with flotation and communication devices, officials said.



The Coast Guard encourages boaters to purchase Emergency Position Indicating Radiobeacons (EPIRBs) that can cost between $200 to $1,500. This technology enables emergency signals to be sent out automatically or manually when a boat sinks. Some EPIRBs have global positioning devices that can help provide the rescuers with a more exact location.



After a boat capsizes, passengers should always stay near the vessel to make it easier for rescuers to find them, especially in waves and high winds. Whitecaps on waves can also confuse Coast Guard searches. Schuyler, who was rescued on Monday, was easier to find because he was near the boat, Coast Guard officials say.



Wayne Cathel says he and six of his friends were in a similar situation in 1993 when their boat capsized during a spear fishing trip in John's Pass in South Florida, according to CNN affiliate Bay News 9

***

(CNN) -- World No. 1 Serena Williams' preparations for her Australian Open title defense suffered a late blip when she was beaten in the final of the Sydney International by Elena Dementieva on Friday.





The American, who had struggled past unseeded Frenchwoman Aravane Rezai in three sets in the semifinals when she appeared to injure her left leg, lost 6-3 6-2 to suffer her fifth defeat in her last eight clashes with the Russian.





"I was struggling a little bit, but she definitely deserves all the credit," Williams told reporters. "It's definitely not ligament problems. It's just a little pain but the strapping usually helps the pain go away."





Dementieva, who beat world No. 2 Dinara Safina in the quarterfinals, successfully defended her title in the final event before the first Grand Slam tournament of this decade starts on Monday.





"It's great to play against the best players in the world, especially going into a Grand Slam. It was a great experience and it'll help me next week at the Australian Open," she told the WTA Tour's official Web site





Dementieva went into the match against Williams having been handed a potential second-round clash with former world No. 1 Justine Henin, who pulled out of the Sydney event as a precaution after suffering a leg injury in her comeback tournament in Brisbane.





Seven-time Grand Slam winner Henin, handed a wildcard after a 20-month retirement, will start against unseeded fellow Belgian Kirsten Flipkens on Monday while fifth seed Dementieva plays fellow Russian Vera Dushevina .





Both have avoided the Williams sisters, who are in the top half of the draw with Serena opening against Poland's Urszula Radwanska on Tuesday and sixth seed Venus taking on Czech Lucie Safarova.





Four-time winner Serena could face seventh seed Victoria Azarenka in the last eight, with a possible semifinal against her older sibling looming.





Last year's losing finalist Safina opens against world No. 44 Magdalena Rybarikova of Slovakia, and could face fellow Russian Maria Sharapova in the fourth round.





Sharapova, the 2008 champion but seeded 14th after struggling with shoulder problems last year, begins with a glamour clash against compatriot and fellow pin-up girl Maria Kirilenko.





U.S. Open champion Kim Clijsters could face fellow comeback queen Henin in the quarterfinals, having been seeded 15th and facing a qualifier first up.





But to set up a rematch of the recent final in Brisbane, which she won, Clijsters is likely to have to overcome third seed Svetlana Kuznetsova in the fourth round.





The Russian, who has never got past the last eight in Melbourne, takes on unseeded compatriot Anastasia Rodionova in her first match.





Australian Open women's singles draw (seeds in bold):





1-Serena Williams (USA) v Urszula Radwanska (Pol)  Petra Kvitova (Cze) v Jill Craybas (USA)  Qualifier v Andrea Petkovic (Ger)  Ayumi Morita (Jpn) v 32-Carla Suarez-Navarro (Spa) 21-Sabine Lisicki (Ger) v Petra Martic (Cro)  Varvara Lepchenko (USA) v Alberta Brianti (Ita)  Kristina Barrois (Ger) v Akgul Amanmuradova (Uzb)  Qualifier v Samantha Stosur (Aus) (13)  9-Vera Zvonareva (Rus) v Kristina Kucova (Svk)  Kai Chen Chang (Tpe) v Iveta Benesova (Cze)  Qualifier v Gisela Dulko (Arg)  Qualifier v 20-Ana Ivanovic (Ser)  28-Elena Vesnina (Rus) v Tathiana Garbin (Ita)  Kimiko Date Krumm (Jpn) v Yaroslava Shvedova (Kaz)  Stefanie Voegele (Swi) v Melinda Czink (Hun)  Stephanie Cohen Aloro (Fra) v 7-Victoria Azarenka (Blr) 4-Caroline Wozniacki (Den) v Aleksandra Wozniak (Can)  Tamira Paszek (Aut) v Julia Goerges (Ger)  Galina Voskoboeva (Kaz) v Tsvetana Pironkova (Bul)  Lucie Hradecka (Cze) v 29-Shahar Peer (Isr) 22-Daniela Hantuchova (Svk) v Viktoriya Kutuzova (Ukr)  Jarmila Groth (Svk) v Qualifier  Stephanie Dubois (Can) v Agnes Szavay (Hun)  Marina Erakovic (Nzl) v 16-Na

***

(CNN) -- Move over Wonder Woman and Lois Lane - Hillary Clinton and Sarah Palin are breaking into the world of comic books.



No capes, no tights: Female Force stars Sarah Palin, Michelle Obama, Hillary Clinton and Caroline Kennedy.



Washington-based publisher Bluewater Productions released a series of comic books featuring Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin on March 11. The company says it has already sold 7,500 copies of each to distributors.



"We really want to show strong, independent, female role models in comics," said Darren Davis, president of Bluewater Productions.



Another company released comics about President Barack Obama and Sen. John McCain during the presidential election.



Then they decided that Hillary Clinton's story needed to be told.



"She was the first [major] female presidential candidate, so we just started with [her], and there was so much interest in it," said Jason Schultz, executive vice president of Bluewater Productions.



The first two issues in Female Force, already released, feature Clinton and Palin. The next two will feature Caroline Kennedy and First Lady Michelle Obama.



The Michelle Obama comic is expected to be released in April, and has pre-sold 28,000 copies.



The next set will feature other "strong, independent women" such as Princess Diana, Schultz said.



Comic fans approve of the idea.



"I think it just says, like, that women are important," one comic book fan told CNN.



Another added, "It shows that comics aren't just about guys in tights beating each other up -- it's about information, it's about understanding people a little better," said another reader.



Richard Laermer, CEO of a public relations firm and author of several books on marketing, said he's not surprised.



"We're in a very politically minded time right now," he said.



The creators expect to expand the comic book world to a larger demographic with the books.



"It's bringing a whole new demographic to comic books," Schultz said. "It just shows little girls, young women, that they can be anything they want," he added.



Mary Ellen Balchunis, an assistant professor of political science at La Salle University in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania said "getting girls [interested in politics] at a younger age is brilliant."



"I think it's great that they're doing these comic books," Balchunis said. "In the past, women have shown a low level of political efficacy."



She said the choices are "fabulous," because "these are the women who are at the top of the totem pole right now."



Each comic will be biographical, Schultz said. "With Hillary, it starts with her life and ends up with her as Secretary of State."



"It would be fun to see how the superhero Hillary sort of pushes her way forth and shows people what she did in her life. To me that's just awesome," said Laermer.



Another professor of political science said the way the women are portrayed will be important.



"Comic books, by definition, are caricatures, but there are different ways of doing those caricatures," said Landon Storrs, an associate professor of history at the University of Houston.



"So it's a question of what the artists go for. If they just tap into familiar stereotypes, then they could reinforce negative ideas about powerful women, even as they are trying to do the opposite," she added.



The fact that real, living women are now in comic books is another barrier that Davis and Schultz have broken through, historian and author Trina Robbins said.



"It's about time. They've never done a major living woman," she said. "I think what's good is they're doing women in politics and not Paris Hilton."



LaNeice Collins reported from New York. Robyn Sidersky reported from Atlanta, Georgia.