(CNN) -- A single-engine airplane made an emergency landing on a California highway Sunday morning, though no major injuries were reported, authorities said.



The Piper Comanche 260 carrying a married couple landed on the southbound lanes of U.S. Highway 101.



The Piper Comanche 260 carrying a married couple landed on the southbound lanes of U.S. Highway 101 just outside Santa Barbara and a few miles from the airport, said California Highway Patrol spokesman Officer James Richards.



The plane's engine quit, and as the pilot descended, he lost control of the plane and landed in the southbound lane facing oncoming traffic. The plane struck two vehicles while landing, then spun and hit another one with its tail, Richards said.



One vehicle passenger was treated for minor injuries, he said. No other injuries were reported.



The landing happened at 10:36 a.m. (1:36 p.m. ET) and held up traffic for less than two hours, Richards said.



He added that the plane had departed Temecula in southwestern Riverside County, California, and was destined for the airport in Santa Barbara, a flight of about 180 miles.



The pilot told authorities that he attempted to switch fuel lines during the flight, but was unable to restore power to the plane. He said he alerted a tower at the airport that a landing on the highway was imminent, Richardson said.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Serving a 36-year-old government-issue cake at an Army retirement ceremony sounds like a classic bureaucratic mistake, but there was no mistake about it.



Retiring Army Col. Henry Moak uses a vintage P-38 to break the seal on  government cake saved since 1973.



Retiring Army Col. Henry Moak served it up himself -- at his own ceremony.



Moak had saved the cake since 1973, when he got it while serving in Vietnam, and had long-standing plans to open it upon his retirement.



Pound cake served in a can was standard fare in military C rations back then. Moak said it was his favorite, and he could not get enough of it.



"I would eat it any chance I could get, but not all of the meals came with pound cake," he said before opening it.



In front of friends and family who attended his retirement ceremony Friday at the Pentagon, Moak eagerly opened the can.



Answering the question of whether the anticipation was the same now as back then, Moak said, "Yes, even more!"



"I won't eat it if it's black and moldy," he told onlookers.



"You can hear the pop of the air coming out," he said referring to the vacuum seal on the can.



To most people's surprise, the opened can revealed a still-edible yellow cake. The ceremonial sword used to cut Moak's real retirement cake was also used to dig into the can and cut out the cake.



Moak took a bite and put up his thumb, "It's good, it's still kind of moist," he declared.

***

(CNN) -- Authorities in Vietnam have arrested the former chief executive officer of Jetstar Pacific Airlines and are preventing two airline executives from leaving the country, Vietnamese and Australian officials said.





The former chief executive, Luong Hoai Nam, faces prosecution for "lack of responsibility causing serious consequences," said a spokeswoman for the Vietnamese Foreign Ministry, Nguyen Phuong Nga.





Vietnamese authorities are investigating the airline's chief operating officer, Daniela Marsilli, and its financial officer, Tristan Freeman, Jetstar Pacific said. They are not allowing Marsilli and Freeman to leave Vietnam, the airline said.





Jetstar Pacific is partly owned by Qantas Airlines of Australia.





The Australian Embassy in Hanoi is seeking details about why the employees are being prevented from leaving Vietnam, according to Australia's Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.





The airline suffered heavy financial losses, the Vietnamese Foreign Ministry spokeswoman said, and investigators are trying to determine the responsibility of members of the airline's executive board and managing board.





Marsilli and Freeman are members of the airline's managing board and must "make themselves present in Vietnam to respond to the requests from Vietnam's legal authorities in a timely manner," the Vietnamese Foreign Ministry spokeswoman said





-- CNN's Pamela Boykoff, Eugina Huang and Eunice Yoon contributed to this report

***

NEW DELHI, India (CNN) -- Indian authorities Tuesday filed a police complaint against Continental Airlines for frisking a former president of the country as he was to travel to New York in April.



Former president APJ Abdul Kalam was exempt from body checks, officials said.



Civil aviation officials in New Delhi accused Continental of gross violation of Indian security rules that prohibit pre-embarkation body checks on certain dignitaries like a former president.



The police complaint followed a probe that had established that APJ Abdul Kalam was subject to frisking before he boarded a flight from New Delhi to New York on April 21, the Indian civil aviation ministry said in a statement.



The ministry also alleged the airline did not respond to its show-cause notice in connection with Kalam's body checks.



In its police complaint, Indian civil aviation authorities accused the airline staff of "willful violation" of their directions on exemptions from pre-embarkation frisking.



Continental, however, insisted it followed standard American air-safety procedures.



"TSA (Transportation Security Administration) requirements impose a final security check in the aerobridge just before boarding the aircraft.



"This procedure is followed by all carriers flying to the U.S. from most of the countries in the world and there is no exemption to this rule," it said in a statement.

***

(CNN) -- Texas authorities on Sunday were searching for a convicted burglar who escaped from a medical facility by rappelling off the building using a string of bedsheets, officials said.



Joshua Duane Barnes, 21, was serving 35 years in prison for several convictions, including two escape charges.



Joshua Duane Barnes, 21, was last seen at 8:15 p.m. Saturday on the seventh floor of a Texas Department of Criminal Justice medical facility in Galveston, Texas, said TDCJ spokesman Jason Clark.



Fifteen minutes later, Barnes was gone, Clark told CNN.



Security officers noticed there was a hole in the wall and a vent had been removed.



According to Clark, Barnes busted a hole through a wall in his room and then broke through a thick window.



He apparently tied bedsheets together, rappelled down the side of the building to a roof, and then jumped to the ground, Clark said.



Barnes was serving 35 years in prison for several felony convictions, including seven burglary charges, two escape charges and an aggravated assault charge in the Texas Panhandle area, according to a TDCJ press release.



The inmate was being housed at a prison in Midway, Texas. He was transported to the medical facility in Galveston last week after being hurt in an altercation, TDCJ said.



The department of criminal justice has tracking dogs and dozens of officers searching the area, Clark said. Local police officers also joined the search.



Barnes began serving his sentence in January.



CNN's Chuck Johnston contributed to this report.

***

KABUL, Afghanistan (CNN) -- International troops in Afghanistan endured another deadly attack Tuesday, a day after 10 NATO-led troops were killed in that country.



The body of a U.S. soldier killed in Afghanistan arrives in the United States on Monday.



A U.S. coalition service member "died as a result of injuries" on Tuesday afternoon in a roadside bombing attack on a convoy in western Afghanistan, the U.S. military said.



This follows 10 NATO-led deaths on Monday, the highest single-day total in Afghanistan in nearly a year, according to NATO and U.S.-led coalition numbers.



Seven Americans, two Canadians and one Briton died in four separate incidents Monday.



On August 18, 2008, 10 French soldiers were killed when about 100 insurgents attacked a patrol in Kabul Province, and a British soldier was killed in southern Afghanistan when insurgents attacked a patrol with a roadside bomb.



A month before that, 10 American troops were killed in two separate incidents on July 13, 2008.



The latest deaths came as U.S. troops cranked up their fight against the Taliban, a push that includes a major Marine-led offensive against the militants in the southern province of Helmand.



Roadside bombs Monday killed four Americans in the northern province of Kunduz and two in southern Afghanistan, NATO's International Security Assistance Force said.



A seventh American died in an insurgent attack in eastern Afghanistan, ISAF confirmed.



Two Canadian air crew members and a British soldier were killed when a helicopter crashed during takeoff in Zabul province, the Canadian and British defense ministries said.

***

(CNN) -- Capt. Chesley Sullenberger, the hero pilot who safely landed a full passenger jet in the Hudson River, was once again honored with cheers and applause Tuesday during a ceremony for him hosted by the governor of his home state.



Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger gives hero pilot Chesley Sullenberger a flag and license plate.



California Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger, first lady Maria Shriver and other dignitaries greeted Sullenberger at the state Capitol rotunda in Sacramento.



Taking a break from difficult negotiations over a troubled state budget, the governor presented Sullenberger with a jacket with the state seal, a California state flag that had flown over the state Capitol, a proclamation and a "California Hero" license plate.



"Today is a very important day," Schwarzenegger said. "There are legislators upstairs that are negotiating and working on a budget -- [we] need a great hero in a state capitol."



The Sullenberger family lives in Danville, California.



Sullenberger's response was understated -- as it has been at other ceremonies, including a New York City Hall event when he was given the key to the city by Mayor Michael Bloomberg.



"On behalf of the other four crew members of Flight 1549 and also on behalf of the many thousands of aviation professionals whose daily devotion to duty keeps air travel safe, I gratefully accept this recognition," he said.



Sullenberger and his crew safely landed the damaged airplane, believed to have hit a flock of birds, in the Hudson on January 15. All 155 passengers aboard the US Airways flight survived.



CNN's Scott Thompson contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- At least 44 people, including 23 Filipino soldiers, died Wednesday in fighting between the Philippine military and Islamic militants, the country's armed services said on Thursday.



A wounded Philippine Marine receives a medal from Major Gen. Benjamin Dolorfino in Zamboanga Thursday.



The fighting was sparked by military raids on Abu Sayyaf militant training camps in the villages of Silangkum and Baguindan on the southern island province of Basilan, said Steffani Cacho, public information officer for the Philippine Armed Services.



Thirty to 40 militants were killed, but only 21 bodies had been recovered, the military said. Twenty-three members of the military were killed and 22 suffered injuries.



The militants used the training camps to temporarily house kidnapping victims and make explosives, Cacho said, adding that high-power firearms, explosives and documents were seized in the raids.



Abu Sayyaf, which has been linked to the al Qaeda terrorist network, is one of several Islamic militant groups fighting the Philippine government. The group operates largely in Basilan, according to the U.S. State Department, and wants to establish a separate state for the country's minority Muslim population.



The government has been fighting to contain the group, which is blamed for several terrorist attacks in the Philippines, including the bombing of a ferry in 2004 that left about 130 people dead.



This year Abu Sayyaf has been implicated in the kidnappings of several Red Cross workers and journalists.

***

(CNN) -- The fallout from Adam Lambert's risqué American Music Awards performance keeps coming with "Good Morning America" canceling the singer's live performance scheduled for Wednesday morning.



ABC was flooded with more than 1,500 complaints, and the network sent an e-mail to potential concert goers letting them know that Lambert would not be performing on Wednesday.



"Given Adam Lambert's controversial live performance on the AMAs, we were concerned about airing a similar concert so early in the morning," a spokesperson for the network said.



"The Early Show" on rival network CBS was quick to announce that they have booked Lambert to perform and discuss the controversy on Wednesday morning.



Lambert shocked viewers with his sexually suggestive dance sequence that included simulated oral sex as well as Lambert kissing his male keyboardist.



The Parents Television Council, a Media watchdog group, also attacked the show as vulgar and urged its members on Monday to contact ABC, Dick Clark Productions and the show's advertisers with complaints about the content.



"Last night's 'American Music Awards' broadcast was nothing short of tasteless and vulgar. Adam Lambert, the second-place finisher in last season's 'American Idol' competition, chose to treat American families to simulated oral sex and other demeaning behavior," the PTC posted on its Web site.



Melissa Henson, director of communications and public education for the PTC, said the council wasn't concerned about Lambert's gay kiss. Its issue and focus are on the simulated oral sex, she said.



"The gender has nothing to do with it," Henson said. "It would be true if it had been a woman's face that was thrust into his crotch."



Henson also noted that this is not an anti-Adam Lambert campaign and said the council would have had no problem with Lambert performing live on "Good Morning America."



"As long as he keeps it clean," Henson said.

***

(CNN) -- A soldier who had been slated to begin serving at Fort Campbell in Tennessee was arrested Tuesday on suspicion of killing his wife, police said.



Jonathan Downing was found in a wooded area 20 miles from the home where his wife was found slain, police say.



Jonathan Clyde Downing, 31, was being held without bond and will be tried in civilian court in the killing of 25-year-old Sena Marie Downing, said Jim Knoll, public information officer for police in Clarksville, Tennessee.



Police officers went to the couple's Clarksville home shortly after 3 a.m. after receiving notice of a possible shooting, Knoll said.



"When the officers responded, the door was ajar; they went in and found her inside of the garage, and she had been shot," Knoll told CNN in a telephone interview.



A few hours later, officers with the Tennessee Highway Patrol and the Robertson County Sheriff's Office located Downing's vehicle about 20 miles away in Robertson County and found Downing in woods nearby, Knoll said.



"That's where he finally gave up," Knoll said. "It took them almost two hours to convince him."



Downing, who had recently served at Fort Knox in Kentucky, was taken into custody shortly before noon and was charged with criminal homicide.

***

(Mashable) -- It seems that yet another member of the animal kingdom has taken a liking to the iPad -- dolphins.





Cats love it and dogs aren't so sure, but apparently a bottlenose dolphin named Merlin is now an iPad enthusiast. Researcher Jack Kassewitz of SpeakDolphin is working on using the Apple tablet device as a language interface for marine mammals.





"We think that once the dolphins get the hang of the touch screen, we can let them choose from a wide assortment of symbols to represent objects, actions and even emotions," Kassewitz said of the project. "Merlin is quite curious, like most dolphins, and he showed complete willingness to examine the iPad."





The young two-year-old Merlin (not the first two-year-old to enjoy the device!) is reportedly able to use his snout to touch photos of objects on the iPad's touchscreen after being shown their real-world counterparts. "This is an easy task for a dolphin, but it is a necessary building block towards our goal of a complete language interface between humans and dolphins," said Kassewitz.





What do you think of the latest member of kingdom Animalia becoming a fan of the iPad? Do you think he'll be upset by AT&T's new data plan pricing?





© 2010 MASHABLE.com. All rights reserved.

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- Diane Sawyer will take over nightly news anchor duties for ABC when Charlie Gibson retires from "World News" at the end of this year, a network spokesman confirmed Wednesday.



Charlie Gibson and Diane Sawyer worked together on "Good Morning America."



Sawyer, 63, will be the second woman to be the solo host of an evening newscast for an American broadcast TV network.



Sawyer will take the chair in January, ABC's Jeffrey Schneider said.



Gibson, 66, and Sawyer worked together for years on ABC's morning show -- "Good Morning America" -- before Gibson was promoted over Sawyer to anchor ABC's "World News" in May 2006.



Elizabeth Vargas and Bob Woodruff co-anchored the newscast before Gibson. That duo came to an end after Woodruff was seriously wounded by a roadside bomb in Iraq.



Maria Brennan, president of the Washington-based American Women in Radio and Television organization, called the announcement a "watershed moment" and said Sawyer was the "obvious choice" to take over ABC's anchor chair.



Asked about the significance of two out of three network nightly news anchors being women -- the other being CBS' Katie Couric -- Brennan said, "It comes with some excitement and some glee for groups like ours, who have worked for years to ensure that women have parity with their male counterparts."



"When we get to a point in time when we don't even notice the gender, we can really celebrate," Brennan said.



Sawyer worked for President Richard Nixon in the 1970s, first in his White House press office and later helping him write his memoirs after his resignation.



After a stint with CBS News -- including five years as a "60 Minutes" correspondent -- Sawyer joined ABC News in 1989.



She worked on news magazines for ABC -- including "Primetime Live" and "20/20" -- before being assigned to co-host "Good Morning America" with Gibson in 1999.



CNN's Albert Lewintinn contributed to this report.

***

Editor's note: In our Behind the Scenes series, CNN correspondents share their experiences in covering news and analyze the stories behind the events. Here, Soledad O'Brien takes users inside a jail where many of the inmates are mentally ill.

An inmate housed on the "forgotten floor," where many mentally ill inmates are housed in Miami before trial.

MIAMI, Florida (CNN) -- The ninth floor of the Miami-Dade pretrial detention facility is dubbed the "forgotten floor." Here, inmates with the most severe mental illnesses are incarcerated until they're ready to appear in court.

Most often, they face drug charges or charges of assaulting an officer --charges that Judge Steven Leifman says are usually "avoidable felonies." He says the arrests often result from confrontations with police. Mentally ill people often won't do what they're told when police arrive on the scene -- confrontation seems to exacerbate their illness and they become more paranoid, delusional, and less likely to follow directions, according to Leifman.

So, they end up on the ninth floor severely mentally disturbed, but not getting any real help because they're in jail.

We toured the jail with Leifman. He is well known in Miami as an advocate for justice and the mentally ill. Even though we were not exactly welcomed with open arms by the guards, we were given permission to shoot videotape and tour the floor.  Go inside the 'forgotten floor' »

At first, it's hard to determine where the people are. The prisoners are wearing sleeveless robes. Imagine cutting holes for arms and feet in a heavy wool sleeping bag -- that's kind of what they look like. They're designed to keep the mentally ill patients from injuring themselves. That's also why they have no shoes, laces or mattresses.

Leifman says about one-third of all people in Miami-Dade county jails are mentally ill. So, he says, the sheer volume is overwhelming the system, and the result is what we see on the ninth floor.

Of course, it is a jail, so it's not supposed to be warm and comforting, but the lights glare, the cells are tiny and it's loud. We see two, sometimes three men -- sometimes in the robes, sometimes naked, lying or sitting in their cells.

"I am the son of the president. You need to get me out of here!" one man shouts at me.

He is absolutely serious, convinced that help is on the way -- if only he could reach the White House.

Leifman tells me that these prisoner-patients will often circulate through the system, occasionally stabilizing in a mental hospital, only to return to jail to face their charges. It's brutally unjust, in his mind, and he has become a strong advocate for changing things in Miami.

Over a meal later, we talk about how things got this way for mental patients.

Leifman says 200 years ago people were considered "lunatics" and they were locked up in jails even if they had no charges against them. They were just considered unfit to be in society.

Over the years, he says, there was some public outcry, and the mentally ill were moved out of jails and into hospitals. But Leifman says many of these mental hospitals were so horrible they were shut down.

Where did the patients go? Nowhere. The streets. They became, in many cases, the homeless, he says. They never got treatment.

Leifman says in 1955 there were more than half a million people in state mental hospitals, and today that number has been reduced 90 percent, and 40,000 to 50,000 people are in mental hospitals.

The judge says he's working to change this. Starting in 2008, many inmates who would otherwise have been brought to the "forgotten floor"  will instead be sent to a new mental health facility -- the first step on a journey toward long-term treatment, not just punishment.

Leifman says it's not the complete answer, but it's a start. Leifman says the

***

(CNN)  -- Utah is the nation's fastest growing state, increasing 2.5 percent from July 2007 to July 2008, according to new population estimates from the Census Bureau.



Barack Obama greets one of the newest members of the U.S. population this year on the campaign trail.



The main reason for Utah's growth is a "natural increase" -- births minus deaths -- said Census Bureau demographer Greg Harper.



"Utah has a strong rate of natural increase and domestic migration, where more people move into the state and [are] not moving out," he said.



"Second is Arizona," Harper said. "It grew by 2.3 percent, and the increase is due to domestic migration, meaning more people are moving into the state than moving out. Also, it's a natural increase, more people were born there than died."



Arizona is followed by Texas, North Carolina and Colorado, each with a 2.0 percent growth rate.



Texas added more people than any other state -- about 500,000 -- making it the third-fastest growing state. Because it has a larger population size, its percentage growth was less than Utah.



"Nevada was last year's fastest-growing state, but it fell to eighth," said Harper. "Overall, that state had been among the four fastest-growing states each of the past 23 years."



Only two states lost population: Michigan and Rhode Island, losing 0.5 and 0.2 percent respectively. Overall, Northeastern states are not growing as fast as other parts of the country, but they have been on the increase since 2005.



The South added the most people during the period, 1.4 million. But Western states, with a 1.4 percent increase, saw the fastest growth rate.



One state that has reversed its course of growth is Florida. A few years ago more than 250,000 people per year were moving there. But for 2007-2008, the state's 0.7 percent increase was below the nation's 0.9 percent overall increase.



According to the estimates, the United States had a net gain of just over 2.7 million people from July 2007 to July 2008.

***

(CNN) -- A 24-year-old teacher from Holyoke, Massachusetts, is in custody after allegedly leaving town with a 15-year-old student, city officials said Tuesday.

Lisa Lavoie, a 24-year-old teacher, is charged with enticement of a child.

Lisa Lavoie and the male student were found in Morgantown, West Virginia, Monday night after apparently being together for a week, Holyoke Mayor Michael Sullivan said.

Investigators have charged Lavoie with enticement of a child.

On February 13, the student's parents informed school officials of a possible relationship between the teacher and their son. That was late on a Friday afternoon, and when officials went to the school to question Lavoie, she was gone for the day. The next week was a vacation week for the school.

The student was reported missing on February 16, at the start of the vacation week. Lavoie wasn't reported missing until she didn't show up for school Monday.

Officials said the pair were in Vermont on Thursday before showing up in West Virginia on Monday. No details were provided on how their alleged movements were traced.

Officials couldn't take the pair into custody until after gathering enough evidence to obtain a warrant from the district attorney's office, said Holyoke Police Chief Anthony Scott. They got the warrant Monday and asked police in Morgantown to arrest Lavoie.

She has been placed on administrative leave pending conclusion of the investigation, Sullivan said.

If convicted, Lavoie could lose her teaching license in Massachusetts, the mayor said. She has been with the school only five months and her job is not protected under contract, he said.

***

LONDON, England -- Evander Holyfield has raised the prospect of a rematch of his infamous world heavyweight title fight with Mike Tyson despite both men being into their 40s.





Holyfield (right) grimaces after being bitten by Tyson in their 1997 fight.





Holyfield took Tyson's crown in an epic bout in 1996, but it was their second fight a year later that is remembered for all the wrong reasons with Tyson disqualified for biting a chunk out of his opponent's ear.





Holyfield, 45, has revealed he is considering an offer from 41-year-old Tyson's camp to meet in the ring for a third time. "There has been some talk between us," Holyfield told The Guardian newspaper on Thursday.





"Mike had Jeff Fenech, who's been training him, call me a few months ago. Jeff says Mike wants to fight me again - but he needs to know if I would agree to it.





"I said, 'It all depends on what they are going to give us - because I'm gonna catch a lot of flak if I say I'm fighting Mike Tyson again.





I've already said I don't want to fight Mike no more'. "Jeff says, 'What if Mike gets in proper shape?' I told him that's OK but I can't be part of it if Mike's going to pull out.





Jeff said, 'The main thing Mike wants to know is if you would be willing to fight him again?' I said, 'Yeah, if the price is right, I probably would'."





Both fighters have made largely unsuccessful attempts at comebacks in recent years with Holyfield continuing his pursuit of an unlikely fifth title against the advice of boxing experts.





He is believed to have held on to a large portion of his career earnings, but, by contrast, Tyson has suffered well-publicized financial problems. E-mail to a friend

***

ISLAMABAD, Pakistan (CNN) -- Pakistan election officials on Monday disqualified opposition party leader and former former prime minister Nawaz Sharif from participating in January parliamentary elections.



Election officials say Nawaz Sharif's previous convictions bar him from standing for reelection.



A spokesman for Sharif's Pakistan Muslim League told CNN Monday that Sharif had been barred by the election commission because of a previous criminal conviction.



Sharif filed paperwork for his candidacy last week, although he had left open the possibility that he would boycott the election in protest of a state of emergency imposed by President Pervez Musharraf.



Sharif, an outspoken critic of Musharraf, who ousted him from power in 1999, had said he wanted to keep all options open.



Sharif returned to Pakistan last month, ending seven years in exile in Saudi Arabia. He had first returned in September, but Pakistani authorities deported him within hours of his arrival.



Sharif was convicted of terrorism, hijacking and tax evasion after Musharraf seized power in 1999.



He was released in 2000 in exchange for agreeing to 10 years of exile in Saudi Arabia. He retained his Pakistani citizenship, but has not been allowed to travel to Pakistan or directly take part in Pakistani politics.



Musharraf, who quit as military leader and took office for a third term last week, has pledged to lift the state of emergency by December 16.



He was criticized of using the emergency to crack down on political rivals and to purge the judiciary of those likely to block the approval of his reappointment as leader. E-mail to a friend



-- CNN's Zein Basravi contributed to this report.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- U.S. border officers found a wire between two fences along the U.S.-Mexican border that, when stretched taut, could have seriously harmed or even decapitated Border Patrol agents, Congress was told Wednesday.



The wire was about 4 feet high when pulled tight, or about neck level for an agent on an ATV, officials say.



"It was configured in a way so that, if it was pulled, it would take off the head of a Border Patrol agent riding in an open car," Homeland Security Secretary Michael Chertoff said at a House budget hearing.



The wire was discovered Saturday when authorities monitoring a surveillance camera saw two people on the north side of the border east of the San Ysidro Port of Entry, in the San Diego sector.



Border Patrol agents sent to the area found a thick metal wire tied to a secondary fence.



The wire stretched across the border road and led into Mexico through a hole in the primary fence, according to U.S. Customs and Border Protection.



When pulled tight, the wire would be about 4 feet high -- about neck level for an agent riding on an all-terrain vehicle, CBP said.



Officials said they suspected that drug or illegal immigrant smugglers were involved.



No arrests were made on either side of the border. The wire was removed, and no injuries or damage took place, CBP said. E-mail to a friend

***

(CNN) -- NASA and Japan improved our world view this week, or at least our view of the world.



This image using ASTER imagery shows the Himalayan glaciers in Bhutan.



The American space agency and Japan's Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry have released a new digital topographic map of Earth that accurately portrays more of our planet than ever before.



The new map consists of 1.3 million images taken by NASA's Terra satellite that have been pieced together to form a unified picture of the planet. The images were taken by a Japanese imaging instrument called the Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer, or ASTER.



"This is the most complete, consistent global digital elevation data yet made available to the world," said Woody Turner, a program scientist at NASA headquarters in Washington.



The map covers more than 99 percent of Earth's land mass from north of the Arctic Circle to south of the Antarctic Circle. During February 2000, space shuttle Endeavour mapped about 80 percent of the planet's surface.



"The ASTER data fill in many of the voids in the shuttle mission's data, such as in very steep terrains and in some deserts," said Michael Kobrick, a shuttle project scientist at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, which manages the program. "NASA is working to combine" the new data with that from the shuttle and other sources "to produce an even better global topographic map."

***

(CNN) -- Motorsport's ruling body has officially approved a host of Formula One team name changes for the 2012 season.





Team Lotus, Lotus Renault and Virgin were all given permission to alter their names following a meeting of the Federation Internationale de l'Automobile's F1 commission in Geneva last week.





CNN-sponsored Lotus will now be known as Caterham F1 from next year onwards, while Virgin will be renamed Marussia F1.





Russian carmaker Marussia Motors purchased a significant stake in Virgin in November 2010, and has had its logo present on the car throughout the 2011 season.





Renault will also undergo changes ahead of next year's campaign, changing the team's chassis name to Lotus.





The announcements mark the end of a two-year spell which has seen two teams race using the legendary name.





"We are very pleased that our chassis name change has been approved," team principal Eric Boullier told Renault's official website.





"We have said all along that, in the interests of the sport, it is important that we remove any ambiguity on this matter. It is also important that there are clearly identifiable teams on the grid.





"It is the start of another chapter for Enstone (the team's HQ), but not a whole new beginning. The team's history and experience will allow us to take up this challenge with a controlled and swift process. We're very much looking forward to 2012."





Red Bull's Sebastian Vettel has already retained the 2011 world drivers' championship, with the Britain-based Austrian team having also clinched the constructors' title for the second year in a row.





The penultimate race of the campaign is on Sunday in Abu Dhabi, before the season-ending Brazilian Grand Prix on November 27.

***

(CNN) -- Authorities investigating the case of a boy who disappeared in Kansas almost a decade ago plan to search an undisclosed residence Wednesday, the Butler County sheriff said.



An age-progression photo shows what Adam Herrman would like today, as a 21-year-old man.



Sheriff Craig Murphy would not disclose details about the residence or why authorities want to search it.



He said his department will also search on an area of the Whitewater River, in southern Kansas, on Saturday near where Adam Herrman was last seen.



Adam was 11 when he went missing in 1999. He was living in a mobile home park in Towanda, a town about 25 miles northeast of Wichita, with his adoptive parents, Doug and Valerie Herrman, authorities said.



Wichita attorney Warner Eisenbise, who is representing Adam's adoptive parents, said the couple believed Adam had run away and didn't report him missing. They "really rue the fact that they didn't" report him missing, he said Monday.



A few weeks ago, an undisclosed person contacted the Wichita-Sedgwick County Exploited and Missing Child Unit, expressing concern about Adam, the sheriff said.



The Herrmans told Eisenbise that Adam ran away frequently, the attorney said, and they believed he was either with his biological parents or homeless. Although the Herrmans did not report him missing, "they were very worried about him," Eisenbise said.



In an interview published Tuesday in The Wichita Eagle, Valerie Herrman said Adam ran away in May 1999 after she spanked him with a belt. She said she was upset but doesn't remember why, The Eagle reported.



The couple never reported Adam missing, Valerie Herrman told the paper, because they feared authorities would take Adam and his siblings away because of the spanking.



The couple adopted his two younger siblings as well, according to The Eagle.



"We love him, and we made a terrible mistake" by not reporting him missing, Doug Herrman told The Eagle. The couple said they searched the mobile home park and other areas for two days after Adam left.



"Then we came to the conclusion that the police probably have him, and they're coming to us, probably to get us in trouble," Doug Herrman told the newspaper, but the "police never came."



Authorities have searched an empty lot in the Pine Ridge Mobile Home Park where the family lived. There, police found an "answer" to one of their questions, Murphy said Monday without elaborating.



Eisenbise said that on December 15, authorities also searched the Herrmans' homes in Derby, outside of Wichita, and took the couple's computer, he said.



The National Center for Missing and Exploited Children has released an age-progression picture that depicts Adam as he might appear now: a young man with blue eyes and light-colored hair.



Adam had been placed in the Herrmans' care when he was about 2, Murphy said Monday.



He had been named Irvin Groeninger III when he was born June 8, 1987, Murphy said, and it was not clear when his name was changed. His biological parents relinquished their rights as parents about two decades ago, and Adam and his siblings were put in foster homes, CNN affiliate KWCH reported.



"I thought what I was doing for them was in the best interest of the children, and evidently it wasn't," Irvin Groeninger, Adam's biological father,  told KWCH. "If he was still in my custody, this would have never happened."



Adam's sister, Tiffany Broadfoot, 22, said she had last seen her brother about 14 years ago at a birthday party.



"He had the cutest little round face, little-bitty freckles right up here on the tip of his cheek," she told the station.



CNN's Taylor Gandossy contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Much-needed rain fell across drought-stricken Texas on Sunday, offering relief but no end to what's been one of the state's driest years on record.





Some areas received more rain in a day than had fallen all summer.





Waco, Texas, where temperatures hit at least 100 degrees Fahrenheit 78 days this year, received 5.83 inches of rain, according to the National Weather Service. Dallas got 1.37 inches of rain, while San Antonio received 3.06 inches -- a record for the date.





The weather service forecast rainfall amounts over the central and southern Plains of 1-3 inches per hour, with totals of more than 10 inches possible in some places by Monday morning.





"This should put a significant dent in the ongoing severe drought over portions of the area, but this amount of rain in a short period of time could also lead to possible flash flooding across northern Texas and Oklahoma," the weather service said.





It added that drought conditions are expected to persist because of the magnitude of the shortage.





With much of the state in an exceptional drought, Texas has been scarred by one of the worst fire seasons in memory.





Since wildfire season started in November, more than 3.8 million of the state's 167.5 million acres have burned in some 24,000 fires, according to the Texas Forest Service. Roughly 2,800 homes were destroyed.





"What the state needs is several widespread rainfall events over several months," the weather service said.





Heavy rains and slippery field conditions at Rangers Ballpark in Arlington forced the postponement Sunday of the second game of the American League Championship Series. Weather permitting, the Texas Rangers and Detroit Tigers will make up the game Monday afternoon.





CNN's Jacqui Jeras contributed to this report.

***

Editor's note: Campbell Brown anchors CNN's "Campbell Brown: No Bias, No Bull" at 8 p.m. ET Mondays through Fridays. She delivered this commentary during the "Cutting through the Bull" segment of Thursday night's broadcast.

CNN's Campbell Brown says John Thain, according to CNBC, spent $28,000 on curtains.

(CNN) -- John Thain, the former CEO of Merrill Lynch, resigned Thursday from the company that bought Merrill out, Bank of America. As far as we can tell, his departure couldn't come soon enough.

Not long ago, Thain was credited with keeping Merrill alive long enough to be rescued.

Now we learn the man who asked for, then quickly withdrew, his request for a $10 million bonus still managed to live large while Merrill teetered on the brink and workers paid the price.

According to CNBC, Thain spent more than $1.2 million in company funds to spruce up his office, hiring a world-class designer to decorate in full decadence.

The list includes an $87,000 "area rug," $28,000 for curtains, a $68,000 credenza and the perfect finishing touch: a $1,400 wastebasket.

This is what passes for corporate responsibility?

CEO John Thain: picking out fancy new curtains while the walls are tumbling down.

The opinions expressed in this commentary are solely those of Campbell Brown.

***

LONDON, England (CNN)  -- An elderly British couple who died together at an assisted suicide clinic in Switzerland died "peacefully" after receiving "wonderful and humbling care" from their doctors, the couple's family said.



Peter and Penelope Duff from Bath, England, died in Zurich on February 27, according to a statement released Thursday by their family and reported by Britain's Press Association. Both had terminal cancer, the statement said.



"Penny had fought a rare cancer, GIST, since 1992 and Peter's colon cancer had spread to his liver," the statement said.



"Their decision in no way reflected on the wonderful and humbling care they have received from their consultant, doctors and nurses, for which the family, and they, were so appreciative."



Peter Duff, who was reported to be 80, was the executive chairman of Alcohol in Moderation, a nonprofit group that advocates a "sensible drinking ethos." His daughter, Helena Conibear, is executive director of AIM Digest, a monthly publication.



Conibear and AIM could not be reached for comment Friday.



The Press Association said Penelope Duff was 70. Her condition, GIST, stands for gastrointestinal stromal tumor, a rare type of cancer found in the digestive system.



Dignity in Dying, a British charity that advocates the choice of assisted death for terminally ill patients, said it was "extremely sad" that the Duffs had to travel abroad to die.



"Had they had the option of an assisted death in this country they may still be alive, as their physical ability to travel would not have been a factor," said Sarah Wootton, chief executive of Dignity in Dying.



Wootton called on Parliament to modernize laws on suicide to allow for assisted dying.



Phyllis Bowman, executive director of Right to Life, which opposes euthanasia, also said the Duffs' case was sad.



"I think it's very sad, particularly as they could have gone together into a hospice. A hospice with cancer -- there is not uncontrollable pain," Bowman told CNN. "I think that with the euthanasia lobby, they feed on despair and they encourage despair rather than hope."

***

(PEOPLE.com) -- Melissa McCarthy is no longer just a bridesmaid. She's the bride.





The "Mike & Molly" Emmy winner and "Bridesmaids" scene-stealer has some big plans on her plate -- from launching her own plus-size fashion line to getting hockey's prized Stanley Cup (for a movie) -- during what is already a stellar year for her.





But none of her professional plans can top her favorite pastime, being mom to her two daughters with actor-husband Ben Falcone: Vivian, 4, and Georgette, 1Â½. McCarthy tells the Hollywood Reporter that being a mother actually helps her feel less insecure about her looks.





"The stupid stuff like what I wear or how I look I can't control, so I just try not to give too much energy to it," she says, calling her body a work in progress after giving birth to Georgette. "At 20, I would have been like: 'Don't they like me? Was it my hair?' At 41, I think the things that define me, I hope, are a lot more than those kinds of petty things."





As for those red-carpet moments, "Trying to find stuff that's still fashion-forward in my size is damn near impossible. It's either for like a 98-year-old woman or a 14-year-old hooker, and there is nothing in the middle," McCarthy wisecracks. Case in point: trying to outfit herself for the Emmys, which required sifting through "nine million dresses with taffeta or shiny bows."





The final result was McCarthy's own line that she is co-designing with couturier Daniella Pearl.





Hosting SNL This Weekend





Fans needn't fret, however -- she'll still be doing comedy, including hosting this weekend's "Saturday Night Live." She psyched for this, too, admitting to having an emotional reaction when the producers invited her to do it.





"I went into such an embarrassing, weird, inappropriately loud cry," says McCarthy. "I'm bent over, literally, in the rug section of Living Spaces, wailing."





Also ahead: starring in and co-writing a movie with "Bridesmaids" scribe Annie Mumolo, which is about hijacking the Stanley Cup to cheer up her sick husband; costarring with Jason Bateman in a movie comedy (still in the talking stage); and appearing in Judd Apatow's as-yet-untitled "Knocked Up" spin-off -- and that, reportedly, is only for starters.





See the full article at PEOPLE.com.





© 2011 People and Time Inc. All rights reserved.

***

Washington (CNN) -- In a change of policy, U.S. Marines are now allowed to wear bracelets in memory of fallen comrades.





The metal or rubber bracelets can honor "prisoners of war, missing in action, killed in action, and those who died of wounds or injuries sustained in a combat theater," the Marine Corps said in a statement Tuesday.





Some Marines had been wearing the bracelets -- which list names of those killed in Afghanistan, Iraq or other zones -- despite their not being permitted by regulations. There had been questions about enforcement of the policy.





The decision came out of a symposium last week at which the issue was discussed by the Marine commandant, Gen. James F. Amos, and his senior officers, the statement said.





"We are acknowledging the close personal nature of our 10 years at war and the strong bonds of fidelity that Marines have for one another, especially for those fellow Marines who we have lost," Amos said in the release.





Amos on Monday met Marines who had returned to the Marine Corps Air Ground Combat Center at Twentynine Palms, California, from Afghanistan. He noticed bracelets and received "positive feedback" on the wearing of the them, said Maj. Stewart T. Upton, a Marine spokesman.





About 360 members of the 3rd Battalion, 4th Marines, were welcomed home. They had five comrades killed during their seven-month deployment in Helmand Province, said center spokesman Capt. Nicholas Mannweiler.





"They are typically providing security," said Mannweiler. "They made a lot of improvements."





The captain said the policy decision on the bracelets signified "we get why you're wearing it and it's blessed."





Guidance on "standardization and uniformity" will be distributed to Marines by the end of next week, the Corps said.





Marines had been permitted to wear the long-familiar POW/MIA bracelets since 1972, during the Vietnam War, Upton said.

***

London (CNN) -- English soccer player Billy Sharp scored what he called the most important goal of his career Tuesday -- a shot in memory of his son Luey, who died Saturday, two days after he was born.





Sharp pulled up his jersey after the goal went in to reveal a t-shirt underneath reading "That's for you son."





The goal was "Dedicated to my brave boy Luey Jacob Sharp I love u son sleep tight. That's for you son," Sharp said on Twitter after the match.





"My goal had to be something special tonight for my special boy.I'm so proud of him,and his mum," he said.





Referees normally give players a yellow card for showing a message on a t-shirt, but Darren Deadman declined to penalize Sharp.





Luey was born October 27. He died October 29, said Sharp's team, Doncaster Rovers.





Sharp was not expected to play Tuesday, but not only took the field but was named team captain for the night.





Fans of both Rovers and their opponents Middlesbrough cheered to honor Sharp and his family before the match.





"This is a minute's applause to celebrate the short life of Billy and Jade's son Luey Jacob Sharp," the announcer said.





"Born October 27. Taken by the angels on the 29th. Sleep tight son," he said.





Sharp said the tribute left him in tears.





"To captain the side tonight was an honor and a pleasure,the minute applause I was crying meant so much to me thanks to both sets of fans," he tweeted.





Hundreds of people tweeted their support to Sharp and his family.





"What you've done has put life into perspective, you've won the hearts of the nation, and united football," said one, Ben Wainwright.





Sharp and his wife were "grateful for the love and support we have received," she said on Twitter. "Daddy did Luey proud tonight. Sleep tight angel."

***

BANGKOK, Thailand (CNN) -- The wife of ousted Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra arrived in Thailand Tuesday morning to face corruption charges, promising to fight the accusations, her attorney said.



Pojamarn Shinawatra with her husband Thaksin Shinawatra.



According to Pichit Chuenban, Pojamarn Shinawatra was presented with an arrest warrant shortly after arriving at Bangkok's Suvarnabhumi International Airport and was escorted by authorities to the Supreme Court.



"She intends to fight all charges through judicial system," Pichit said.



Greeted by about 50 well-wishers, Pojamarn arrived at court accompanied by her three children. She faces charges stemming from a Bangkok land deal and a stock concealment plan that could put her in jail for up to eight years, according to the Thai News Agency.



The court released her on 5 million baht (about $168,000) bail and ordered her not to leave the country.



On Monday, Thaksin's attorney Noppadon Pattama said the former prime minister would return from exile in mid-April to answer to the same charges his wife faces. He was deposed by a military junta in Sept. 2006 and fled to London. He plans to return after Thailand's new government is in place.



In December's parliamentary elections, supporters of Thaksin, the People Power Party, won nearly half the seats in the lower house and will lead the ruling coalition.



PPP leader Samak Sundaravej said a new parliament controlled by his party would pass an amnesty law to allow Thaksin's return and amend the constitution to let Thaksin get back into politics.



Thaksin said he would not re-enter politics when he returned to Thailand. He said that he and his family had "suffered enough" but that he wanted to face the charges against him and prove his innocence.



Thaksin is a 58-year-old telecommunications tycoon who owns the English Premier League Manchester City Football Club. Thaksin's party won two landslide victories before he was deposed. E-mail to a friend

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Burberry, the 150-year-old British luxury brand most famous for its distinctive check pattern, has recently experienced a resurgence.



Christopher Bailey, Burberry's creative director, has been credited with the brand's resurgence.



The brand credits much of its new a la mode image to creative director Christopher Bailey.



The unassuming 37-year-old British designer has successfully reconnected Burberry with a trendy young audience -- using the likes of British super model Agyness Deyn, whom he has propelled to international stardom -- in ad campaigns.



But times are hard for luxury brands, with a recession that has turned many high-end consumers toward cheaper alternatives.



So how is Bailey handling the current economic climate?



With stylish new headquarters in the heart of London and the recent opening of a Burberry Children's wear store in the capital, it seems the brand has kept its wheels rolling.  Watch Burberry's creative director speak to CNN »



Bailey believes the new headquarters were an important extension of Burberry's image, telling CNN "the building is the brand beacon."



"It's so important that everyone lives and breathes the aesthetic of what Burberry is. We have to do what feels right for the company," Bailey added.



But that does not mean that Burberry is ignoring the recession. "It's all about the balance between functionality and emotion. You have to be instinctive about what's going on," said Bailey.



"We think about the world recession, but it helps us focus and make sure that the brand purity and integrity is there in everything we do.



"We've just opened our first [children's wear] store in London and the first signs are pretty wonderful."



But Bailey agrees that "there has been incredible excess in the last five to 10 years, so it's a good moment to re-balance."



So how will that translate to the catwalk? "The [clothes] will be investment pieces for the long-term. It's not just about fashion for a season."

***

RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil (CNN) -- Former presidents of Mexico, Colombia and Brazil called Wednesday for the decriminalization of marijuana for personal use and a change in tactics on the war on drugs, a Spanish news agency said.

People march in support of legalized marijuana in late January in Belem, northern Brazil.

Ex-presidents Ernesto Zedillo of Mexico, Cesar Gaviria of Colombia and Fernando Henrique Cardoso of Brazil made their announcement at a meeting in Brazil of the Latin American Commission on Drugs and Democracy, the EFE news agency said.

"The problem is that current policies are based on prejudices and fears and not on results," Gaviria said at a news conference in which the commission's recommendations were presented.

The 17-member panel worked on the report for a year and will forward it to all Latin American governments as well as the United States and the European Union, EFE said. Gaviria said the time is right to start a debate on the subject, particularly with the pragmatic openings provided by the election of President Barack Obama in the United States.

"In many states in the United States, as is the case in California, they have begun to change federal policies with regard to tolerating marijuana for therapeutic purposes. And in Washington there's some consensus that the current policy is failing," EFE quotes Gaviria as saying.

Decriminalization should be accompanied by treatment for addicts and public service campaigns on abuse prevention, the commission said.

"If you don't help those who are dependent, you are half way there because they are going to commit crime to get money and pay for the drug," Gaviria said.

Cardoso said the group called for only the decriminalization of marijuana and not other illicit drugs because "you have to start somewhere" and it would have been unrealistic to ask the same for all drugs, EFE said.

Marijuana was chosen because it is grown in all countries in the region and because it is "less harmful."

The decades-old criminalization of personal consumption has failed to stop the plant's cultivation and distribution, the group said.

The commission urged that all current criminal prosecution be aimed at drug cartels and organized crime and not marijuana smokers, EFE said.

Zedillo did not attend the news conference but worked on the report, Cardoso said.

Wednesday's recommendation was the second time in less than a week that a Latin American government official called for decriminalization.

A mayor in Peru suggested Friday that the federal government legalize illicit drugs and administer them through the national health ministry.

Gusto Sierra, the mayor of the Surquillo district in Lima, said a federal drug law is hypocritical because it allows maximum legally allowed quantities for some drugs and plants but doesn't say where to acquire them, the Peru 21 newspaper reported in a front-page story headlined "Say yes to drugs?"

Sierra said he will take the matter up with the nation's executive branch.

Zedillo served as president of Mexico from 1994-2000. Gaviria was president of Colombia from 1990-94. And Cardoso led Brazil from 1995-2002.

***

(CNN) -- A five-year-old British boy who was kidnapped in Pakistan earlier this month has been found safe and is back with his relatives, the British High Commission said Tuesday.





Sahil Saeed was released at a school in the Punjab province of Pakistan, said Assistant Chief Constable David Thompson of the Greater Manchester Police in England, near his parents' residence in Oldham.





From there, Sahil wandered into a field and was found by residents who looked after him until police arrived, Thompson said.





Regional Pakistani police said Sahil was found near the town of Danga in Punjab province, close to where he was abducted March 3.





Sahil was in good condition, said Aslam Tareen, the head of the regional police.





"He is with members of family in Pakistan and the Pakistani police, and there is also contact from the British High Commission," Thompson said. He added that Sahil had already spoken to his mother and father in England by telephone and that both parents were "clearly relieved" to speak to their son.





The High Commission issued a statement thanking police in Jhelum, another town in the eastern province of Punjab, for the boy's return.





"This is fantastic news that brings to an end a traumatic ordeal faced by Sahil and his family," said Adam Thomson, the British high commissioner to Pakistan.





Police arrested some of the kidnappers, said Rana Sanaullah, the provincial law minister.





Sahil, a British citizen of Pakistani descent, was on the last day of a two-week vacation in Pakistan before he was to return home to Oldham, in northern England.





Gunmen barged into Sahil's grandmother's home in Jhelum and took him. They reportedly demanded a ransom of 10 million rupees ($118,000).





Pakistan's Interior Minister Rehman Malik had said the captors included someone close to the family.





"There is someone who is very close to the family because the way the situation happened, the way the entry was made," Malik told reporters.





But Tareen said Tuesday there is no evidence that any family member was involved. There was also no indication a ransom was paid, Tareen said.





Sanaullah, the law minister, said the kidnappers were part of a ring that operated in and out of Pakistan. He did not elaborate.





Thompson, of the Greater Manchester Police, could not comment on the possibility of arrests in England.





"At this stage there are no inquiries that we're carrying out in the UK that would lead me to contemplate that we'd make an arrest in the near future," he said.

***

(CNN) -- A Maryland funeral home has lost its license after investigators found about 40 bodies stacked on top of each other, leaking fluid, in a garage, a state official said.





The state Board of Morticians and Funeral Directors revoked the license of Chambers Funeral Home & Crematorium in Riverdale, Maryland after an April 26 visit to the site.





Hari Close, president of the the state funeral board, told CNN Tuesday that some of the bodies were cadavers who had been donated to a local university for research. Other bodies came from other funeral homes, Close said.





The bodies were supposed to be cremated, but investigators were alarmed at how they were stored in the garage while they awaited cremation.





"Even somebody who donates their body to science, they still should be treated with dignity," said Close. "Not to mention the health and safety issues with the body fluids flowing out."





William Chambers, co-owner of the funeral home, told CNN-affiliate WJLA said that he hopes to work with the state to resolve the alleged violations.





When investigators inspected the funeral home they were warned by an employee, who told them, "Don't get upset about all the bodies in there," according to documents released by the state funeral board.





Inside the room was a "large pile, approximately 12 by 12 feet, of body bags containing human remains strewn on the floor of the garage in front of a removal van. There was visible leakage from the body bags as well as a pungent odor," the documents said.





"The investigator also observed writing on some of the body bags," they said. "However, fluid leakage from the body bags caused the writing to smear and become illegible. As a result, it was not immediately possible to determine the identity of the remains."





There will be a hearing at the end of the month to determine whether the funeral home will get its license back, Close said.





CNN's Patty Lane contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Four Virginia men were arrested Tuesday on allegations of bribery and kickbacks in what prosecutors describe as an elaborate scheme thought to involve hundreds of millions of dollars in contracts connected to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.





The suspects include two long-time Corps employees charged in an alleged conspiracy involving more than $20 million in bribes and kickbacks, as well as a plan to try to steer a $780 million contract to a favored contractor, the U.S. Justice Department reported. Another of the defendants is director of contracts for a company that did business with the federal government, the Justice Department said.





Corps employees Michael Alexander, 55, and Kerry Khan, 53, as well as Khan's son, Lee, 30, and Harold Babb, 60, were all indicted on charges of conspiracy to commit bribery and wire fraud, conspiracy to commit money laundering, and aiding and abetting, according to a Justice Department statement.





Both Kerry Khan and Alexander also face one count each of receipt of a bribe by a public official. If convicted, both men could each face a maximum 40-year sentence behind bars.





Babb, meanwhile, also was handed a charge related to unlawful kickbacks, and could face up to 35 years in prison. He was director of contracts at Eyak Tek, an Alaska Native-owned small business based in Dulles, Virginia.





Lee Khan, who controlled a consulting company with his father, faces a sentence of up to 25 years if convicted, according to the Justice Department.





All four men pleaded not guilty in federal court in Washington Tuesday afternoon.





Thought to have used their positions within the Corps, the elder Khan and his colleague Alexander are suspected of having funneled more than $45 million in payments by way of a federal contract that they oversaw, according to the indictment.





About $20 million in fraudulent expenses were built into those invoices, which were then diverted to all four defendants, prosecutors say..





Authorities are in the process of seizing funds in 29 bank accounts, as well as three luxury vehicles and seven high-end watches, and are pursing a forfeiture allegation against 16 real properties financed in whole or in part with proceeds from the alleged crimes, the Justice Department said..





It was not clear Tuesday whether the suspects have retained legal counsel.

***

(CNN) -- A man shot and killed seven patients and a nurse at a Carthage, North Carolina, nursing home Sunday before being wounded during a shootout with a police officer, authorities said.

Relatives of the nursing home's patients gathered at a nearby church, where they learned details of the shooting.

Three other people, including the police officer and a visitor to the nursing home, were wounded in the attack, Carthage Police Chief Chris McKenzie said. The police officer was treated and released, McKenzie said.

The slain patients ranged in age from 78 to 98, Moore County District Attorney Maureen Krueger said. The man accused of carrying out the attack, 45-year-old Robert Stewart, was in custody, and his condition was unknown Sunday night, McKenzie said.

Stewart was not an employee of the Pinelake Health and Rehab Center, and he did not appear to have been related to any of the patients, she said.

"There is still more to be uncovered as far as his purpose in being there," she said.

A witness told CNN affiliate WRAL-TV that Stewart was armed with a rifle, a shotgun and other weapons. The officer who stopped him, Justin Garner, "acted in nothing short of a heroic manner" and probably stopped the carnage from being worse, Krueger said.  Watch stunned community react »

Jerry Avant Sr. told WRAL that his son, Jerry Avant, a 39-year-old registered nurse, was the employee who was killed in the shooting. He said a doctor told him that his son had been shot more than two dozen times.  Watch father of slain nurse and ex-wife of suspect react »

The doctor "said he undoubtedly saved a lot of lives," Avant Sr. said, speaking of his son.

Stewart faces eight counts of first-degree murder and one count of felony assault on a police officer, and other charges are pending, she said.

Carthage is about 60 miles southwest of Raleigh.  See map showing Carthage, Raleigh »

Sunday's slayings were the latest in a series of high-profile in March, including the killings of 10 people by an Alabama man who was then killed by police. In addition, a man shot and killed a pastor in a southern Illinois church and stabbed two parishioners, and a 17-year-old in Germany killed 15 people in two small towns before dying in a shootout with police.

In Carthage, crisis counselors were setting up in the town's First Baptist Church to aid survivors of the latest killings.

"I don't know the emotion entirely has set in," McKenzie said. "This is a small community built on faith, and faith will get us through."

***

(CNN) -- Three Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, police officers became the first department fatalities since 1995 Saturday morning while responding to a domestic dispute call, Police Chief Nathan Harper said.



Law enforcement from several jurisdictions respond to a shooting standoff at Pittsburgh home Saturday.



"We have never had to lose three officers in the line of duty at one time at one call," Harper said.



Suspect Richard Poplawski surrendered around 11 a.m. outside the Stanton Heights home he shares with his mother after a standoff that lasted nearly four hours and left two more officers injured.



Wearing a bulletproof vest and armed with an AK-47, a long rifle and a pistol, Poplawski fired about 100 rounds during the standoff, Harper said.  Watch officers respond at the scene »



Poplawski was taken into custody after surrendering to law enforcement. He is expected to face charges of homicide, aggravated assault and other related offenses, Harper said.



Officer Paul Sciullo III was the first to approach the home after responding to the scene around 7:05 a.m. He was shot in the head as he entered the doorway.



When Officer Stephen Mayhle tried to help his fellow officer, he too was shot in the head, Harper said.



Officer Eric Kelly, who rushed to the scene on his way home after finishing his shift, was fatally shot as he attempted to assist his fallen colleagues, Harper said.



The shootings triggered a standoff between Poplawski, who was shooting from his bedroom window, and law enforcement agencies from several jurisdictions, Harper said.



Poplawski opened fire at an Army SWAT vehicle that arrived around 8:30 a.m., preventing them and medics from reaching the wounded policemen.



Officer Timothy McManaway also was shot in the hand, the chief said. Another officer, Brian Jones, broke his leg while trying to get over a fence while securing the rear of the house, he said.



Some neighbors were evacuated during the standoff. Neighbors reported that the family had caused trouble before and Harper said police had responded to calls from the home two or three times.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- The United States will allow Americans to send mobile phones to relatives in Cuba under a change in policy that President Bush announced Wednesday.



President Bush announces the U.S. policy allowing cell phones to Cuba at the White House on Wednesday.



Bush said he is making the change since President Raúl Castro "is allowing Cubans to own mobile phones for the first time."



"If he is serious about his so-called reforms, he will allow these phones to reach the Cuban people," Bush said.



Bush urged the Cuban government to loosen restrictions further, saying if Cubans can be allowed to own mobile phones, "they should be trusted to speak freely in public."



They should be allowed to watch uncensored movies and have free access to the Internet, he said.



And he called for the government to implement major free-market reforms.



Relations between the United States and Cuba remain tense nearly 50 years after Fidel Castro overthrew the pro-American government in Havana. The United States has maintained an embargo against Cuba for decades.



Cuban officials on Monday accused the top U.S. diplomat in Havana of delivering money from private anti-Castro groups in Florida to dissidents in Cuba.



U.S. State Department spokesman Sean McCormack said that "the U.S. government has programs to provide humanitarian assistance to people that are essentially forgotten by the Cuban government and that we ... do not stand in the way of private groups doing that as well."



As to how that is done, he said, "I'm not aware of the mechanics; I don't steep myself in these things."



Fidel Castro, beset with health problems, handed day-to-day governing power over to Raúl, his younger brother, earlier this year.



After being elected president in February, Raúl Castro announced that Cubans who can afford them could buy cell phones and DVD players and stay in hotels previously reserved for foreign tourists -- overturning bans from the Fidel era.



The goods and services remain out of reach for most people on the island, where $120 cell phones plus $10.80 calling cards cost about six times the average monthly salary.



Bush said Wednesday it is "the height of hypocrisy to claim credit to allow Cubans to purchase appliances that virtually none of them can afford."



Though the price may put mobile phones out of the reach of most Cubans, they are affordable for many of those who have access to U.S. dollars -- typically either sent from relatives abroad or earned internally by tourist workers.



Bush on Wednesday marked what the White House called a Day of Solidarity with the Cuban People, which the president said he hopes will be an annual event.

***

(Entertainment Weekly) -- In what feels like a box-office weekend from "The Twilight Zone," a low-budget and critically acclaimed movie with no stars and an unknown director managed to top the charts.



"District 9," the alien action pic produced by Peter Jackson, crushed the competition grossing $37 million.



"District 9," the alien action pic produced by Peter Jackson and directed by the 29-year-old Neill Blomkamp ? who shot the film in Johannesburg, South Africa, of all places -- crushed the competition by grossing $37 million, according to early estimates.



Audiences clearly enjoyed what they saw too: "District 9" has already soared to No. 78 on IMDb's top 250 movies list, although it'll obviously drop some as the initial euphoria wears off.



Second place went to "G.I. Joe: The Rise of Cobra," which dropped 59 percent in its second weekend but still managed to recruit $22.5 million. The $175 million action movie should pass $100 million domestically by Monday.



"The Time Traveler's Wife" materialized into third place with $19.2 million in its debut weekend, proving that there is a market for watching Eric Bana disappear. Rounding out the top 5 were "Julie & Julia" (No. 4 with $12.4 million) and "G-Force" (No. 5 with $6.9 million), respectively.



Also opening wide was a trio of movies that failed to make a significant dent on the box office. "The Goods: Live Hard, Sell Hard," a cars-salesmen comedy starring Jeremy Piven, barely registered on the mercury thermometer by earning $5.4 million.



"Ponyo," the 10th film by Japan's animation auteur Hayao Miyazaki, grossed $3.5 million on 927 screens. While that amount represents Miyazaki's best opening weekend in America, it's still fish feed compared to "Ponyo's" worldwide gross of $187 million.



The music comedy "Bandslam" won't be getting any requests for encores after making only $2.3 million from more than 2,000 screens ? even the promise of seeing the "Taylor Lautner takes off his shirt" trailer of The "Twilight" Saga: New Moon couldn't save the Vanessa Hudgens movie.



In limited release, the Jimmy Page/The Edge/Jack White music documentary "It Might Get Loud" opened promisingly, grossing $101,000 from just seven theaters. And "500 Days of Summer" continues to cement its title as "the indie breakout of the summer" by charming $3 million more from moviegoers, bringing its total to $18 million so far.



CLICK HERE to Try 2 RISK FREE issues of Entertainment Weekly

***

Washington (CNN) -- President Obama and the rest of the first family teamed up with an extremely oversized rabbit Monday to the host the annual White House Easter Egg Roll, much to the delight of visiting children from across the country.





The theme of this year's festivities was "Ready, Set, Go!" -- a reference to first lady Michelle Obama's "Let's Move" initiative, which is designed to address the problem of childhood obesity.





The first family kicked off the event, which dates to 1878, shortly before 11 a.m., appearing with the Easter Bunny on the White House's South Portico, a balcony overlooking the residence's sprawling South Lawn.





"Is this not the most perfect day for the Easter Egg Roll?" Michelle Obama asked the enthusiastic crowd. Washington is currently in the middle of a warm spell under a clear sky.





"Our hope today is that in addition to having fun and doing some of the traditional activities like the egg roll ... you can learn about beginning to live a more healthy life," she said.





As well as participating in the traditional egg roll, families were invited to visit the White House garden and play football, basketball and tennis, among other things. Several celebrities attended the event, including players from the Washington Redskins and athletes Apolo Ohno and Billie Jean King.





The president also read the Dr. Seuss book "Green Eggs and Ham" to the visiting children.





"When your parents tell you to eat your broccoli, you don't know whether you're going to like them or not," he told the kids, emphasizing the point of the classic story. "You've got to try it. ... [And] when your parents tell you to eat your peas, eat your peas."





The first White House Easter Egg Roll was hosted by President Rutherford B. Hayes in 1878.

***

NEW YORK (CNN) -- A man who allegedly set off a small bomb at a Starbucks coffee shop was arrested after he made the mistake of bragging about his exploit to friends, police said Wednesday.



An NYPD officer stands guard outside a Starbucks where a bomb went off on Memorial Day.



New York City Police Commissioner Raymond Kelly told reporters that Kyle Shaw, 17, was arrested Tuesday night at his Manhattan apartment after a police investigation revealed that he bragged to his friends about planting the explosive outside an Upper East Side Starbucks on May 25.



Shaw allegedly told his friends prior to the explosion that "Project Mayhem" was about to begin, Kelly said, and that they should watch the news on Memorial Day.



Shaw was a fan of the movie "Fight Club" and imitated Brad Pitt's character from the film, the police commissioner said -- although he apparently failed to adhere to Pitt's famous line in the film: "The first rule of Fight Club is, you do not talk about Fight Club." The movie, released in 1999, also includes a scene in which a Starbucks is destroyed.



Kelly said there is no evidence at this time to suggest that Shaw was behind other recent small explosions in the city, such as the bombings at the Times Square Army recruiting center and the Mexican consulate.



Shaw made the small explosive out of a plastic bottle, firework powder, a metal cap and electrical tape, Kelly said.



The blast, at 3:30 a.m. on Memorial Day, damaged a nearby bench and shattered the store's windows, the commissioner said.



No one was injured in the explosion, but the bomb was powerful enough to have caused serious injuries if anyone had been nearby, Kelly said.



Shaw has been charged with arson, criminal possession of a weapon and criminal mischief, he added.

***

(CNN) -- Police have made an arrest in the home invasion slaying last year of a Southern California couple in their beach house, authorities said Monday.





Joshua Graham Packer, 20, of Ventura is facing charges including three counts of murder and two counts of robbery, Capt. Ross Bonfiglio of the Ventura County Sheriff's Department said.





Packer is accused of murdering Brock Husted, his wife, Davina Husted, and her fetus. The Husteds, who were both 42, were stabbed to death in their seaside home in Faria Beach, California, on May 20.





Chief Gary Pentis of the Ventura County Sheriff's Department said it appeared the suspect targeted the victims. "My personal opinion? This was not a random act," Pentis said at a news conference Monday.





Until the couple's slaying, the gated community of luxury homes had not recorded a homicide in 15 years, police said.





According to investigators, the Husteds were home with their two young children on the night of the slaying. Their daughter was asleep in bed, and their son was watching "American Idol" in the living room.





About 10:30 p.m., the suspect entered the home through French doors that face the ocean, police said.





The killer was dressed in dark clothing and wore a motorcycle helmet, authorities said. He walked past the child who was watching television and stabbed the Husteds.





Davina Husted was four months pregnant.





The home was not ransacked, and the alleged murder weapon was left at the scene, Bonfiglio said.





A sample of Packer's DNA taken after an arrest in Santa Barbara matched the genetic material found at the Husted crime scene, said Pentis the sheriff's department chief. He added that items from the victims' house were found at the suspect's home.





Scott Husted, the brother of Brock Husted, thanked the sheriff's department for solving the killings. "This is a milestone, a very huge milestone in this process," he said. "We're very grateful for the work the Ventura County sheriff's department has put in this case."





"This in no way takes away the loss our family has had. Brock was our baby brother."





Packer is being held on $2.2 million bail at the Ventura County Main Jail.

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- Pentagon officials have begun preparing for the first transfer of power during war since Vietnam. They insist that the complicated transfer from the Bush administration to the Obama administration will go smoothly.



The coming transfer of power during wartime will be the first since 1968.



President Bush met Thursday with members of his Cabinet, including Defense Secretary Robert Gates, and urged them to cooperate.



"We're in a struggle against violent extremists determined to attack us, and they would like nothing more than to exploit this period of change to harm the American people," Bush said.



"For the next 75 days, all of us must ensure that the next president and his team can hit the ground running."



Teams in Gates' office and that of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Adm. Mike Mullen, have been working on the transition for months, according to Pentagon officials.  See who Obama may be considering for his Cabinet »



With ongoing wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, it will mark the first time a transfer of power has taken place during wartime since 1968, when Lyndon Johnson handed over power to Richard Nixon while the Vietnam War raged.



"We are preparing to make this as smooth a transition as we can," Pentagon spokesman Bryan Whitman said this week.



Although officials say the transition is in good hands, little is being said about what discussions will occur between the Pentagon teams and President-elect Barack Obama's transition teams when they begin showing up within days or weeks.



"There is a recognition that given that we are a nation at war, that energy and effort [should] be sufficiently placed to ensure that we don't drop any balls, because national security and supporting our fielded forces that are engaged in combat is of paramount importance to this country," Whitman said.



Robert Rangel, special assistant to Gates and the deputy secretary of defense, is in charge of the transition process in the Pentagon, while Marine Brig. Gen. Frank McKenzie, who reports to Rangel, is leading the effort for the Joint Chiefs.



Last month, Gates issued guidelines for the transition, stressing that the department must maintain continuity of operations and ensure efficient and effective transition between the outgoing political leaders and the incoming administration, according to Whitman.



The Pentagon has opened offices for Obama's transition staff. The nondescript offices are just down the hall from the secretary of defense's office and have been readied with computers, phones and filing cabinets.



The offices remain empty until staff members are designated by Obama's team and cleared through the White House.



"The initial contact point for the Obama transition team will be through the White House, and there will be a discussion on the way forward on the transition, and what will happen out of that will be a memorandum of understanding that says, 'these people will be working with the Defense Department,' so we know who has been sanctioned and designated by the president-elect," Whitman said.



In his comments Thursday, Bush said, "ensuring that this transition is as smooth as possible is a priority for the rest of my presidency."

***

(CNN) -- Investigators discovered four more bodies Tuesday at the Cleveland, Ohio, home of a convicted rapist -- making a total of 10 since last week, Police Chief Michael McGrath said Tuesday.



Authorities on Tuesday charged Anthony Sowell with five counts of aggravated murder after unearthing the bodies of women at his home last week, police said.



Sowell, 50, also was charged with rape, felonious assault and kidnapping, police said. His arraignment is scheduled for Wednesday morning.



Police arrested Sowell on Saturday, two days after discovering the decomposing bodies of five females inside his home and another woman's body outside the house.



Earlier Tuesday, a source close to the investigation had told CNN that a seventh body had been found in the home. The source, who was not authorized to speak on the record, did not reveal the gender of the seventh body found at Sowell's home. The source did not say exactly where the body was found at the residence.



Authorities found the first two bodies last week while trying to serve an arrest and search warrant on Sowell related to a sexual assault investigation, and an intensive search began. Sowell was not home at the time; officers found him after a tipster told them of his whereabouts.



The decomposing bodies of the first six women, all of whom were African-American, could have been lying where they were found for "weeks, if not months or years," Cuyahoga County Coroner Frank Miller III told CNN on Saturday.



All six deaths were ruled homicides, Lt. Thomas Stacho of the Cleveland Police Department said Monday, with five of the deaths due to strangulation.



About a month ago, a woman accused Sowell of rape and felonious assault, Stacho noted last week. Investigators obtained the warrants that set off the search after the "cooperation of the victim," he said.



Officers serving the warrants Thursday discovered the badly decomposed remains of two bodies on the third floor of the house, he added. A subsequent search revealed what appeared to be a freshly dug grave under the stairs in the basement. On Friday, investigators returned to the house, dug up the grave and found a third body, Stacho said.



A further search of the house and property found two more bodies in a crawl space and a sixth body in a shallow grave outside the home.



Five different burial methods were used on the victims, and the bodies were in varying states of decomposition, said Miller, which made it difficult to determine the ages of the victims.



Stacho said Sowell makes his living as a "scrapper."



"He walks around and picks up scrap metal and takes it to junk yards to make a few pennies," he said.



Sowell was convicted of a 1989 rape and was imprisoned from 1990 to 2005, Stacho said.



CNN's Karan Olson contributed to this report.

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Fragile finances are likely to rule out buying a boat for many this summer but that shouldn't mean the end of all water-based pastimes.





Underwater scooter: The Seabob Cayago will move you like a fish with its 7hp motor.





MainSail presents you with some of the coolest toys for slightly more affordable fun on the water.





Seabob Cayago scooter: Do you want to become a human fish this summer? This water and diving scooter is purported to be the fastest of its kind, with a 7hp electric motor.





Hydradome BOB: If you want to take the motorized diving experience to a new level, the Breathing Observation Bubble (BOB), is the ideal machine. This submersible can cruise underwater at two knots while the rider sits in comfort.





Hovpod: For high-speed fun on and off the water, the Hovpod hovercraft should be your gadget of choice. The Hovpod will take you across any flat surface at speeds of up to 45 miles per hour (72 kilometers per hour).





Powerski Jetboard: This machine is a cross between a surfboard and a jet-ski. Capable of up to 35 knots, the Powerski Jetboard lets you surf without the surf.  Walk-on-water ball: For cheaper and more simple fun on the water, the Nuclear Globe Walk-on-water ball is perfect. The heavy-duty PVC ball can keep you fit and you can even stay dry if you want to.





Iceberg Wall: If you're entertaining plenty of people, the Iceberg Wall looks like a great time. Coming in either the 2.5 meter or a massive 4.9 meter size, the Iceberg offers safe climbing, sliding and jumping for everyone.





See our  photo gallery » of this summer's top six toys for fun in the water, thanks to SuperYachtWorld.





For more sailing news and more about the super-yacht industry, visit CNN's MainSail homepage here.





Subscribe to SuperYachtWorld





COPYRIGHT ©  2009 IPC MEDIA LTD. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

***

WASHINGTON (CNN) -- The man who authorities allege carried out the 2001 anthrax mailings that killed five people sent himself an e-mail saying he knew the attacker's identity, according to court documents released Wednesday.



Former biodefense researcher Bruce Ivins killed himself in July, authorities say.



Bruce Ivins, who authorities say killed himself in July as the Justice Department prepared to charge him in the anthrax case, is alleged to have sent the e-mail to himself last September.



An FBI agent quotes the message in an affidavit accompanying applications for search warrants for Ivins' e-mail accounts.



"Yes! Yes! Yes!!!!!!! I finally know who mailed the anthrax letters in the fall of 2001. I've pieced it together! Now we can finally get this over and done with," the e-mail reads.



In it, the former biodefense researcher says he plans on turning information over to his lawyer and that his lawyer would then give it to authorities. The e-mail does not say who Ivins believed was responsible.



"I'm not looking forward to everybody getting dragged through the mud, but at least it will be over," the e-mail reads. "Finally! I should have it TOTALLY nailed down within the month. I should have been a private eye!!!!"



The documents -- which the Justice Department says are the last Ivins-related search warrants that had yet to be released to the public -- also contain new details about allegations that Ivins wanted to kill his co-workers.



The details are in an account of a July 9 group therapy session during which Ivins allegedly said he was a suspect in the anthrax investigation.



According to an FBI agent's account, Ivins was "angry at the investigators, the government, and the system in general."



"He said he was not going to face the death penalty, but instead had a plan to kill co-workers and other individuals who wronged him," the account reads. "He said he had a bullet-proof vest, and a list of co-workers, and added he was going to obtain a Glock firearm from his son within the next day, because federal agents are watching him and he could not obtain a weapon on his own."



The FBI agent also alleges that Ivins said during the session that he had walked around the "ghetto" areas of Frederick, Maryland, near his home, late at night "hoping that someone would try to hurt him so that he could stab them with a sharp pen."



That description is similar to something Ivins allegedly wrote on YouTube referencing a winner of the television game show "The Mole." Authorities said Ivins' YouTube message read: "The least someone could do would be to take a sharp ballpoint pin or letter opener and put her eyes out, to complete the task of making her a true mole!"



General details of the therapy session have previously been reported. After the meeting, social worker Jean Duley contacted authorities and Ivins was taken into custody. He was released after being evaluated at two hospitals.



Notes allegedly written by Ivins at the time of his hospitalization were found in the trash at his home after his death. According to the FBI, he wrote about the stresses in his life and the possibility of facing prison time.



Ivins' attorney, Paul Kemp, maintains Ivins didn't carry out the attacks and says the new documents prove nothing.



"There is simply nothing new here, nothing that is proof against Dr. Ivins," Kemp said Wednesday.



The anthrax probe continues, Justice Department spokesman Dean Boyd said.



"We are working to close the investigation soon," Boyd said, adding that "investigative efforts" and "administrative measures" need to be finished.



The anthrax attacks occurred less than a month after the September 11, 2001, suicide attacks that killed nearly 3,000 people in New York, Washington and Pennsylvania. Letters filled with bacterial spores were sent to Senate Democratic leaders and news organizations.



Those

***

(CNN) -- Panama City Beach, Florida, police are looking for a hotel security guard accused of raping an Alabama student and throwing her off a sixth-floor hotel balcony, a police spokesman told CNN.



Police released this photo of Shawn Wuertly, who worked as a hotel security guard in Panama City Beach, Florida.



The 18-year-old woman from Tuscaloosa, Alabama, remains hospitalized, but her injuries are not life-threatening, Lt. Dave Humphreys said.



The incident happened early Monday at the Sandpiper Beacon Beach Resort in Panama City Beach during spring break.



Police have issued an arrest warrant for Shawn Wuertly, 29, who worked as a security guard at the resort, Humphreys said.



He is wanted for attempted felony murder, sexual battery and false imprisonment.



Wuertly had been questioned by police regarding the attack, but they lacked the evidence to hold him, the spokesman said.



The police investigation has found that the suspect had seen the girl "several times" at the hotel and had "taken a liking to her at some point," Humphreys said.



Around 1 a.m. on Monday, the suspect grabbed the woman and pulled her into an unoccupied room on the sixth floor, using his key to get in, Humphreys said.



She said he sexually assaulted her and, after a brief altercation, threw her over the balcony, the police spokesman said.



She hit two smaller roofs on her way down, which likely saved her from more serious injuries, before she came to rest in a second floor stairwell, Humphreys said.



After his initial questioning, Wuertly told police he was leaving for Tennessee and would return on Wednesday. Wuertly has an outstanding arrest warrant, something that police did not discover until after he was released.



"Obviously no one checked his warrants because he has an outstanding warrant in Indiana," Humphrey said, noting that police are "not happy and will address that."



CNN's calls to the hotel's manager regarding Wuertly's outstanding warrant were not returned. E-mail to a friend

***

KABUL, Afghanistan (CNN) -- Civilian deaths in Afghanistan have risen sharply in the past year, largely due to more Taliban attacks and roadside bombings, U.N. officials said Sunday.

NATO soldiers sit in their vehicle in an Afghan province freed from Taliban forces.

Afghan civilian deaths jumped from 430 in the first six months of 2007 to 698 so far this year, an increase of 60 percent, said John Holmes, the United Nations undersecretary-general for humanitarian affairs.

"It is clear that the international military forces are making every effort to minimize civilian casualties," Holmes said.

"Nevertheless, these problems are still there, and we need to deal with them and make sure that the safety of civilians comes first and international humanitarian law is respected," he said.

Taliban insurgents forces have shifted from direct attacks on international troops toward the use of "civilian-blind" measures such as roadside bombings and suicide attacks, said Aleem Siddique, a spokesman for the U.N. Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.

At the same time, he said, civilian deaths blamed on government forces and U.S. and NATO troops has declined in the first six months of 2008, largely due to pressure from Afghan President Hamid Karzai.

About 60 percent of civilian deaths in 2008 are blamed on anti-government forces, up from less than half in 2007.

Increased Taliban attacks on aid projects also have left 78 of Afghanistan's 398 districts off-limits to relief workers, Siddique said.

"Increasingly, we're seeing targets of schools, of radio stations, of health clinics -- all in an effort to halt progress and keep people in fear," he said.

A total of 565 aid convoys came under attack in 2007, with hundreds of tons of food hijacked. As recently as Sunday, a convoy of 100 tons of food aid came under attack outside Kandahar, with several trucks burned and looted, he said.

"Thankfully, we're not getting any report of death or injuries," he said.

Afghanistan is the original front in the "war on terrorism," which was launched after al Qaeda's September 11, 2001, attacks on New York and Washington.

A U.S.-led invasion after the attacks pushed out the Taliban, which had allowed al Qaeda to operate from its territory, but the Islamic fundamentalist militia has regrouped along and across the mountainous border with Pakistan.

Coinciding with the rise in civilian deaths in 2008 is an increase in attacks on American and allied forces, which are up 40 percent since last year

The death toll of U.S. and allied troops in Afghanistan in June also climbed to more than 40, making it the deadliest month since the war began.

An explosion in southern Afghanistan killed a British soldier serving with NATO on Saturday, the British Defense Ministry said Sunday.

The soldier died when he was struck by a mine in Lashkar Gah, the capital city of Helmand province, the ministry said. He and his unit were investigating a report of a rocket-propelled grenade attack on a civilian aircraft at a nearby airfield, it said.

"When investigating this, they dismounted their vehicles and what is believed to have been a legacy anti-Personnel mine detonated, killing the soldier instantly," the ministry statement said.

Most of the soldiers serving in Helmand are British. Helmand province is Afghanistan's top poppy-producing region and a major front in the war against the Taliban. Provincial authorities there have blamed militants for a spate of recent deadly attacks.

NATO and Afghan force operations kept the insurgency down in 2007 by killing or capturing key leaders and clearing out Taliban safe havens, but a Pentagon report issued last week predicted the Taliban would be back in 2008.

***

New York (CNN) -- Pakistani neuroscientist Aafia Siddiqui was convicted Wednesday of attempting to kill Americans in Afghanistan in 2008.





The jury found Siddiqui guilty of seven counts, including attempted murder and armed assault on U.S. officers.





The Manhattan jury began deliberations Monday afternoon and sent a note shortly before 2 p.m. Wednesday saying they had reached a verdict.





Siddiqui listened to the verdict without emotion but let out an outburst once the jury was escorted out of the courtroom.





"This is a verdict from Israel, not America," she said. "Anger should be directed to where it belongs. I can testify to this. I have proof."





Authorities removed her from the courtroom. She will be sentenced May 6.





Siddiqui's family said she had been unjustly found guilty.





"Today's verdict is one of many legal errors that allowed the prosecution to build a case against our sister based on hate, rather than fact," they said in a statement released through the International Justice Network.





"We believe that as a result, she was denied a fair trial, and today's verdict must be overturned on appeal."





Prosecutors said Siddiqui shot at two FBI special agents, a U.S. Army warrant officer, an Army captain and military interpreters while she was being held unsecured at an Afghan facility on July 18, 2008.





Authorities said Siddiqui used an officer's rifle to fire two shots at the personnel, who were hidden from her view by a curtain. She hit no one. The warrant officer returned fire with a pistol, hitting Siddiqui at least once.





Afghan police had arrested her a day earlier outside the Ghazni governor's compound in central Afghanistan after finding her with bomb-making instructions, excerpts from the "Anarchist's Arsenal," papers with descriptions of U.S. landmarks, and substances sealed in bottles and glass jars, according to a September 2008 indictment.





The indictment said Siddiqui had "handwritten notes that referred to a 'mass casualty attack' " listing several locations in the United States and "construction of 'dirty bombs.' "





The notes also "discussed various ways to attack 'enemies,' including by destroying reconnaissance drones, using underwater bombs, and using gliders," the indictment said.





"Siddiqui also possessed a computer thumb drive that contained correspondence referring to specific 'cells,' 'attacks' by certain 'cells,' and 'enemies,' " the indictment said. "Other documents on the thumb drive discussed recruitment and training."





Siddiqui, whom the FBI had sought for several years for suspected ties to al Qaeda, was extradited to the United States in August 2008.





Since 2003, the whereabouts of Siddiqui, an American-educated neuroscientist, had been the source of much speculation.





According to Amnesty International, Siddiqui and her three small children were reported apprehended in Karachi, Pakistan, in March 2003, shortly after the FBI issued an alert requesting information about her location.





Several reports indicated that Siddiqui was in U.S. custody after her arrest in Karachi. But in May 2004, then-Attorney General John Ashcroft and FBI Director Robert Mueller identified Siddiqui as being among several sought-after al Qaeda members.

***

(CNN) -- A barn fire that killed two men and dozens of horses in Ohio on Saturday shows no sign of criminal intent, authorities said.



The Ohio State Fire Marshal said the cause of the fire, at the Lebanon Raceway near Cincinnati in southwestern Ohio, is undetermined.



"However, investigators have ruled out criminal intent," it said in a written statement.



The ages and identities of the men are not yet known. Initially, officials reported that 65 horses perished, but later put the number at 43.



The state fire marshal said that preliminary information from the men's autopsies may be available by Sunday.



The fire began in the northwest corner of the barn, according to the state fire marshal's office. It would not release the specific origin of the fire because of the investigation.



The Warren County Fair Board -- which operates the track -- confirmed the men's deaths and the destruction of the barn, but couldn't say how many horses were killed. It said in a statement that harness racing scheduled for Saturday night has been canceled.



Firefighters from 11 departments, which received the call just before 5 a.m., cleared debris and extinguished hot spots during the day.



For more than 50 years, the Warren County Fair Board has been operating the county fair grounds, which includes "a harness racing track and supporting facilities that are leased for harness racing meets to two harness racing clubs," according to the statement issued by a fair board attorney, Bill Schroeder.



Schroeder said the fire was first noticed by a neighbor and that the barn, harness-racing carriages, and other racing equipment have been destroyed.



Firefighters kept the flames from spreading to other barns, officials told CNN affiliate WHIO-TV. State and local fire officials are working to determine what sparked the fire.



Follow CNN affiliate WHIO's local coverage



Follow CNN affiliate WLWT's local coverage



Another barn fire at the fairgrounds killed 35 horses in 1988, Warren County Commissioner Pat South said, according to the Springfield (Ohio) News-Sun newspaper.

***

(CNN) -- The Professional Footballers' Association (PFA), a body which represents soccer players in England and Wales, has sent ex-professionals a guide on how to handle mental health issues following the death of Wales manager Gary Speed.





Speed, who made over 500 appearances in the English Premier League during a 22-year playing career, was found dead at his home on Sunday, sending British football into mourning.





Although it is not known whether Speed was struggling with depression or any mental health issues, the PFA, which is linked to a similar body in Scotland, has taken the step of making "The Footballers' Guidebook" available to 50,000 former players.





The guide, which includes comic strip style drawings and case studies from former players, was sent to current players in July.





"Whether you're a king, a prince or a pauper, or a top sports star or the man in the street -- everybody is a human being and can have issues that they need help with," PFA chief executive Gordon Taylor told CNN.





The issue of depression in football was highlighted by the death of German national team goalkeeper Robert Enke, who took his own life in 2009 after a long struggle with the illness.





"The PFA are going to do even more work to try and make sure that people know they can turn to somebody in such times," explained Taylor. "We've got to do all we can."





"The death of Gary is so devastating , we've got to do all we can to make sure it doesn't happen again."





Speed represented Leeds United, Everton, Newcastle United and Bolton Wanderers in England's top flight, before dropping into the second tier to play for, and later manage, Sheffield United.





The former midfielder is the most-capped outfield player in Welsh history, having played for his country on 85 occasions. As a manager, Speed guided Wales to 45th in the world rankings, their highest position.





A minutes applause will be held before all of this weekend's English Premier League matches in honor of Speed.

***

(CNN) -- Novak Djokovic is up to number three in the world after defeating Marin Cilic in the final of the China Open in Beijing on Sunday.



Novak Djokovic holds aloft the giant China Open trophy after victory over Marin Cilic in Beijing.



The Serb captured his third ATP title of the year with a 6-2 7-6 victory over the battling Cilic, who beat fourth seed Nikolay Davydenko and top seed Rafael Nadal en route to the final.



Second seed Djokovic took advantage of a 90-minute rain delay, which came at 2-2 in the first set, coming back on center court at the Beijing Olympics tennis venue with sharper ground strokes and well-placed serves.



After holding serve to go 3-2 up, Djokovic broke Cilic straight away and then a second time to take the opening set, with the Croat the victim of two unlucky net cords in the final game.



In the second, Cilic -- a wild card entry -- and Djokovic traded breaks three times to force a tie-break, with the Cilic failing to serve out twice.



Djokovic took control midway, winning a rally that left Cilic sitting on the court to go up 4-2. The Serb closed it out on his second match point when the Cilic sent an inside-out forehand sailing wide.



"I certainly played much better after the rain delay," Djokovic told reporters. "I kind of got my nerves together -- I was very fresh on the court after that. Even though it was a straight set win, it wasn't easy at all. Marin could have had at least a set under his belt."



Djokovic, by reaching the final, is assured of taking over the world number three ranking, surpassing injured Scot Andy Murray.



Meanwhile, Jo-Wilfried Tsonga defeated Mikhail Youzhny to become the first French player to win the men's singles title at the Japan Open in Tokyo.



The world number seven, who knocked out compatriots Gael Monfils and Richard Gasquet on his way to the final, chalked up a 6-3 6-3 final win over the Russian.

***

(CNN)  -- [Updated 3 p.m. ET, Monday, August 29] These beachgoers are enjoying themselves on Isola dei Conigli ("Rabbit Island") in Lampedusa, Italy.





Lampedusa is the southernmost part of Italy, in the Mediterranean Sea between the Sicilian mainland and North Africa. Since the Arab unrest began earlier this year, thousands of people from Libya and other parts of North Africa have sought refuge there.





Contrary to its name, Rabbit Island is probably more renowned for turtles. It is one of the last remaining egg-laying sites in Italy for the endangered loggerhead sea turtle.





Nobody answered Rabbit Island in our photo challenge this week, but there were some close guesses of Sardinia, Italy, as well as some generic guesses of the Mediterranean.





[Original post] Do you know where this photo was taken?





If you think you know the answer -- or if you just want to take a wild guess -- post it in the comments area below. Later in the day, we'll reveal where the photo was taken and give credit to those who figured it out first. (The more detail, the better!)





Each Monday morning, we'll post a new photo and challenge you to tell us its origin. The photo might be related to a prominent news story or theme -- or it might just be something that caught our eye.





Good luck!





Check out a previous example

***

(CNN) -- Law enforcement officials in southern California searched urgently Wednesday for a 3-year-old boy who was kidnapped at gunpoint during a weekend home invasion.



Briant Rodriguez, 3, was taken by armed men during a home invasion in San Bernardino, Caifornia, police say.



Two men broke into a house in the San Bernardino area on Sunday and tied up the boy, Briant Rodriguez, his mother and other siblings.



They ransacked the house and fled with the boy, authorities said.



One of the children freed himself and untied the rest of the family, CNN affiliate KTLA reported. The boy's father was at work at the time, KTLA said.



An Amber Alert was issued late Sunday. Sheriff's deputies in San Bernardino County released composite sketches of the suspects during a news conference on Tuesday.  Watch how the boy was taken at gunpoint »



Sheriff's officials said they placed the boy's picture on billboards along the U.S.-Mexican border and have followed up on half of 80 or so leads from the Amber Alert tip-line.



Federal, state and local authorities are working the investigation, which is sparing no expense, Sgt. Doug Hubbard. said. "Every type of known technology is working on this case," he added.



Officials said the kidnappers have not contacted authorities or the parents.



At the news conference, the boy's mother, Maria Millan, held her son's T-shirt and begged that he be released.



"My son, my son, my pretty son," she said. Millan said she told the kidnappers "I don't owe you a thing" and has said she didn't know the men.



There has been speculation that the boy's abduction was a case of mistaken identity or carried out by people involved with organized crime. Authorities say they have found no motive in the case, and they are not ruling out any possibility. They said the parents are not suspects.



Hubbard, the sheriff's department's lead investigator in the case, said "the family obviously has been very distraught."



"Every second that goes by for us is critical," Hubbard said of the round-the-clock and robust investigation. He also added that in his 20-year career he has never experienced a case where a home-invasion robbery resulted in a kidnapping.



Briant is described in the Amber Alert as a Hispanic male who was last seen wearing a yellow shirt with blue sleeves and blue-striped shorts with two different colors of blue. The boy's hair is longer than shoulder length.



Both suspected kidnappers are Hispanic males -- one 5-feet, 5 inches tall, between the ages of 18 and 20 with a thin build, unknown hair and eye color, last seen wearing a black baseball hat, blue jeans and green T-shirt. The other is 5-foot-10, around age 24 with a thin build, black boots, a black shirt and a bandanna.

***

(CNN) -- Formula One's new Team U.S. F1 will have the financial backing of YouTube co-founder Chad Hurley -- and the video sharing Web site's chief executive expects to make a big impact in motorsport.



Chad Hurley is hoping his start-up experience can help the US F1 team become a major player.



The American, who along with co-founders Steve Chen and Jawed Karim sold YouTube to internet giant Google for $1.65 billion in 2006, has faith in the team's prospects for the 2010 season.



It is fronted by engineer Ken Anderson, formerly involved with NASCAR team Haas CNC Racing, and Peter Windsor, a journalist who has worked with F1's Ferrari and Williams.



"I believe in Ken and Peter and the team that they have put together, and I believe that we have a chance to hopefully start from a clean slate and try to build a team in a different way," Hurley told Web site Autosport.com.



Hurley started YouTube from scratch, and sees parallels with his involvement with US F1.



"The business aspect of what attracted me to US F1 is just that, that it is a start-up," he said. "And it's a very similar situation to one that would be in Silicon Valley.



"It's a small team of talented, smart individuals trying to break the mould, trying to accomplish something that others think is impossible."



However, Hurley does not expect instant success for the new franchise, which will be the only F1 outfit based outside of Europe and comes into the sport in difficult economic times when sponsors are dropping out.



"Obviously we want to be competitive," he told Autosport.com. "I know there is going to be a lot of competition -- it's going to take quite a few years to ramp up this team and get the cars into a position where we are competing for the world championship, but ultimately that's our goal.



"We're not necessarily going to get involved and be satisfied with just getting a car onto the track. Our aspirations and goals go much farther than that."



While major manufacturers have been reviewing their participation in motorsport's premium category -- Honda withdrew at the end of last year and BMW will end its association with Sauber at the end of this season -- Hurley is confident that he can find other investors to back the American team.



"I hope so, and I hope it goes beyond Silicon Valley," he said. "I am definitely going to be involved in helping the team with sponsors, helping the team with business relationships, and helping the team with integrating technology -- ways that they can leverage and benefit from social media and the Internet broadly.



"So in many ways, I hope to add benefit to the team and what they are trying to accomplish."

***

(CNN) -- The two people who died Thursday night when their helicopter crashed into a mountain in the Dominican Republic were friends who had left their homes and family in Florida this week to help deliver aid to the people of Haiti, a son of one of the victims said Friday.



The accident occurred about 7 p.m. in Dajabon, just east of the border with Haiti, said Rosani Zapata, a spokeswoman for the Dominican Civil Aviation Institute.



The helicopter had filed a flight plan from Santiago to Jimani in the Dominican Republic, then on to Port-au-Prince in Haiti. It was en route back to Santiago when the crash occurred, she said.



Aboard were pilot John Ward of Fort Myers, Florida, and James Jalovec, a 53-year-old Naples, Florida, businessman who owned Sweetwater Environmental Inc., a sewage company based in Sebring.



Mark Jalovec, 21, told CNN in a telephone interview that his father began discussing the prospect of helping out a couple of days after the January 12 earthquake that devastated Haiti.



"It kind of caught everybody off guard," he said, noting that his father had never done anything similar. Still, he said, his father saw a fit. "I got a helicopter; these people are in desperate need -- he kind of decided it with Mr. Ward that they were going to do it, and that's what they did."



He said his father last called him Monday, after he and Ward had flown doctors from an orphanage outside Port-au-Prince to the Dominican Republic.



Spencer Steadman, vice president and general manager of Sweetwater Environmental, described Ward as an experienced pilot who had long flown Jalovec to his business interests, which spanned the state. "They had an engine failure on one here about three months ago," he told CNN in a telephone interview. "He done a reverse autorotation and set that thing down. No injuries. Four people, they walked away. He was a very good pilot."



The helicopter that crashed Thursday, a Robinson R44, was two weeks old, he said.



Steadman said he was not surprised when Jalovec called him Saturday night and said he was planning to depart Sunday morning for a week in the region.



"He seen a need, and it was a challenge, and that's Jim," Steadman said. "He was hard-core business. When he done business, he done business. That's what he liked doing. He was very aggressive. ... If it was worth doing, he'd do it."



The cause of the crash is under investigation.

***

KAUHAJOKI, Finland (CNN) -- Police in Finland have identified the 10 victims in Tuesday's college shooting as eight female students, a male student and a male teacher.



The bodies of the victims were also badly burned after being set on fire.



The gunman -- identified by authorities as Matti Juhani Saari -- also died after turning the gun on himself.



In addition, one woman was seriously wounded in the shooting.



Finnish police had interviewed and released Saari a day before Tuesday's bloody rampage at a college in Kauhajoki in southwestern Finland, the country's interior minister said Tuesday.



Finnish broadcaster YLE reported that police found a note at Saari's apartment saying he planned the attack since 2002 because he hated "people and the human race," according to Jari Neulaniemi of the National Bureau of Investigation.



Neulaniemi told YLE that the shooting took place in a single classroom. Nine of the victims were found in the classroom and one in the corridor, the report said.



Authorities say they became interested in the 22-year-old student after he posted four videos on YouTube. One of them showed him firing a pistol at a shooting range.



Saari did not directly threaten anyone in the videos, so there were no grounds for further action, national police Commissioner Mikko Paatero told YLE.



However, Interior Minister Anne Holmlund suggested the government will investigate how the police handled the case.  Watch as the people of Kauhajoki mourn the victims »



"It's clear that we have to carefully go through what should have been done and if we could have avoided this situation in some way," The Associated Press quoted her as saying.



Finnish President Tarja Halonen, speaking from the United Nations' annual General Assembly in New York, also raised concerns about the YouTube videos.



"We, parents and elderly people, have a little bit of feeling about the Internet," she said during an impromptu TV interview. "It's like a strange planet for us. But it's not so. It's part of our world, so we have to step in."



However she praised efforts by police, who she said "were already on board" by interviewing Saari. Authorities hoped that was enough to take care of any threat, but "now we see that it was not," she said.



The massacre in Kauhajoki, 290 kilometers (180 miles) northwest of Helsinki, was Finland's second school shooting in less than a year and renewed calls for a review of the country's laws on gun ownership.  Watch pictures from the scene »



"We must considerably tighten them," Prime Minister Matti Vanhanen told YLE during a visit to the town early Wednesday.



"We should consider whether to allow these small arms for private citizens at home. They belong on firing ranges."



MTV-3's Foreign Editor Risto Puolimatka told CNN that Saari was issued with a temporary gun license last month. It was the gunman's first license, Puolimatka said.



Authorities learned about the videos Friday but could not reach Saari until Monday, Paatero told YLE. Police also searched his home, YLE reported.



Four videos of a man firing a pistol at a shooting range were posted by a "Mr. Saari" from Kauhajoki, where the college is based, according to his profile on video-sharing Web site YouTube.



The profile also included a video tribute to the Columbine High School shooters, Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold, at the top of the man's favorites list.



The videos were posted over a three-week period this month. None was posted in the last week.  Watch more about the YouTube videos »



The account was suspended within hours of the shooting, which began about 11 a.m. local time (0800 GMT.)



Jukka Forsberg, a maintenance worker at the school, told YLE that the gunman was wearing a ski mask and walked into the building with a large bag. About 150 students were on campus Kauhajoki city's School of Hospitality in southwestern Finland.



Forsberg said, "I heard several dozen rounds of shots. In other words,

***

MOSCOW, Russia (CNN) -- Russian officials on Monday located a Russian cargo ship that has been missing for more than two weeks after it was believed to have been hijacked, a top official said.



The Arctic Sea had been missing since July 31.



The Arctic Sea was located 300 miles (483 km) from Cape Verde, an island nation a few hundred miles from the coast of western Africa, said Russian Defense Minister Anatoly Serdyukov.



The crew "is alive and well," he said.



"The crew members have been moved to our anti-submarine warfare ship Ladny where they are answering questions," Serdyukov said.



"The questioning aims to clarify all circumstances of how the ship disappeared and why did it not send any [emergency] signals."



The Arctic Sea, which sails under a Maltese flag, had not been heard from since July 31. It was carrying a 6,500-ton cargo of timber from Finland to Algeria when it reported trouble on July 24 off the coast of Sweden.



It was scheduled to arrive in North Africa on August 4.



On Friday, the ship was reported to be in international waters north of Cape Verde. The news came from Portugal's state news agency, which quoted Cape Verde's defense director, Pedro Reis.



The U.S. military also had a report last week that the ship had been seen a few hundred miles from Cape Verde, two military sources told CNN, but the United States had no independent verification of those reports. The U.S. military was not involved in the search.



At the time, Russia's ambassador to Cape Verde, however, denied that the Arctic Sea had been spotted near the island nation.



On July 24, the ship's 15-member crew had told authorities that eight to 12 people armed with guns and pistols boarded the vessel about 3 a.m. that day, masked and wearing uniforms with the word "police" written on them, the Malta Maritime Authority said.



"During [the attackers'] stay onboard, the members of the crew were allegedly assaulted, tied, gagged and blindfolded and some of them were seriously injured," the maritime authority said in a written statement.



Swedish police reached the ship by phone on July 31 and spoke with someone they believe to be the captain, police spokeswoman Maria Lonegard said. It was the last known communication with the vessel, which was believed to be off the coast of France at that time.



On Saturday Finnish police told CNN that a ransom demand had been issued to the ship's owners, Solchart Management, for the return of the vessel.

***

(CNN) -- Brazilian star Kaka is leading the campaign for David Beckham to stay at Italian giants AC Milan beyond his agreed loan spell.



Former England captain David Beckham has made an immediate impact with his contribution at AC Milan.



The England midfielder is due to return to the Los Angeles Galaxy in March but  playmaker Kaka said Beckham had already shown his star qualities.



The 33-year-old played 89 minutes of the 2-2 draw with Roma on Sunday following a friendly outing against Hamburg.



"David has shown that he is a player ready to run the extra mile," Kaka told a news conference in Zurich ahead of FIFA's world player of the year gala.



"The first matches showed quite clearly what his qualities are and his passing ability and his capacity to play well.



"Perhaps these first two months will lead to six months or to one year, to more contracts. I certainly would like to play more with him."



Beckham's advisers have stressed that there are no plans for him to stay at AC Milan beyond March 9.



However, former Galaxy general manager Alexi Lalas last week expressed fears that Beckham could be tempted to bring an early end to his time in the U.S.



AC Milan coach Carlo Ancelotti revealed Beckham's attitude and intelligence had won him a place in the starting side in Rome where he had been expected to start on the bench.



"He did well," said Ancelotti. "I chose Beckham to start because he proved in recent days to be a very intelligent player and serious.



"The appearance against Roma is a small reward for him because he worked very hard and has adapted well to the team.



"This was only his second game with us and he will improve. I believe everyone is happy to have Beckham here."



Dutch midfielder Clarence Seedorf said: "We have to compliment him. He has done a good job and he grew in the game. He still needs to improve but I think he can be very satisfied with what he has done after two months of not playing."



Roma stand-in captain Daniele De Rossi suggested Milan had made a shrewd move in capturing the 33-year-old.



"From a media standpoint Beckham is impressive," De Rossi said. "He is a nice guy, has a beautiful wife, has won so many trophies in his career and perhaps this penalises him as a player although I believe he has the feet and the determination."



Beckham, meanwhile, forecast that Sunday's double goalscorer Alexandre Pato of Brazil is destined for greatness.



"I have seen him in training and on the pitch. He is only 19 years of age and I think he can become one of the greatest players in the world," said Beckham.



Milan are nine points behind Serie A leaders Inter going into Saturday's home game against Fiorentina with Beckham seemingly set to retain his starting slot.

***

(CNN) -- Human remains found buried under recently added concrete at a home in Plant City, Florida, are likely those of missing lottery millionaire Abraham Shakespeare, police said Thursday.





Deputies made the discovery after a tip came in, suggesting investigators would find a body near a home in Plant City, according to CNN affiliate WFTV.





Hillsborough County Sheriff David Gee said the body was slowly being uncovered. They are awaiting positive identification.





However, Gee said their investigation and information specifically led them to the area after they began to believe he might be dead because of "sinister means and motives."





"Our indications were it would be there," Gee said during a news conference Thursday night.





Police on Wednesday had scanned the newly finished concrete slabs near the home on Wednesday and removed it. On Thursday, Gee said they discovered the remains buried five feet below the surface, and it appeared the remains had been there for awhile.





Shakespeare, a 43-year-old truck driver, won a $31 million Florida lottery prize in 2006. A year later, he won a court challenge from a fellow trucker who accused Shakespeare of snatching the winning ticket out of his wallet while the two were delivering meat to Miami restaurants.





Shakespeare's family reported him missing on November 9, telling the Polk County sheriff's office they hadn't seen him since April.





Polk County Sheriff Grady Judd said when their investigation began, they had hoped to find Shakespeare alive "and he truly had just wanted to hide from those who were asking him for money."





"As our investigation continued, the information we developed led us to believe he may very well have ended up with an untimely death," Judd said.





Both Judd and Gee said they would not comment on whether anything else was found inside the manmade grave, or whether a previous person of interest was connected to the area. The home, according to WFTV,  belongs to the boyfriend of a person of interest in the disappearance of Shakespeare.





While they await identification of the remains, police said they would begin to shift their focus to a murder investigation.





"It's painfully obvious he didn't get there by himself," Judd said.





Gee said police from Polk and Hillsborough counties were already working with prosecutors on the case and hope to bring to justice the person responsible for what they believe is clearly cold-blooded murder.





"Somebody put that body in that hole," Gee said. "This isn't by any means just where we find someone on the side of the road. Somebody has obviously put him there."

***

LAS VEGAS, Nevada (CNN) -- Police executed a search warrant at a Las Vegas pharmacy Tuesday morning in connection with the investigation into Michael Jackson's death, a federal drug agent said.



A Las Vegas pharmacy was searched Tuesday in connection with Michael Jackson's death.



Applied Pharmacy on Flamingo Road in Las Vegas sold the anesthetic propofol to Dr. Conrad Murray, Jackson's doctor, a source familiar with the investigation said.



Another source close to the investigation said last month that Murray, a Texas-based cardiologist, is said to have given Jackson propofol, commonly known by the brand name Diprivan, in the 24 hours before he died.



The search of Applied Pharmacy came two weeks after searches of Murray's home and clinic in Las Vegas.



The search warrant served Tuesday authorized investigators to seize documents -- both on computers and paper -- related to the Jackson investigation, DEA Assistant Special Agent in Charge Mike Flanagan said.



The warrants used for those earlier searches, which were filed in a Clark County, Nevada, court, imply that investigators looking into Jackson's death believe that the singer was a drug addict.



The warrants, signed by District Judge Timothy Williams and given to CNN by Las Vegas affiliate KTNV, say that "there is probable cause to believe" that the searches would uncover evidence at Murray's home and office of excessive prescribing, prescribing to an addict, prescribing to or treating an addict and manslaughter.



They cite "probable cause to believe" that the premises contained "records, shipping orders, distribution lists, use records relating to the purchase, transfer ordering, delivery and storage of propofol (Diprivan)."



Murray was with Jackson on June 25 when he was rushed to UCLA Medical Center in Los Angeles and when he was pronounced dead, according to Murray's lawyer.



A source involved with the inquiry into Jackson's death has said that investigators found numerous bottles of prescription drugs in his $100,000-a-month rented mansion in Holmby Hills, California.



The items taken from Murray's home included copies of his computer and cell phone hard drives. They were to be turned over to the Los Angeles Police Department, which is leading the investigation into Jackson's death at age 50.



A "thorough and comprehensive" report into the death of Michael Jackson is complete, the Los Angeles County coroner's office said Monday, but police have requested that the report not be released because of the ongoing investigation.



The coroner's office said it would abide by the request that "the cause and manner of death remain confidential" and referred all questions to the Los Angeles Police Department.



CNN's Ted Rowlands contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Police have identified the man whose shooting of another man outside a store in Naples, Italy, was captured by a surveillance camera, the Italian news agency ANSA reported Saturday.



The announcement came two days after police released the video of the brazen daylight shooting in hopes it would lead someone to come forward. Police did not release the man's name.



The video, shot May 11, shows a man wearing jeans, a dark jersey and a baseball cap, walking into the store and looking around, turning and walking back out.



Passersby appear unfazed. One woman tries to lift up the victim's head in an apparent attempt to see if she knew him; a man steps over the body.



Police said they had been without any clues before the release of the video. A source who was not identified publicly said the killer was a man in his 30s from Naples' northern Sanita district who had recently left the city.



A third man seen in the video was thought to have been an accomplice, but he told Il Mattino newspaper that he had nothing to do with the killing.



"I am the man of the film, but I have never been a lookout, and now I am afraid," the 39-year-old man said. "I was taking a breath of air, waiting for my daughter to go shopping."



The man said he had been living "in terror" since acquaintances called him from Germany to tell him they had seen him on the video.



Police said they knew of no motive for the killing, which took place in the poor neighborhood of Rione Sanita, where Camorra, the name for organized crime in Naples, is strong.



The victim was a bank robber, the spokesman said.



A police spokesman said Camorra has been blamed for about 60 killings this year in Naples and its surrounding county.

***

(CNN)  -- Seven members of a joint United Nations-African Union peacekeeping patrol have been killed by a heavily armed militia group in Sudan's Darfur region, the U.N. said.



Peacekeepers drive into a Sudanese refugee camp near Farchana, east of Chad.



Five of those killed were Rwandan, a U.N. peacekeeping official said, and the other two were a Ugandan and a Ghanaian.



Twenty-two others were wounded in the attack, which was immediately condemned by U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.



"The attackers used heavy weapons and engaged the UNAMID convoy in an exchange of fire for more than two hours," according to the statement released by Ban's spokesman.



UNAMID is the acronym for the U.N.-AU mission in Darfur. The peacekeepers are allowed to used force when fired upon directly.



"The secretary-general condemns in the strongest possible terms this unacceptable act of extreme violence against AU-U.N. peacekeepers in Darfur and calls on the government of Sudan to do its utmost to ensure that the perpetrators are swiftly identified and brought to justice," the statement said.



"The secretary-general expresses his deepest condolences to the families of the peacekeepers who lost their lives, and reiterates his appreciation for their service, valor and commitment to the search for peace in Darfur."



The ambush happened around 2:45 p.m. (1145 GMT) in northern Darfur. The rescue mission did not take place until after dark, she said.



The peacekeepers who were attacked operated out of Shangil Tobayi -- a base to the west of El Fasher.



In five years of war the U.N. says more than four million people have been affected: Two-and-a-half million people forced from their homes and more than 300,000 killed.



Sudanese officials dispute those numbers claiming only 10,000 have died -- a number they say is normal for five years of war.



U.S. President George W. Bush calls the killings genocide and has put sanctions on Sudan. The U.N. says Sudan's government is guilty of crimes against humanity and of violating international human rights laws every bit as heinous and serious they say as genocide.



In February 2008, a fresh wave of killing forced 58,000 people to flee their homes as government troops and Janjaweed militiamen retaliated against rebels.



A U.N. report said Sudan broke international law as 115 innocent civilians were killed using tactics similar to those employed in 2003, 2004, the worst years of the war.



Peacekeepers are frequently targeted by militias in Darfur, where they are trying to protect civilians from "janjaweed" militias -- nomadic Arab militias, supported by Sudan's government, which target pastoral black Africans.



Ten African Union peacekeepers were killed in October in an ambush on their peacekeeping base -- the deadliest single attack on AU peacekeepers since they began their mission in late 2004.



A U.N. commission concluded in 2005 that the Sudanese government and militias "conducted indiscriminate attacks, including killing of civilians, torture, enforced disappearances, destruction of villages, rape and other forms of sexual violence, pillaging and forced displacement" in Darfur.



In 2006, the U.N. Security Council authorized the creation of the joint AU/U.N. hybrid force of peacekeepers to protect civilians in Darfur. That hybrid force formally took over peacekeeping duties late last year from the force composed solely of members of the African Union.



Yet the force is under-manned as a result of the Sudanese government's opposition to a U.N. presence, with just over 9,500 troops of an authorized strength of 26,000.

***

(CNN) -- Democratic Sen. Barack Obama and Republican Sen. John McCain in August will be on the same stage for the first time in the 2008 presidential campaign.



The Rev. Rick Warren says he makes no endorsements because he shepherds "both sides of the flock."



The Rev. Rick Warren has invited them to appear at a leadership and compassion forum in his Saddleback Church in Lake Forest, California, on August 16. Warren, the author of the best-selling book "The Purpose Driven Life" spoke with CNN's Wolf Blitzer by phone Tuesday from Sao Paulo, Brazil.



BLITZER: Pastor Warren, how did you do it? How did you convince both of them to show up?



PASTOR RICK WARREN, SADDLEBACK CHURCH: Well, Wolf, they've both been friends for a long time. I knew both John and Barack before either of them decided to run for office, had talked with them. Both of them have helped me in the past with our peace plan and with -- they've sent messages to Saddleback at some of our conferences.



And so I just thought let's -- you know, I might be the guy to get them together. So, I called them up and said, let's do it. And they said, well, we'll do it if you be the only questioner, if you don't have a forum, don't have a panel. And if you'll ask all the questions, then we'll do it.



BLITZER: But they're not going to be together. They're going to be separate. These are going to be Pastor Warren and Barack Obama, followed by Pastor Warren and John McCain. But there's not going to be any interchange between the two of them, is that right?



WARREN: Yes. I'm going to -- my plan is to bring them out on stage together at the beginning or at the end. But what I want to do is I want to let each of them talk without interrupting each other. And it's not a debate format.



There will be plenty of time for debates. What I want to do is get people to know the real person like I know them without a time barrier and a buzzer and a time for rebuttal. Let them just speak what they need to say.



BLITZER: The last time we spoke was right after you invited Barack Obama when he was still running for the Democratic presidential nomination. You got some criticism from a few fellow evangelicals out there. You called him in the interview with me an amazing, an amazing man, Barack Obama. Could you see yourself supporting him for president?



WARREN: Well, I don't support anybody for president publicly. I never endorse. I never campaign.



You know, as a pastor, I don't really think that's my role. I have to shepherd both sides of the flock. And I have a church full of Democrats and a church full of Republicans and a church full of independents.



So, I think they're both amazing men. I've known them for a long time. They're both very, very different.



They have both different theories of government, different theories of leadership, different approaches to life. And I -- what I do is I think, because I know them, I think I can set up an environment that people can actually say, oh, so that's what that guy's really like. And I think I can do that for both John and for Barack.

***

BOLINGBROOK, Illinois (CNN) -- The disappearance of a suburban Chicago police sergeant's wife is now being treated as a potential homicide, and her husband is a suspect, authorities said Friday.

Stacy Peterson, 23, has been missing from her suburban Chicago home since October 28.

In another development, a judge signed an order to exhume the body of Drew Peterson's third wife, who was found drowned in a bathtub in 2004, said Will County State Attorney James Glasgow.

Peterson, 53, said he last spoke to 23-year-old Stacy Peterson -- his fourth wife -- the night of October 28.

Drew Peterson initially told the media he believed his wife ran off with another man, but he hasn't repeated that accusation. CNN has been unable to contact Drew Peterson for comment.

The couple have been married four years and have two children, who have been interviewed for the investigation, Glasgow said. Drew Peterson also has older children from a previous marriage.

Investigators have twice searched the couple's home and vehicles, and removed several items, including computers, said Illinois State Police Capt. Carl Dobrich.

Drew Peterson allowed a limited search on the night his wife was reported missing, but investigators were not allowed to look throughout the entire house and were given access to only one of the vehicles at that time, Dobrich said.

"Early on, we looked at this as a missing persons case, but also believed strongly ... it was strongly starting to look at Drew Peterson as being a person of interest," Dobrich said.

"I would say that right now, Drew Peterson has gone from being a person of interest to being a suspect."

New information turned up during the investigation also raised questions about the death of Peterson's third wife, Kathleen Savio, which was ruled an accident by a coroner's jury, Glasgow said.

"There are strong indications that it was a homicide," he said. "That's why we are doing the exhumation, because there are tests that need to be done that weren't done during the first autopsy."  Watch why authorities want to exhume the body »

Glasgow cited abrasions on Savio's body and a gash on her head that could not be readily explained.

"Our main thrust is to determine whether or not it was a homicide, and as we do that, we will see if there is any evidence that implicates anyone," he said.

Glasgow, who was not state attorney at the time of Savio's death, said he reviewed the case file before deciding to reopen the case.

"With 29 years of experience, there was no doubt in my mind it wasn't an accident," he said. "That was clear."

In 2002, Savio was charged once with battery and once with domestic battery against her husband, but was found not guilty at trial, Glasgow said.

Another time, she tried to bring domestic battery charges against Peterson, but no charges were ever filed.

Savio's sister, Sue Doman, said Savio expressed fear of Drew Peterson.

"She told me all the time, 'He's gonna kill me. It's gonna look like an accident,' " Doman said.

Doman said she didn't believe her sister could have died in the way the investigation concluded.

"I don't understand accidental drowning. You just don't drown in the bathtub, especially a small whirlpool. You just don't do that," she said.

Meanwhile, friends and family of Stacy Peterson said she expressed concerns about her husband.

A friend, Steve Cesare, has told CNN he received e-mail from her describing her relationship as abusive.

The woman's aunt, Candace Aikin, of El Monte, California, said Stacy Peterson confided in her that there were problems during a visit to the Peterson home in suburban Chicago last month.

"She said that she was afraid because he was following her around 24/7, even inside the house," Aikin said.

"He was very obsessed

***

NEW YORK (CNN)  -- A longtime employee and vault manager for a jewelry company in Long Island City, New York, stole millions of dollars worth of gold and gold jewelry from her employer over a six-year span, the Queens district attorney has alleged.



Teresa Tambunting, 50, of Scarsdale, New York, is accused of stealing as much as $12 million from Jacmel Jewelry, Queens District Attorney Richard Brown said in a statement Wednesday.



At an arraignment Wednesday, she did not enter a plea to charges of first-degree grand larceny and first-degree criminal possession of stolen property, the district attorney's office said. She was released on $100,000 bail and will return to court May 19, the office said.



Her attorney, David Kirby, did not return phone calls seeking comment.



Tambunting, who worked for Jacmel for 28 years, has returned about $7 million worth of gold, but $4 million remains missing, according to Brown.



"The defendant is accused of establishing a virtual mining operation in Long Island City which siphoned off millions of dollars' worth of the precious metal from her employer," Brown said.



Police say Tambunting -- whose job responsibilities involved monitoring the vault in which fine gold, finished products and raw materials were stored -- confessed that for several months last year, she hid gold in makeshift slits in her purse.



An inventory in January revealed that as much as $12 million in merchandise was missing, Brown said in the written statement. After an investigation, Tambunting arrived at the jewelry company's offices wheeling a suitcase containing about 66 pounds of gold, an estimated $868,000, the district attorney's office said. In February, about 450 pounds of gold was taken from her residence, the office said.



Tambunting became vault manager in 1991, the office said. The dates of the alleged thefts were not immediately clear.



The value of the gold returned fluctuates because of the rise and fall of gold prices. However, the charges are based on what Jacmel claims it lost: $3 to $12 million, according to the Queens district attorney.



Jewelry manufacturer owners often find themselves in precarious circumstances when protecting their companies from thievery, said Benjamin Mark, who owned a jewelry manufacturing company in New York for 20 years.



"Unless you have metal detectors where every single employee removes their shoes and belts, you can't be certain," said Mark, who now operates a one-man business. "Stealing jewelry is relatively simple."



Jacmel Jewelry is one of the country's largest manufacturers and distributors of popular price jewelry, according to its Web site.



It employs more than 1,000 people worldwide, according to its president, Jack Rahmey. Rahmey said he is cooperating with authorities.



Tambunting faces up to 25 years in prison if convicted.

***

HARARE, Zimbabwe (CNN) -- With polls closed for a Zimbabwe runoff that opposition politicians and international observers call a sham, alleged torture victims who support former candidate Morgan Tsvangirai said Friday that they back his decision to pull out of the race.



Many of the injured being treated at a private hospital in Harare, Zimbabwe, asked not to be identified.



"It's a good move by my president, Morgan Tsvangirai," said a 26-year-old Movement for Democratic Change activist who said he was forced to stand on hot coals and had boiling water poured on him about a week ago. "There's no use going for an election."



The man, who displayed a large, pale, blistered patch on his back, asked not to be identified -- as did others being treated at a private hospital in Harare -- for fear of further attacks by gangs supportive of President Robert Mugabe.



All of the victims said they were taken to "torture bases" by the gangs, made up of young men and soldiers.



In the March 29 election, MDC officials said their polling showed Tsvangirai clearly defeating Mugabe, who at 84 is the only president Zimbabwe has had since it gained independence from Britain in 1980.



But after delaying the release of results for more than a week, the country's electoral commission -- which is made up of Mugabe appointees -- said that although Tsvangirai got more votes, he didn't top the 50 percent needed to avoid a runoff.



MDC supporters had already reported violence against them by police, military members and other supporters of Mugabe's Zanu-PF party. But in the weeks leading up to the runoff, the reports increased in frequency and intensity.



More than 70 people were killed in attacks since the election, according to the MDC. Mugabe's supporters have claimed that those attacks were against his party members, a claim international observers, including the United Nations, have disputed.  Watch victims say they were taken to torture camps »



Tsvangirai and other party leaders were repeatedly arrested by police or detained on their way to political rallies. And reports of beatings and other intimidation tactics were common in areas where the MDC had made strong showings in the election.



"Mostly for the rural people -- the police would come in for the Zanu-PF, so the area was very tense," said a municipal worker at the hospital, who said he was kicked and had burning plastic poured on his skin about three or four days ago. "Everyone was beaten. Whether Zanu-PF or MDC. There was chaos in the country."



George Charamba, a spokesman for Mugabe, insisted that the vote was "free and fair."



Charamba denied that any pressure was being used.



Asked about images from Zimbabwe showing what is reported to be violence against members of the opposition, he responded, "I thought we are long past the age where we could consider pictures as not lying. It's very, very easy for anyone to stage-manage a demonstration, and a violent one at that."



Last weekend, Tsvangirai withdrew from the runoff, saying there was no way the result would be legitimate. He has spent much of the time since living in the Dutch Embassy in Harare in fear for his safety.



Early Friday, the municipal worker said he was considering whether to heed Tsvangirai's call for his supporters to not vote in the election, but the question may be moot. The gangs took his identification card and threw it into a fire, he said.



Another man and a woman treated for broken hands at the hospital said they were tortured and had boiling water poured on their genitals for being MDC supporters. The man said he was forced to drink sewage.



Meanwhile, Mugabe laughed and mugged for reporters from Zimbabwe's state-run media as he cast his ballot at a high school.



"Very optimistic, upbeat ... and hungry," he said when asked how he was feeling.

***

(CNN) -- Hindered by painful stings and strong currents, endurance swimmer Diana Nyad ended her latest attempt to swim from Cuba to Florida about two-thirds of the way through the crossing Sunday.





The 62-year-old Nyad suffered jellyfish and Portuguese man-of-war stings Saturday, while ocean cross-currents were pushing her off course, team captain Mark Sollinger said. She was pulled out of the water about 11 a.m. Sunday, about 67 nautical miles through the 103-nautical-mile passage.





Treading water before being helped out of the water, Nyad said the man-of-war stings had paralyzed some of the muscles in her back, given her chills and nausea. Doctors warned her she could suffer long-term health problems if she suffered another sting.





"I've never been in any pain, ever, like that in my whole life," she said, adding, "Now it's set me so far back, I just don't' have the lung capacity to swim the way I can."





It was her third attempt to make the swim from Cuba to Florida. Her first, in 1978, was brought to an end by strong currents and bad weather after almost 42 hours in the water.





She made a second try in August, before she was pulled from the water after 60 miles and almost 29 hours of swimming. She blamed a shoulder injury she suffered early in the journey, and an 11-hour-long asthma attack.





Her latest attempt, accompanied by shark divers, began just after 6 p.m. Friday from Havana's Hemingway Marina. The former world champion swimmer projected the swim would take close to 60 hours.





There was a bit of excitement early Saturday afternoon as an oceanic whitetip shark swam near Nyad, but a diver on her team faced it off and it meandered away.





The swimmer improved her performance late Saturday morning after struggling to maintain her usual stroke rate, her support team said. Fortified by chicken soup, Nyad was making good progress until the Saturday evening incident.





Nyad got back in the water at 12:20 a.m. Sunday and swam for nearly 11 hours before packing it in.





"But for each of us, isn't life about determining your own finish line?" she said in a statement on her website. "This journey has always been about reaching your own other shore no matter what it is, and that dream continues."





CNN's Matt Sloane and Shasta Darlington contributed to this report.

***

Editor's note: Junot Díaz's novel "The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao" won the Pulitzer Prize in 2008.





(OPRAH.com) -- It wasn't that I couldn't write. I wrote every day.





I actually worked really hard at writing. At my desk by 7 a.m., would work a full eight and more. Scribbled at the dinner table, in bed, on the toilet, on the No. 6 train, at Shea Stadium. I did everything I could.





But none of it worked.





My novel, which I had started with such hope shortly after publishing my first book of stories, wouldn't budge past the 75-page mark. Nothing I wrote past page 75 made any kind of sense. Nothing.





Which would have been fine if the first 75 pages hadn't been pretty damn cool. But they were cool, showed a lot of promise. Would also have been fine if I could have just jumped to something else.





But I couldn't. All the other novels I tried sucked worse than the stalled one, and even more disturbing, I seemed to have lost the ability to write short stories. It was like I had somehow slipped into a No-Writing Twilight Zone and I couldn't find an exit. Like I'd been chained to the sinking ship of those 75 pages and there was no key and no patching the hole in the hull. I wrote and I wrote and I wrote, but nothing I produced was worth a damn.





Want to talk about stubborn? I kept at it for five straight years. Five damn years. Every day failing for five years? I'm a pretty stubborn, pretty hard-hearted character, but those five years of fail did a number on my psyche. On me. Five years, 60 months? It just about wiped me out.





By the end of that fifth year, perhaps in an attempt to save myself, to escape my despair, I started becoming convinced that I had written all I had to write, that I was a minor league Ralph Ellison, a Pop Warner Edward Rivera, that maybe it was time, for the sake of my mental health, for me to move on to another profession, and if the inspiration struck again some time in the future...well, great.





But I knew I couldn't go on much more the way I was going. I just couldn't. I was living with my fiancée at the time (over now, another terrible story) and was so depressed and self-loathing I could barely function.





I finally broached the topic with her of, maybe, you know, doing something else. My fiancée was so desperate to see me happy (and perhaps more than a little convinced by my fear that maybe the thread had run out on my talent) that she told me to make a list of what else I could do besides writing.





I'm not a list person like she was, but I wrote one. It took a month to pencil down three things. (I really don't have many other skills.) I stared at that list for about another month. Waiting, hoping, praying for the book, for my writing, for my talent to catch fire. A last-second reprieve. But nada.





So I put the manuscript away. All the hundreds of failed pages, boxed and hidden in a closet. I think I cried as I did it. Five years of my life and the dream that I had of myself, all down the tubes because I couldn't pull off something other people seemed to pull off with relative ease: a novel. By then I wasn't even interested in a Great American Novel. I would have been elated with the eminently forgettable New Jersey novel.





Oprah.com: The real meaning of your "true calling"





So I became a normal. A square. I didn't go to bookstores or read the Sunday book section of the Times. I stopped hanging out with my writer friends. The bouts of rage and despair, the fights with my fiancée

***

WASHINGTON (CNN)  -- A nonprofit consumer group said Thursday that it will sue Bayer HealthCare, alleging "deceptive and irresponsible" advertising that contends selenium in two of its multivitamins may reduce men's risk of prostate cancer.



One A Day Men's 50+ Advantage ads say selenium may cut men's risk of prostate cancer, a consumer group says.



The Center for Science in the Public Interest said it informed the multinational company of its intent Thursday. David Schardt, the center's senior nutritionist, told reporters during a teleconference that the center already has filed a complaint with the Federal Trade Commission.



"We are standing behind all the claims we make in support of the products," Trish McKernan, Bayer's global spokeswoman, told CNN.



"The selenium claims are made by a [Food and Drug Administration]-approved qualified health claim. We regularly review the evidence, and we change our claims if necessitated. The emerging science hasn't compelled us to change our claims, and the FDA claim is intact."



Bayer's HealthCare division, based in Leverkusen, Germany, researches, manufactures and markets pharmaceutical products.



Bayer promotes One A Day Men's 50+ Advantage and One A Day Men's Health Formula multivitamins on package labels, TV and radio ads and on its Web site. In its promotions, the company says "emerging research" suggests that selenium might reduce the risk of prostate cancer, the center said.



"Did you know that there are more new cases of prostate cancer each year than any other cancer?" according to one radio ad. "Now there is something you can do."



Both dietary supplements contain 105 micrograms of the trace mineral selenium per daily dose, or about twice the Recommended Daily Allowance, which is 55 micrograms a day for adults, according to the center. Visit CNNhealth.com, your connection for better living



"It's astounding that a company such as Bayer ... would make such deceptive claims," the center's litigation director, Steve Gardner, told reporters during the same teleconference.



Supporting the center in its letter of complaint to the FTC are nine researchers, who wrote a separate letter to Mary Engle, associate director of advertising practices. Among the signees are medical professionals from the Harvard School of Public Health, American Cancer Society and University of Illinois at Chicago Division of Pathology Research.



All agree there is scant evidence to support Bayer's claim.



A seven-year, $118 million study funded by the National Institutes of Health found last year that selenium does not prevent prostate cancer in healthy men, the center said.



The Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial involving 35,000 U.S. and Canadian men was halted in October when researchers determined that selenium was not protecting the men from prostate cancer and may have been causing diabetes in some of them.



According to the researchers in their letter supporting the FTC's complaint, "the federally financed study was the largest individually, randomized cancer prevention trial ever conducted, and, given its high rates of adherence and its statistical power, it is unlikely to have missed detecting a benefit of even a very modest size."



"Bayer Healthcare is doing a disservice to men by misleading them about a protective role for selenium in prostate cancer," they added.



CNN's Ann Curley contributed to this report.

***

WHITE OAK, Maryland (CNN) -- Seeking to remove unapproved drugs from the marketplace, the Food and Drug Administration on Tuesday ordered nine companies to stop manufacturing narcotics whose therapeutic claims have not been proved.

The FDA ordered nine companies to stop selling unapproved drugs marketed for pain relief.

The FDA's warning letters notified the companies they may be subject to legal action if they do not stop manufacturing and distributing "prescription unapproved products" that include high-concentrate morphine sulfate oral solutions and immediate-release tablets containing morphine sulfate, hydromorphone or oxycodone.

This action does not include oxycodone capsules. All of these drugs are used for pain relief and are forms of previously approved medications.

The agency says this is not a recall, but is instead a warning to manufacturers. The companies have 60 days to pull these pain-relief drugs from the market. Distributors have 90 days to stop shipping them.

If these drugs are not off the market by those deadlines, a company could face seizure of the narcotics and legal action.

"We estimate there are several hundred unapproved drugs out there," said Deborah Autor, director of the office of compliance within the FDA's Center for Drug Evaluation and Research.

"We will continue to take aggressive action against those firms that do not have the required FDA approval for their drugs. Today's warning letters are another demonstration of our commitment to remove illegal, unproved drugs from the market."

Although the FDA does not know whether these drugs are unsafe, it has not approved them so cannot certify that the products are 100 percent safe and effective.

"Consumers have a right to expect that their drugs meet the FDA's safety and effectiveness standards," said Dr. Janet Woodcock, director of the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research.

"Doctors and patients are often unaware that not all drugs on the market are backed by FDA approval. It is a high priority for the FDA to remove these products from the market because they may be unsafe, ineffective, inappropriately labeled, or of poor quality."

The FDA believes Americans have access to plenty of legal narcotics for pain relief and removing these unapproved drugs will not create a shortage.

Consumers who may be concerned that they are taking any unapproved drug products should refer to the FDA's Unapproved Drugs Web page, which includes a list of manufacturers of these products. Those who find they are taking unapproved drugs should see their health care professionals for treatment options.

Those companies receiving warning letters are Boehringer Ingelheim Roxane Inc., Columbus, Ohio; Cody Laboratories Inc., Cody, Wyoming; Glenmark Pharmaceuticals Inc., Mahwah, New Jersey; Lannett Company Inc., Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Lehigh Valley Technologies Inc., Allentown, Pennsylvania; Mallinckrodt Inc. Pharmaceuticals Group, St. Louis, Missouri; Physicians Total Care Inc., Tulsa, Oklahoma; Roxane Laboratories Inc., Columbus, Ohio; and Xanodyne Pharmaceuticals Inc., Newport, Kentucky.

***

Washington (CNN) -- President Obama on Thursday strongly criticized controversial anti-homosexuality legislation being considered by Uganda's legislature.





It is "unconscionable to target gays or lesbians for who they are," Obama said during an appearance at the National Prayer Breakfast.





The measure being considered in Uganda is "odious," he added.





The organization which sponsors the breakfast, the Fellowship Foundation, has been associated with efforts to pass the bill, according to the ethics group Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington.





The measure would punish sexual activity between persons of the same sex with long jail terms or death.





Secretary of State Hillary Clinton also criticized the bill during an appearance at the breakfast.





CREW had protested Obama's appearance at the breakfast, claiming in a statement that the event "designed to appear as if government-sanctioned, actually serves as a meeting and recruiting event for the shadowy Fellowship Foundation," also known as "The Foundation" and "The Family."





A Ugandan legislator who introduced the bill -- which has been roundly condemned by human rights groups -- was scheduled to attend the breakfast before his invitation was revoked, CREW claimed.





The breakfast is held annually on the first Thursday in February. The president, members of Congress and other dignitaries regularly attend.





Members of the Fellowship Foundation could not be reached for comment early Thursday. CREW did not divulge the source of its information.





J. Robert Hunter, a member of The Fellowship who has spoken publicly about the group, told The New York Times in a story published Thursday that it was unfair to blame the group for the Uganda legislation. About 30 family members, all Americans who are active in Africa, conveyed their dismay about the legislation to Ugandan politicians, including the bill's sponsor, Hunter said.





CREW asked Obama and members of Congress on Monday not to attend the breakfast. On Wednesday, it asked television network C-SPAN to refrain from broadcasting the prayer breakfast, or at least to properly identify its sponsor as the Fellowship.





"The Fellowship has been cultivating an unorthodox brand of Christianity amongst the political, military and economic elite of America and other countries for over 50 years, focused on meeting Jesus 'man-to-man,'" CREW said. "The organization operates under an intense veil of secrecy, staying largely out of the public eye and hiding its donors' identities." Its leader, Doug Coe, has led the group since 1969, according to CREW.





The fellowship operates a residence and meeting place on Capitol Hill that has been linked to "ethically troubled" politicians, including Sen. John Ensign and South Carolina Gov. Mark Sanford, the ethics group said.





"The president and members of Congress should not legitimize this cult-like group -- the head of which has praised the organizing abilities of Hitler and bin Laden -- by attending the breakfast," Melanie Sloan, CREW executive director, said in a statement.

***

(CNN) -- A multistate romaine lettuce recall because of fear of contamination with a potentially deadly bacteria has restaurants east of the Mississippi River scrambling to assure customers that their salad is safe.





"We have taken the extra precaution of contacting our lettuce supply chain partners to ensure that our product meets our usual high standard of quality," New York-based franchise Just Salad said in an e-mail to its customers.





"We are happy to say that we have confirmed that this recall will have no effect on Just Salad's romaine lettuce," the e-mail said.





On Thursday, Freshway Foods in Sidney, Ohio, announced a voluntary recall of products containing shredded romaine lettuce with a use-by date of May 12 or earlier because they may be contaminated with E. coli linked to outbreak of illness.





Read about recall on CNN's This Just in





Yum! Brands -- the largest restaurant company, and owner of popular fast food chains KFC, Pizza Hut, Taco Bell and Long John Silver's -- said Freshway Foods is a not supplier to any of its brands.





The romaine lettuce, sold under the Freshway and Imperial Sysco brands, was recalled in connection with an E. coli outbreak that has sickened at least 19 people in Michigan, Ohio and New York.





Most E. coli strains are harmless, but some cause severe illness. Diarrhea, urinary tract infections, pneumonia and other respiratory illnesses are just some of the consequences of ingesting certain kinds of the bacteria.





Blog: What you need to know about E. coli





The lettuce under recall was sold to wholesalers and food service outlets in Alabama, Connecticut, the District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Kansas, Kentucky, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Missouri, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, Tennessee, Virginia, West Virginia and Wisconsin.





Freshway Foods also advised consumers not to eat "grab and go" salads sold at in-store salad bars and delis at Kroger, Giant Eagle, Ingles Markets and Marsh stores in 23 states and the District of Columbia.





The Freshway recall does not affect bagged and prepackaged romaine lettuce mixes sold in the produce section.





"It is important to note that bulk and prepackaged romaine or bagged salad mixes containing romaine that were purchased in supermarkets are not included in this recall; Freshway Foods does not produce these products," Freshway said in a statement.





Consumers with recall questions and concerns can contact Freshway Foods at 888-361-7106 or visit its website, www.freshwayfoods.com.

***

KATHMANDU, Nepal (CNN) -- Tibet's exile government said the death toll from protests in the Himalayan region over the past two weeks has reached about 140, but Chinese government restrictions have made it difficult confirm the number killed.



People walk past burnt-out buildings in Lhasa on 16 March, 2008, after violent protests broke out.



Chinese authorities have issued a much lower death toll and said most of those killed were "innocent" ethnic Han Chinese targeted by rampaging Tibetans.



The Tibetan exiles published a list of 40 Tibetans they said are confirmed dead.



Meanwhile, Tibetan exiles and monks protested for a second day outside of China's embassy visa office in Kathmandu, Nepal on Tuesday, resulting in 73 protesters arrested, Nepalese police said.



Although police said they did not use force, protest organizers said as many as 12 people were hurt when police charged them with bamboo sticks.  Watch demonstrator in tears as monks arrested ».



Protests involving Tibet also dogged the Olympic flame, which was lit in a ceremony Monday in Olympia, Greece. The torch is scheduled to be carried to sites around the world on its way to the Summer Olympics in Beijing, and Tibetan activist say they plan anti-Chinese protests along the way.



Another group of about 50 Tibetan exiles in India began their own torch relay Tuesday with a symbolic "Olympic" flame that will end in Tibet on the day of the Summer Games' opening ceremonies in Beijing, The Associated Press reported.



On Monday, Greek police arrested some of the protesters along the first miles of the torch relay, but the demonstrations were peaceful and police reported no injuries or scuffles.



At one point, a Tibetan woman covered herself with red paint and lay on the ground, forcing the torchbearer to weave around her as other protesters shouted "Flame of shame."



Students for a Free Tibet, a Tibetan exile group, said its protesters would challenge police as the flame moves through 23 cities on five continents before passing throughout China. Tibetan activists will follow it through "London, Paris and everywhere else China's stained Olympic Torch goes," the group said.



The group said the Chinese government "will pressure other governments to silence peaceful protesters who expose the truth behind China's Olympics propaganda campaign."



"The Chinese government's long arm has already extended to San Francisco, where Tibetans are being told they cannot protest along the Torch Relay route," the group said in a news release.



Also Monday, five Tibetans were arrested for deadly arson attacks stemming from the anti-China riots that erupted this month, China's government announced.



A Chinese Ministry of public security official said the suspects have confessed to two arson incidents that killed 10 people in the Tibetan capital of Lhasa, according to the state-run news agency Xinhua.



Ministry spokesman Shan Huimin said three female suspects were detained for a March 14 fire at a shop, in which five female sales assistants were burned to death, Xinhua reported.



In the second case, two males were detained for setting fire to a motorcycle shop on March 15, which resulted in five deaths -- including an 8-month-old boy and his parents, according to Xinhua.



Shan said the violence in Lhasa between March 14 and 15 also injured 242 police officers, according to Xinhua. However, Shan added, peace has been restored to the area.



Clashes between anti-Chinese protesters in the Tibetan capital Lhasa and other cities broke out earlier this month, and Chinese officials blamed the Dalai Lama's followers for the violence.



The Tibetan government in exile said at least 80 people were killed by police, but Chinese officials put the death toll at 13. E-mail to a friend



CNN's Manesh Shrestha in Nepal contributed to this report

***

(CNN)  -- Police digging for clues in the deaths of six people found in the New Mexico desert hope the identification of one set of bones will generate leads.



An Albuquerque, New Mexico, police forensics team member digs last week at the burial site.



The remains of Victoria Chavez and five other people were found in a 92-acre area housing development under construction just west of Albuquerque.



Chavez was a prostitute and drug user who was last seen in 2003 and reported missing in 2004, Albuquerque police said.



The six bodies were found after a woman walking her dog found a human bone two weeks ago and notified police, said John Walsh, Albuquerque police spokesman.



Authorities have not yet identified the other five sets of bones but say they might find others. Attempting to piece together identities could take a long time because, they said,  "it's very difficult" to determine cause of death from skeletal remains.



"We're going off of one remain so far," Walsh said. "And that's all we've got at the moment. We've only got skeletal remains.



"This is a slow go," Walsh said. "Things won't pop up in hours, likely in weeks."



Chavez's remains were identified through dental records that her family provided when she was reported missing in 2004. It will be tougher to identify the others. For example, one had no dental work and another had no skull.



The cause of Chavez's death was not known, but Walsh speculated that her death could be related to violent sex trade.



He said police are looking at reports of missing prostitutes over the years and are trying to determine possible suspects. He said he hopes family members of those missing could help authorities.



Police are trying to figure out how the bodies got there. They are investigating the possibility that one person put the bones there.



"At this stage, the best way I can describe it, we have a handful of theories," Walsh said.



The names of two dead men have surfaced during the investigation of Chavez's death, Walsh said, confirming a news report.



One was a pimp who died of natural causes. The other was killed by a pimp after he killed a prostitute, the report said.



The last set of remains exhumed at the site was nine or 10 feet deep. Authorities were using heavy and light equipment and cadaver dogs to find bodies and clues.



Investigators think there could be even more remains buried on the New Mexico site.

***

(CNN) -- Nikolai Valuev will face Ruslan Chagaev in their much-anticipated rematch for the WBA heavyweight title in Finland on May 30.



Ruslan Chagaev (left) lands a powerful left-hander during his win over Nikolai Valuev two years ago.



The bout, at Helsinki's Hartwall-Arena, will be the first-ever heavyweight contest on Finnish soil, and will see a pumped-up Valuev going all out to "settle the score" against the only man to defeat him in a 51-bout career.



Chagaev twice pulled out of scheduled rematches with Valuev last summer due to injury problems, prompting the WBA to vacate the title.



Uzbeki southpaw Chagaev has been listed as 'champion in recess' ever since and -- as a result -- has to fight Valuev by the end of June in order to determine the undisputed champion.



Valuev reclaimed the vacant belt by defeating American John Ruiz in August and defended his title against Evander Holyfield in December.



"The day has come to settle the score," Valuev told a news conference. "I have been waiting for two years to make amends. Only a victory over Chagaev can put my mind at rest."



Valuev bounced back with four wins on the spin following his loss to Chagaev in April 2007 but the Russian admits the only scalp that matters is that of the Uzbeki.



"I know everything there is to know about Chagaev," said Valuev. "This is the fourth time I am actually preparing for a fight with him," he added, referring to the two postponed fights last year.



"Now is the time to end all this confusion. There will only be one WBA heavyweight champion after May 30 -- and that will be me."

***

(CNN)  -- Hundreds of U.S. and Afghan soldiers have embarked on a major operation against militants in the eastern Afghan region of Tora Bora, near the border with Pakistan, officials have told CNN.



File photo of the remote mountain Tora Bora region on the border of Afghanistan and Pakistan.



Air and ground strikes under way in the remote mountain region are aimed at large numbers of militant fighters.



The troops are targeting "hundreds of hardened al Qaeda and Taliban in dug-in positions," said officials familiar with the intelligence.



The operation started two days ago in the region, where al Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden was once thought to be hiding.



The Bush administration has been criticized for not sending enough ground forces to Tora Bora in December 2001 to capture the militant after the invasion that toppled the Taliban.



"U.S. and Afghan forces engaged al Qaeda and other violent extremist fighters in eastern Afghanistan during a combined arms assault using precision munitions. There have been no substantiated reports of civilian casualties in this engagement," said Capt. Vanessa R. Bowman, a U.S. Army spokeswoman.



"The targets were carefully chosen to pinpoint enemy positions and eliminate the likelihood of harming innocent civilians," she said.



"This region has provided an ideal environment to conceal enemy support bases and training sites, as well as plan and launch attacks aimed at terrorizing innocent civilians, both inside and outside the region."



Also Wednesday, a manager at a private British security firm in Afghanistan was shot and killed in the capital Kabul, a spokesman for the company said.



"We did lose a manager today in Kabul to unknown assailants," Christopher Beese, spokesman for ArmorGroup International, said Wednesday.



He said next of kin have been notified and an inquiry into the incident has begun. The name of the man, a British national, was not released.



"It's bad news. He was a very well-respected man," Beese said, noting that the victim had experience in Afghanistan going back to the early 1980s.



Beese -- who said the man's role was to run the administration of the 1,200-person-strong security presence in the country -- described the man as a "logistics manager" and "all things to all people."



The firm, which has been operating in Afghanistan since 2002, mostly provides diplomatic protection and has contracts with the British and American governments.



The man recruited and trained Afghan guards and was the most senior administrator at the company's Kabul base, Camp Anjuman, the company said. E-mail to a friend



CNN's Joe Sterling contributed to this report.

***

(CNN) -- Robert Pires is confident Villarreal -- nickname 'the Yellow Submarine' -- can torpedo the Champions League dreams of former club Arsenal in Tuesday's quarterfinal first leg clash in Spain.

Robert Pires made his final apearance for Arsenal in the 2006 Champions League final defeat against Barcelona.

"We can beat them, for sure," said the former French internationa\. "We would not come on the pitch if we were not convinced that we are good enough to go through.

"I would say that I expect a spectacular game between two teams that look like each other a lot. Hopefully we will see many goals."

The 35-year-old spent six successful seasons at Highbury, and made his last appearance for the Gunners in the 2006 Champions League final when he was substituted in an early tactical change following the sending off of goalkeeper Jens Lehmann.

Such an exit was not the way Pires wanted to bring the curtain down on an Arsenal career which had seen him help guide Arsene Wenger's side through an unbeaten Premier League campaign in 2003/2004.

"I have always had a tremendous relationship with the Arsenal fans and these games will be the occasion for me to say goodbye to them," Pires told www.setanta.com. "Not having been able to say goodbye to them is a pain to me.

"I wanted to have the chance to thank the Highbury public for their support, but I could not do it because my last game was the Champions League final with Barcelona.

"Then I announced my departure to Villarreal three days later and did not see them again. Sincerely, this draw is emotional to me, and fills me with nostalgia as well, that is for sure."

Pires was sent off in the 3-0 weekend defeat at Almeria that saw  midfielder Santi Cazorla break an ankle in a match that left Manuel Pellegrini's team in fourth place.

Spain international midfielder Marcos Senna is, though, expected to be fit to face the Gunners.

Arsenal striker Robin van Persie misses the trip to Spain with a groin injury, but Samir Nasri and Theo Walcott have been passed fit for the clash at El Madrigal after a virus and knee injury respectively.

Manager Arsene Wenger paid tribute to his players on arrival in Spain and maintained that he is "confident" of a positive outcome over the two legs.

Midfielder Andrey Arshavin is ineligible having played for Zenit St Petersburg during the group stages. Striker Eduardo (groin) and midfielder Abou Diaby (thigh) remain sidelined, while long-term absentee Tomas Rosicky continues his recovery.

***

(CNN) -- The wedding of a Boston, Massachusetts, medical student accused of killing a woman he met through Craigslist has been called off, his fiancee's lawyer said.





The wedding of accused "Craigslist killer" Phillip Markoff and his fiancee, Megan McAllister, has been called off.





Megan McAllister, who was accompanied by her mother, met Phillip Markoff for about 25 minutes in a Boston jail earlier this week, her lawyer Robert Honecker told CNN affiliate WCVB.





"It was an emotional conversation on both sides," Honecker said, adding that McAllister is planning to move back to her home state of New Jersey.





"There is still a love and commitment to that person, and I think that obviously realizing what has now happened, that she has to take steps to do what she has to do on her life," Honecker told WCVB. She plans to move on, he said.





"There are things that she has to do, and I think the process begins today," Honecker told WCVB.





Honecker told ABC on Thursday that the wedding "will not occur."  Watch lawyer tell reporters that Megan McAllister is ready to move on »





McAllister maintained her fiance's innocence in an e-mail sent to ABC News in early April. In the e-mail, McAllister said police have the wrong man and Markoff "was set up."





McAllister's visit was her first since Markoff was arraigned last week on murder charges in the killing of a woman whom authorities say he met through Craigslist, a popular online classifieds service.





Markoff, 23, a second-year student at Boston University's School of Medicine, is charged with killing Julissa Brisman on April 14 at a Boston hotel. Police said Brisman, a model from New York, advertised as a masseuse on Craigslist.





Prosecutors say Brisman was shot three times at close range and suffered blunt head trauma. Markoff is also charged in connection with an April 10 robbery of Trisha Leffler, 29, at another hotel in Boston. Leffler also met Brisman on Craigslist.





Leffler was robbed of $800 in cash and $250 in American Express gift cards, according to police reports.





Markoff has pleaded not guilty and is being held without bail.

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN) -- Before Jada Pinkett Smith took the role of producer and star of TNT's "HawthoRNe," she made sure her family was fine with her being away from her mother and wife duties during filming.



Jada Pinkett Smith's new TV show, "HawthoRNe," premieres Tuesday on TNT.



Pinkett Smith plays a single mom and a hospital's chief nurse on the medical show, which debuts Tuesday night on cable's TNT Network, which is owned by the parent company of CNN.



"I sat down with kids and my husband and I really asked their permission," she said. "I said 'Listen, there was this show I'd love to do and it will be three months that you might not see Mommy a lot.' And they're looking at me like 'Really? What does that mean?'"



It meant that on weekdays Will would get Willow, 8, and Jaden, 11, out of bed each morning, tuck them in at night and take care of them in-between.



"So they get to eat chocolate for breakfast and go to bed whenever they feel like it for those three months while I'm working," Pinkett Smith said. "So, it works out, and they know that the rest of the year, I'm off."



While the show is based on a Richmond, Virginia, hospital, it's produced in a recently closed Inglewood, California, hospital just a few miles from the Smiths' home.



"The great thing is that my kids do know I'm in town," she said.



It's close enough for Will to spend time on the set with Jada while still taking care of the kids.



"He's an extra in one of the episodes, so just see if you can catch him," she said. "He's walking by, doing a drive-by, and we could hardly afford that. It was a very costly walk-by."



Smith also works as a "ghost producer" helping structure her episodes, she said.



"He's quite a fantastic story structuralist," she said. "So right now, I'm learning from him just how to structure a story in a way that speaks to the universal voice and to understand how to hit those human emotional cords that resonate universally, no matter what country you're from, your economic status."



Will Smith was also on the set at Paramount Studios last month when daughter Willow taped her TV sitcom debut on Nickelodeon's "True Jackson, VP." His role then was stage dad.



Hollywood's highest paid actor, as ranked by Forbes magazine, sat with the other parents through the day-long rehearsals and taping "like a regular dad," according to the parent of a cast member.



By the way, Jada reports her daughter came home saying she wanted to do more television acting.



When "HawthoRNe" production ends later this summer, Jada may have to return the "supportive spouse" favor to her husband when he travels to Beijing, China, to work on a "Karate Kid" remake.



Will Smith will produce, with son Jaden playing the lead role, opposite Jackie Chan.



It's not clear if Jada will seek work as a background extra.

***

(CNN) -- After hours of back and forth between members, the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America decided Friday evening to accept noncelibate clergy members and lay leaders who are in "lifelong" and "monogamous" same-sex relationships.



Previous Evangelical Lutheran Church policy allows gay and lesbian clergy, lay people to serve only if celibate.



One of the country's largest Protestant denominations, the Lutheran church approved four recommendations to its ministry's policies that underscore a new approach to homosexuality.



While the recommendations passed at the weeklong Churchwide Assembly in Minneapolis, Minnesota, do not address recognizing same-sex marriage or civil unions, they do allow congregations to support same-sex relationships among their members and allow individuals in same-sex relationships to hold clergy positions.



The previous policy of the 4.6-million member church allowed gay people to serve as members of professional rosters only if they were celibate.



Some members argued prior to the vote that the change would fly in the face of religious teachings.



"Brothers and sisters, I ask you, before you dig yourselves deeper into this hole, if you are so absolutely certain that these behaviors are not sinful that you are willing to place yourselves and this church at the spiritual risk that comes from encouraging sin," said the Rev. Steven Frock of the Western Iowa Synod.



Among those on the other side was Alan Wold of the Northern Illinois Synod. "If according to some I am going to be in err for supporting this... Let me err on the side of mercy, grace, justice, and love of neighbor. Let me err on the side of gospel, which makes all things new."



Many feared the emotional debate could tear at the unity of the church. So the members voted to re-order their resolutions -- moving to the top a resolution that the church "commit itself to bear one another's burdens, love thy neighbor, and respect the bound consciences of all." It passed with overwhelming support.



Other religious denominations, including Episcopalians and Unitarians, have made moves to accept gay clergy, and Evangelical Lutherans would not be the first to accept those openly in same-sex relationships, said David Masci, a senior researcher at the Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life. But ELCA would be the largest to make such a move.



The church is the third largest Protestant denomination, representing 2 percent of the U.S. population, according to the Pew Forum.



The battle Friday was the latest in what Masci said many "socially moderate" denominations, including those in Judaism, are grappling with: balancing the growing acceptance of same-sex relationships with traditional teachings.



As some have moved toward accepting same-sex relationships, within those same denominations "you see more conservative wings that are pushing back against it," said Masci.



On hand for Friday's debate were hundreds of "interested parties" -- including some people who are not members of the church, said John Brooks, ELCA spokesman.



When asked whether there had been protests or rallies on either side outside the convention site, he responded, "Interestingly, no."



In the convention hall, Brooks said, "The debates haven't been rancorous or mean-spirited in any way. They've been quite civil. But people have been passionate with their feelings."



The Rev. Terri Stagner-Collier of the Southeastern Synod said a vote in favor of the resolutions would cause members of her own family to leave the church. Her sister "felt her church was being ripped away from her," Stagner-Collier said tearfully, adding, I urge you not to do this to all of those people in the pew and in my family."



Sara Gross of the Oregon Synod said some "dear members" of the church will be lost if the resolution passes. But, she said, "A vote to reject this recommendation sends a message to the world saying 'not all are welcome.'"



In a "changing world," Gross argued, the Evangelical Lutheran Church of America "needs to be a voice that stands up and says

***

SAN ANTONIO, Texas (CNN)  -- The three Americans rescued after more than five years in captivity in Colombia say they are doing well but are "overwhelmed with emotion," according to a statement released on their behalf.



"Words alone can never possibly express the thrill and excitement we feel to be back home in the United States of America with our families at our side," the Friday statement from Marc Gonsalves, Thomas Howes and Keith Stansell said.



The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) had held the three U.S. government contractors since February 2003, after their plane crashed in a remote region of the South American country.



They were among 15 hostages rescued Wednesday in a Colombian military operation.  Watch Colombians celebrate success »



Also among the rescued hostages was French-Colombian politician Ingrid Betancourt, who returned to France on Friday. She is undergoing medical tests at a Paris military hospital, The Associated Press reported.  Watch Betancourt's joyous return to France »



Shortly after the plane crashed, FARC members killed contractor Tom Janis, according to employer Northrop Grumman, and Colombian army Sgt. Luis Cruz, according to the U.S. State Department.



The three freed Americans are being treated at Brooke Army Medical Center in San Antonio, Texas.  Learn about the former hostages »



"For five-and-a-half long years, we all hoped and prayed this day would come," their statement said. "Now that it has, we're just overwhelmed with emotion. The love and the joy we're all experiencing is beyond description.



"We want to offer our heartfelt thanks to the government and the armed forces of Colombia. The operation they conducted to rescue us was one for the history books -- something we will never forget for the rest of our lives."



Colombian authorities unveiled details and a videotape Friday describing the mission, which involved tricking the leftist rebels into giving up their hostages.  Watch video of the rescue »



Government agents had infiltrated the FARC leadership over several months. This week they talked the rebels into moving the hostages, saying a humanitarian group wanted to check on them.



A helicopter carrying fake rebels picked up the hostages at a rendezvous point, ostensibly to take them to another rebel camp. It actually was a government helicopter, and the hostages were whisked to freedom without a shot being fired.  Learn about FARC »



On Thursday, doctors at the Brooke Army Medical Center said the three Americans appeared to be in good health. Initial tests had for now ruled out the suspicion of infectious diseases, and although other medical tests are pending, "everything really looks well," said Col. Jackie Hayes, a psychiatrist and the lead physician on the men's medical team.



Hayes said patient confidentiality rules prevented him from commenting on reports that Gonsalves was suffering from hepatitis.



Maj. Gen. Keith Huber, commander of U.S. Army South, said the contractors were in the second phase of a three-phase process designed to ease their transition back to normal life.



"They greeted me with a strong handshake and clear eyes and an incredible smile," he said.

***

SEATTLE, Washington (CNN) -- An accident involving de-icing solution being sprayed on an Alaska Airlines plane in snow-covered Seattle sent seven people to a hospital Wednesday, airport and hospital officials said.



Emergency vehicles gather around Alaska Airlines planes in Seattle, Washington, on Wednesday.



The seven, who were crew members, were transported to Highline Medical Center for minor issues, such as eye irritation, dizziness and nausea, said Sea-Tac Airport spokesman Perry Cooper. Eighteen passengers were treated at the scene.



There had been an initial report that two people were badly hurt, but Cooper said all of the injuries were minor. He said six of the crew members transported to the hospital were working and one was off duty.



Caroline Boren, Alaska Airlines spokeswoman, confirmed the injury numbers and said the most extensive treatment given to the passengers was an eye wash. None of them requested further treatment or were transported to the hospital.



Matt Crockett, assistant administrator at Highline Medical Center, confirmed the hospital was assessing seven people in its emergency room. He said six of them were in satisfactory condition and another was still being evaluated.



The incident began when fumes from the de-icing application got into the cabin of Alaska Airlines Flight 528.  Watch an ex-transportation official explain how the fumes seeped into the plane »



Alaska Airlines said the flight was getting ready for takeoff to Burbank, California, when passengers began to complain of eye irritation and strong fumes from the chemicals. Video footage showed several emergency vehicles around the plane on the snow-covered tarmac.



The airline said the plane, a Boeing 737-800, was carrying 143 passengers and several crew members. Boren called the situation "very unusual" and said maintenance crew had been working on the plane.



Cooper said the airline was bringing in another aircraft to transport the passengers to their destination.



Seattle has been blanketed with nearly 9 inches of snow this week, and forecasters predicted snow mixed with rain Wednesday, with an accumulation of about a half inch of new snow through Thursday.



One passenger, Joe Dial of Seattle, told CNN affiliate KIRO-TV that passengers were exposed to the de-icer fumes for 45 minutes before they were able to leave the plane.



The jetliner had pulled away from the gate Wednesday morning, but then had to return for the de-icing process, Dial told KIRO.



Meanwhile in Moline, Illinois, an AirTran Airways jet skidded off the runway at Quad City International Airport, CNN affiliate WQAD-TV reported.



Witnesses said passengers were being evacuated to buses, and there appeared to be no injuries, according to WQAD. The airport was closed to all traffic after the accident, the station said.



At airports elsewhere across the U.S., weather was forcing significant delays as travelers tried to reach their destinations by Christmas.



Flights bound for Newark-Liberty International Airport in New Jersey faced delays averaging three hours. Flights into Chicago's O'Hare International Airport in Illinois, John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York and San Francisco International Airport in California were all subject to delays averaging an hour or more, according to the FAA.



Travelers at O'Hare were hoping Wednesday went better than the day before as thousands were stranded in the nation's second-busiest airport overnight when hundreds of flights were canceled.



"It is ruining my holiday," one stranded passenger, Keith Bouchard, told CNN affiliate WLS-TV.



"I am not going to have a holiday mood till I get home," stranded passenger Ken Estes told WLS.



O'Hare's trouble extended to South Florida, where Laura Weichhand and Rachel Lewis got stuck at Fort Lauderdale-Hollywood International Airport when their flight to Chicago was canceled.



"If we want to be home for Christmas ... our only option is we're going to drive 26 hours to be home for Christmas," Lewis told CNN affiliate WPLG-TV.



The Chicago area was expected to get 1 inch to 3 inches of new snow Wednesday.



At Colorado's Denver International Airport, lost luggage was a huge problem. Thousands of

***

ISLAMABAD, Pakistan (CNN) -- U.S. and Pakistani troops exchanged fire Thursday along the Pakistani-Afghan border minutes after the Pakistani military fired shots at two American helicopters that were providing cover for the troops, a U.S. military spokesman said.



Pakistan says it shot at two U.S. OH-58D helicopters like this one pictured in a U.S. Army photo.



The U.S. Army OH-58D Kiowas, part of NATO's International Security Assistance Force mission in Afghanistan, were patrolling the Pakistani-Afghan border when the Pakistani military fired on them, NATO and U.S. officials said.



The Pakistani military said the fire was warning shots, and President Asif Ali Zardari said it was flares. Both Zardari and the Pakistani military said the helicopters had crossed into Pakistani territory -- a charge U.S. officials denied.



Rear Adm. Greg Smith of U.S. Central Command said the helicopters were providing cover for a small U.S. military unit accompanying an Afghan border police unit on a routine patrol.



After the shots were fired at the helicopters, Smith told CNN, the U.S. troops fired "suppressing rounds" into a nearby hill to get the Pakistanis to stop. That prompted the Pakistani troops to stop firing at the helicopters and fire instead in the direction of the troops, he said. The U.S. troops then returned fire, Smith said.



No injuries were reported in the five-minute incident.



Smith and other U.S. officials said the helicopter crews did not fire back.



But the Pakistanis disagreed, asserting in a written statement that the helicopters "returned fire" after the initial shots were fired.



"The helicopters passed over our border post and were well within Pakistan territory" at the time that "security forces fired anticipatory warning shots," the Pakistani statement said.



After the shots were fired, "the helicopters returned fire and flew back."



The Pakistani statement did not mention exchanging fire with ground troops and did not identify the shots as flares, as Zardari did in New York in an appearance with U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice.



"They are flares," he said in response to a question asking why the Pakistani military was firing on NATO helicopters. "Just to make sure that they know they crossed the border line."



Asked if such warnings will continue, he replied, "Sometimes the border is so mixed that they don't realize that they crossed the border."



Rice, off camera, agreed that "the border is very unclear" and "inhospitable."



Pentagon spokesman Bryan Whitman reiterated the United States' stance that the two helicopters were over Afghan territory. "The Pakistanis need to provide the U.S. a reason to why this took place," he said.



The ISAF issued a news release saying that "ISAF helicopters received small-arms fire from a Pakistan military checkpoint along the border near Tanai district, Khowst."



"At no time did ISAF helicopters cross into Pakistani airspace." The ISAF did not mention ground troops or say whether the helicopters returned fire.



Both the ISAF and Pakistani military said they are working to resolve the issue.



Last week, Zardari said Pakistan would not allow foreign nations to violate its sovereignty to pursue terrorists.



"We will not tolerate the violation of our sovereignty and territorial integrity by any power in the name of combating terrorism," he said in his first speech to Parliament as president.



His remark followed a similar declaration from Pakistan's military chief, Gen. Parvez Kayani, who said this month that Pakistan's territorial integrity "will be defended at all cost, and no external force is allowed to conduct operations."



A senior defense official in the Pentagon said the Pentagon is trying to determine the details of Thursday's incident.



"What we don't know if this was just a case of trigger-happy members of the Frontier Corps," the official said, "or whether in fact the Pakistani military does have orders to fire on our helicopters."



"We are confident our helicopters were on the Afghan side of the border, and we have no report they fired back," the official added.



Top U.S. commanders will be talking

***

ATLANTA, Georgia (CNN) -- Eric Hahn thought his financial situation was set after he was approved for a private student loan with an 8 percent interest rate to supplement his federal education loans.



Eric Hahn, 21, estimates he will be in debt for the next five to seven years for his undergraduate tuition.



Just a few weeks later, Hahn, 21, was forced to cash in his savings and investments so he could make his rent and tuition after finding out that the lender, MyRichUncle.com, had suspended its private student loan program.



"Due to continued disruptions in the capital markets, combined with the continued demand we have experienced this year, we are reaching funding capacity limits," a message on his cell phone said, mimicking a statement on the company's Web site.



The sudden news left Hahn, a senior-year finance major, scrambling to find additional funding after maxing out his borrowing options from the federal government. Eventually, the country's leading student loan provider, Sallie Mae, approved him for a private loan at 12 percent.



After he graduates, Hahn estimates it will take him anywhere from five to seven years to repay about $30,000 he will have borrowed by then.



"Money isn't cheap," said Hahn, who transferred to Georgia State University in Atlanta from the University of Connecticut last year because the tuition was less expensive. "The process is time-consuming, and there's also the stress of having to liquidate my investments and wonder where I'm going to find money."



About 8 percent of student borrowers rely on private loans, which tend to be costlier and stricter than federal loans, said Robert Shierman, executive director of the Institute for College Access and Success. In doing so, Hahn and others like him are getting a crash course in market volatility and its effects on the consumer's ability to find money.  Watch how the current economic troubles affect consumers »



MyRichUncle.com is the most recent lender to suspend its private student loan program, joining the ranks of major financial institutions like Wachovia and Bank of America and companies specializing in student loans such as College Loan Corporation and Campus Door, which was backed by Lehman Brothers.



MyRichUncle's president and co-founder, Raza Khan, told CNN: "We are currently working with a number of investors so we can resume loan origination as soon as possible.



"Meanwhile, students and parents should not lose sight of the value of education. Funds do remain available -- we encourage families to do all the homework and research, and to make prudent decisions on borrowing," he added in a written statement.



Since August 2007, 33 lenders have suspended private loans programs, according to the Web site FinAid.org, which tracks activity in the student loan market.  Unlike federal lending programs, private loans rely on liquidity from investors. Even though private loans are considered strong by industry standards, they are feeling the effects of a turbulent capital market.



"The only reason lenders had to stop making the loans was that they ran out of liquidity," said financial aid expert Mark Kantrowitz, who created FinAid.org.



"It's a contagion effect of the sub-prime crisis," said Kantrowitz. "It's an overreaction that has affected the student loan market."



With their strong resemblance to consumer loans, where lenders set the terms based on your credit score, financial advisers often recommended private loans as a means of last resort.



But with rising tuition and increased enrollment putting a squeeze on the student aid market -- which disbursed about $60 billion in federal funds and $17 billion in private loans last year -- students are turning to private loans after they've exhausted all other avenues, or for expenses that federal aid won't cover.



In response, Congress passed legislation this year to increase the maximum amount of federal loans that students can obtain.



"With federal student loan limits increasing, you can borrow now more than last year, regardless of income, assets, collateral or income," said Martha Holler, vice president of corporate communications of Sallie Mae.



Despite

***

(CNN) -- "Wolverine." "Star Trek." "Angels & Demons." "Terminator: Salvation." The summer movies roll out, one weekend after another, like dreadnoughts leaving port to bombard a battle-scarred ocean.



Mark Ruffalo and Adrien Brody star as "The Brothers Bloom," a pair of successful con artists.



So won't a little film about a pair of con-artist brothers, with nary an indestructible alloy in sight, get overrun by these blockbusters?



Rian Johnson, the 35-year-old director of the charming "The Brothers Bloom," doesn't see it that way.



"I actually kind of like it," he says of the strategy of premiering his film during summer movie season. ("Bloom" opens Friday in limited release and expands nationwide May 29.) "I feel like we're scampering in between the feet of these giants."



Make no mistake, adds Johnson: "I love the big summer movies." But, he says, audiences will see the big movie of the week "and then want something different. That's the advantage coming out in this season has."



"Bloom" has already proved itself nimble.  Watch the stars talk about "Bloom" »



The film started earning buzz at the Toronto Film Festival last September, and its distributor, Summit Entertainment, launched a shrewd marketing campaign by putting the first seven minutes on the Internet earlier this year.



Johnson, who directed the critically acclaimed "Brick" -- a film noir set in a high school -- has been praised for another inventive mix of genres, combining the con-man film with a touch of screwball comedy, some international intrigue and more than a little whimsy.



Mark Ruffalo, who stars as Stephen Bloom, the mastermind of the duo, describes "Brothers Bloom" as "its own world."



"What I loved about it was its tonal shifts," he says. "It goes from broad, almost slapstick stuff to the brother story and a love story. It's not traditional in that sense."



The film follows Stephen Bloom and his brother, played by Adrien Brody, as they embark on one last con: an attempt to swindle a wealthy shut-in, Penelope Stamp, played by Rachel Weisz. Instead of being upset, Penelope is tickled by the new world before her and the opportunities for freedom, even as the younger Bloom (simply called "Bloom") wants to move on to something else.



Johnson is nothing if not a student of film, and "Bloom" features references to other con-man works. "Paper Moon," with its examination of character, was a favorite, says Johnson. There are also nods to "The Sting," David Mamet's works, and even Agatha Christie.



But, as Ruffalo says, "Bloom" exists in its own world. Though the film is set in the present day, the Blooms wear suits and hats as if they walked out of 1910. Much of the film was shot in the sunny byways of coastal Eastern Europe, with its weathered 19th-century resorts and glamorous Old World style. (The backdrop made the story "much more real for all of us," says Johnson.)



Add Johnson's invocations of Fellini's "8½," Marcello Mastroianni and (of all things) the Band documentary "The Last Waltz" to his cast, and Ruffalo says it was easy to find the film's personality.



"That was the starting point -- a threadbare elegance," he says.



"There's an appreciation of eccentricity," agrees Johnson. Whimsy can be hard to maintain, he says, but "the heightened style comes from a story-based place." (Johnson wrote the film's script.)



That can be a lot for the moviegoing public of today -- weaned on CGI, armored rogues and thin romantic comedies -- to take in. But Johnson says he has faith "The Brothers Bloom" will find an audience.



"I'm

***

Ercis, Turkey (CNN) -- The death toll from the massive earthquake that shook eastern Turkey over the weekend rose to 570 on Friday, up from 535 the day before, but crews have pulled 187 people alive from the rubble, Turkish officials said.





In addition, about 2,555 people were injured by the 7.2-magnitude earthquake that struck Sunday, according to the Turkish Disaster and Emergency Relief Agency.





Rescue workers extracted 13-year-old Serhat Tokay from the rubble of an apartment building early Friday, 108 hours after the earthquake struck Ercis, the semi-official Anatolian news agency reported. The child was being treated in a field hospital.





Eight hours earlier, crews had rescued 18-year-old Imdat Padak from the wreckage of another building in Ercis, the agency reported.





After teams from Azerbaijan retrieved him, Padak was taken to a hospital for initial treatment, and then was airlifted by helicopter to the city of Van.





Padak appeared not to have any significant trauma, but was suffering dehydration. He is reported to be a student from the village of Kiziloren and was taking courses while preparing for university entrance exams.





Earlier in the week, crews pulled a 2-week-old baby, Azra Karaduman, alive from the debris.





There were reports Thursday of a moderate earthquake in the country's south.





A 5.2 earthquake hit about 200 kilometers (125 miles) south of the center of Sunday's quake, near the border with Iraq, the U.S. Geological Survey reported.





Tokay was the latest of several people found alive in the rubble days after Sunday's quake. On Wednesday, rescuers pulled two people from collapsed buildings.





Britain has pledged emergency tents for more than 5,500 people whose homes were destroyed, Home Secretary Theresa May said during a visit to Turkey Thursday.





CNN's Diana Magnay, Yesim Comert, Sarah Jones and Michael Martinez contributed to this story

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- A meningitis outbreak is threatening the lives of tens of thousands of people in Darfur, according to an aid agency expelled from the country last week.



A Doctors without Borders medic helps a sick child in a Darfur refugee camp.



Humanitarian organization Doctors Without Borders, also known as Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF), says it was preparing to vaccinate around 100,000 people in southern and western Darfur against meningitis, when it was told to leave the country.



"We were in the process of organizing a vaccination campaign. At the moment  there's no one there that can take over those activities, which is really worrying," Gemma Davies of MSF told CNN.



The country's Ministry of Health officially declared a meningitis outbreak on March 2 at the Kalma Camp, which shelters more than 90,000 refugees in southern Darfur.



"Living in such close proximity, the potential for this outbreak to spread quickly is quite high, Davies, MSF project coordinator for South Darfur, told CNN.



"With no health care providers to give vaccinations, and with no one to manage the meningitis cases when they come, it's really concerning," she added.



The vaccination campaign was due to begin on March 7, but it is now unclear if or when it will resume, as reports of government harassment of aid workers continue.



Davies told CNN she experienced no harassment, and said government officials had  been in contact with only the head of MSF's regional operations.



"We haven't actually been given any reason on why we were expelled," she said. "We have absolutely no idea when we'll be able to return."



Doctors Without Borders was among 13 aid agencies, including Mercy Corps and the International Rescue Committee, that were ordered by the government to shut down their operations in Sudan last week.



So far the agency has confirmed 32 meningitis cases and four deaths, and has seen dozens of other suspected cases.



Thousands of unvaccinated refugees and villagers are now exposed to the airborne disease in densely populated camps and villages throughout Sudan.



"One of our priorities is to get another organization to take over our programs there," Davies added.



The medical relief agency says it doubts though that other any other organizations have the capacity to deal with a meningitis epidemic.



Davies also said she is worried about the cut-off of MSF's feeding and maternal delivery services: "We had over 100 patients on our feeding program that now won't be receiving any follow up."



The decision by the Sudanese government to throw out the aid groups came a day after the International Criminal Court at The Hague issued an arrest warrant for Sudanese President Omar Hassan al-Bashir for war crimes and crimes against humanity in Darfur.



However, not all international aid organizations are affected. Others including World Vision international continues its work, which reaches approximately 500,000 internally displaced people in South Sudan.



The U.N. has received reports that international staff members of five non-governmental organizations had been detained for up to four hours.



Speaking on the phone from Nairobi, an aid worker, who asked not to be identified for fear of further harassment, told CNN that his colleagues who remained in Khartoum were being intimidated and threatened by government agents.



In some cases Sudanese government representatives "had started gathering banking details and confiscating computers, communications equipment and vehicles from the NGOs", a U.N spokesman said at a news conference last week.



Last week, the U.N. warned that the loss of  NGOs in Sudan would cause 1.1 million people to go without food aid and health care, and more than 1 million to have no access to water.



Oxfam, whose work focuses on providing safe drinking water, was one of the aid groups who were told their registration to operate in Sudan was no longer valid. Ninety percent of their staff are Sudanese nationals, who mostly remain in country, unable to continue their relief work under threat of arrest.



"These agencies are vital implementation partners for the United Nations and account for at least half of the humanitarian capacity in

***

(CNN) -- Harold Pinter, the Nobel Prize-winning playwright and screenwriter whose absurdist and realistic works displayed a despair and defiance about the human condition, has died, according to British media reports. He was 78.



The much-honored Harold Pinter received the French Legion d'honneur in 2007.



Pinter's wife, Lady Antonia Fraser, confirmed his death.



Pinter, who had been suffering from cancer, died on Christmas Eve, according to the reports.



Fraser told the Guardian newspaper: "He was a great, and it was a privilege to live with him for over 33 years. He will never be forgotten."



Pinter was known for such plays as "The Birthday Party" (1957), "The Homecoming" (1964), "No Man's Land" (1974), "Mountain Language" (1988), and "Celebration" (2000). The works caught a linguistic rhythm -- the legendary "Pinter pause" -- and an air of social unease that resonated throughout the English-speaking world and in myriad translations.



His movie credits, like his plays, span the decades and include "The Quiller Memorandum" (1965) and "The French Lieutenant's Woman" (1981).



Pinter also wrote the screenplay for his 1978 play "Betrayal," the story of a doomed love affair told backward, which was made into a 1983 film with Ben Kingsley, Jeremy Irons and Patricia Hodge.



He received the Nobel Prize in literature in 2005.



Pinter's later plays were more overtly political, with works such as "One for the Road" (1984) and "The New World Order" (1991) focusing on state torture.



In commentaries, he became a blistering critic of the United States, writing in his Nobel lecture that the country "quite simply doesn't give a damn about the United Nations, international law or critical dissent, which it regards as impotent and irrelevant. It also has its own bleating little lamb tagging behind it on a lead, the pathetic and supine Great Britain."



But Pinter could also be a man of great humor. In 2006, he recounted a story about a fall that had landed him in the hospital a year earlier.



"Two days later, I woke up to find that I'd been given the Nobel Prize in literature," he said. "So life is really full of ups and downs, you see."



Harold Pinter was born in London on October 10, 1930. He was the son of Jewish immigrants, his father a dressmaker, his mother "a wonderful cook," he once recalled. In 1948 he was accepted into the Royal Academy of Dramatic Arts, then as now one of Great Britain's most renowned drama schools. But the RADA didn't take; Pinter hated the school and dropped out after two terms.



He became an actor and turned to playwriting with his first work, "The Room," in 1957. Later that year he wrote "The Birthday Party," a "comedy of menace," in the words of one critic, that helped make Pinter's reputation -- though, in an irony he could appreciate, after it closed in London due to scathing notices.



Ensuing Pinter plays, including "The Dumb Waiter" (1957) and "The Homecoming," made him Britain's most famous playwright, as influential to "late 20th-century British theater [as] Tennessee Williams is to mid-century American stages," CNN.com's Porter Anderson wrote in 2006.



"What's generally meant as a 'Pinter play' in the purest sense usually revolves around one or more characters who are imposing on themselves a constricted, even deprived existence in order to hold off a presumed but uncertain threat," Anderson wrote.



Pinter's plays featured sparse dialogue, often spiced with paranoia or simple befuddlement. In "The Birthday Party," a boardinghouse resident is accosted by two malevolent visitors who insist it's his birthday; in "The Homecoming" -- which won the Tony Award for best play when it premiered on

***

(CNN) -- Undercover officers rescued a baby gorilla from suspected animal traffickers in the Democratic Republic of Congo, a national park in the country announced Tuesday.



This baby gorilla was rescued from a suspected trafficker in the Democratic Republic of Congo.



The gorilla, thought to be about two years old, was hidden at the bottom of a bag and covered with clothes when Congolese Wildlife Authority officers arrested the suspected trafficker on Sunday, Virunga National Park said.



The gorilla, a female, was overheated and dehydrated after six hours in transit. She also had a puncture wound on her right leg, among other injuries, and is malnourished, but is responding to treatment, the park said in a statement.



It is not clear if the young gorilla's mother is alive or dead, park spokeswoman Samantha Newport said.



"You can assume that a gorilla family was attacked in order for the traffickers to obtain a baby -- but it is impossible to know if a whole family was wiped out, just a few individuals, or none at all," she said. "In most cases gorillas have to die to get a baby -- but we cannot know specifically for this case."



The animal is now being looked after by specially trained carers, Newport said.



"This is of course not an ideal replacement for a mother -- but the best option we have," she told CNN via e-mail. Carers often have some veterinary training, but are not fully fledged vets, she added.



But gorillas do not do well in situations like this, she warned.



"Gorillas, it is worth noting, are notoriously difficult to keep alive," she said. "Chimps are fighters, as are bonobos. But gorillas -- when the going gets tough -- tend to just shut down. So it really is a critical time right now to ensure she gets the veterinary attention and human warmth that she needs to get through this."



The suspect was getting off a plane from the interior of the country, near the gorillas' habitat, the park said.



One person has been charged under the country's law forbidding the destruction of flora and fauna, Newport told CNN. The park did not name the suspect.



Gorillas can fetch up to $20,000 on the black market, the head of Virunga National Park said.



"Investigations have yet to reveal where these animals are being sent and who is buying them, but on the ground sources tell us that a baby gorilla can fetch up to $20,000," said Emmanuel de Merode, the director. "We must remember that for each trafficked baby gorilla, several gorillas have probably been killed in the wild."



He led the three-month undercover operation that netted the suspect and the gorilla, the park said.



The gorilla is a lowland eastern gorilla (Gorilla beringei graueri), also known as the Grauer's Gorilla, a subspecies of Eastern Gorilla only found in the forests of eastern Democratic Republic of Congo, according to the park.



Virunga National Park calls itself the oldest national park in Africa, established in 1925. It lies in a region that has been badly affected by the long-running war in the Democratic Republic of Congo. The gorilla section is in a strategically important area near the borders of Rwanda and Uganda.



A ranger was killed earlier this year, and rangers lost control of a large part of the park to rebels for over a year.



But a census earlier this year suggests mountain gorillas are surviving despite poaching and war.



Officials have long said that the 250-square kilometer gorilla reserve in the southern part of Virunga National Park is where around 200 of the world's 700 mountain gorillas live.

***

LOS ANGELES, California (CNN)  -- Actor Tim Roth is in an abandoned building near downtown Los Angeles, and he's about to mix things up.



British actor Tim Roth plays a human lie detector on the hit series "Lie to Me."



"This is a scene where the FBI is interrogating a suspect," Roth said. "I'm breaking into the interrogation to get information out of him using the sort of techniques that my character espouses as opposed to pressuring him."



Roth, who plays Dr. Cal Lightman on the hit Fox series "Lie to Me," is shooting scenes for the season finale, which will air May 13. His character is an expert on body language and the detection of deception.



"Our series is based on the idea that we can read what's going on across your face and if it's contradicting what you're actually saying," Roth said.



Lightman and his colleague, Dr. Gillian Foster -- played by Kelli Williams -- run "The Lightman Group."



They observe body language and interpret what it means in order to help law enforcement agencies see through the bull.



His character is based on Dr. Paul Ekman, a specialist who reads clues embedded in the human face, body and voice to expose the truth in criminal investigations.



Ekman, who in 2001 was named as one of the most influential psychologists of the 20th century by the American Psychological Association, is a scientific consultant for the show.



Roth says Ekman can be intimidating.



"He makes me very, very nervous, Paul, you know," he said. "I mean, he's the sweetest man, as sweet as can be, but when he's around, you feel like your acting is really being judged."



Roth is perhaps best known for his outings with famed director Quentin Tarantino. The British actor pulled off a convincing American accent in the cult classics "Reservoir Dogs" and "Pulp Fiction."



He uses his true-Brit accent in "Lie to Me," which debuted in January and is one of the season's few successful new dramas.



In a review for Entertainment Weekly, critic-at-large Ken Tucker wrote that "Like 'Monk' and 'Psych' and 'The Mentalist,' 'Lie' offers us an eccentric who's brought in by law enforcement to solve crimes."



Though he gave the show a B-minus, Tucker praised Roth for "resist[ing] the cuddly/cranky."



The show has quickly found its fan base, though ratings have declined slightly since the show was put in its 8 p.m. Wednesday time slot, ahead of "American Idol." (The first five episodes aired after "Idol.")



"I got stopped because one of my lights was out and I was coming back from work and the guy, the cop that stopped me said 'Oh, we watch your show' and they seemed to enjoy it," said Roth.



"ER" alum Mekhi Phifer is set to join the cast as an FBI agent for two episodes this season, starting Thursday.



"I'm here to kick ass and take names, you know. So it's kind of different," Phifer said. "It's fun, you know. Obviously, I carry a gun and I'm in law enforcement rather than being a doctor."



Phifer particularly likes acting in intense scenes with Roth.



"I have my own way of doing it," he said. "It's a little different than the way Tim does it. It's a lot of fun, and we're having a great time."



And will time spent on the show help Phifer better detect when people are lying to him in real life?



"It's going to take a few more episodes, but I'm pretty perceptive," he said.



Roth, however, makes no claims of special powers -- at least when he's away from the set.



"I try not to know too much, because it

***

(Tribune Media Services) -- Virginia Pozo buys a first-class ticket to Peru on TACA. But it turns out the ticket is in economy class. When she tries to get a refund on the fare difference, her online agency offers her a $400 voucher. Is that enough? And is she entitled to more?



A passenger bought first-class tickets to Peru, but learned they were economy-class seats.



Q: We bought two first-class airline tickets to Peru on TACA through Cheaptickets.com. But we soon found out they were economy-class seats.



We've asked the airline for a $1,100 refund -- the price difference between first-class and economy-class tickets -- but it won't budge. Cheaptickets.com sent a $400 voucher that we don't want.



We've disputed the ticket charges with American Express, but it has denied our claim. It's obvious to us we didn't receive what we paid for.



We've never sued anyone and I would rather not have to go there. Do you have any other suggestions?



-- Virginia Pozo, San Francisco, California



A: If you didn't get a first-class seat, you shouldn't have to pay for one.



TACA owes you a refund of the fare difference between the two classes. And your online travel agency, Cheaptickets.com, should help you. At the very least, you would expect American Express to take your side in a dispute.



So what happened?



From what I can tell, you booked what you thought was a first-class ticket through your online agent. But the airline only delivered a seat in economy class. In fact, it never treated this as a first-class reservation in the first place. Was there a miscommunication between the agent and the airline? Or between your agent and you? Maybe.



As far as I can tell, Cheaptickets doesn't have a service guarantee comparable to the other big online travel agencies, which promises everything about your trip will be perfect. But it's reasonable to expect that the products it sells will be on the up-and-up, and that if there's something wrong, it will fix it.



Cheaptickets' $400 voucher was a nice gesture, but not enough. Why? Two reasons: First, it requires you to buy another ticket or hotel room, and second, it doesn't come close to making up the price difference between the two tickets.



As I read your letter, it seems as if you spent some time on the phone with Cheaptickets and TACA. Writing to the two companies might have yielded a more favorable result. This is one of the rare times when you should have considered sending either a paper letter that included your confirmation and your boarding pass, or, if you're good with a PC and a scanner, an email with documents attached.



Receipts are important to resolving this dispute. You need to prove you didn't get what you paid for.



Since you were doing business with an American company -- Cheaptickets -- American Express should have sided with you. Invoking the Fair Credit Billing Act, the federal law that protects you from charges for goods and services you didn't accept or weren't delivered as agreed, might have encouraged American Express to see things your way.



I think TACA, Cheaptickets and American Express failed to meet their customer-service obligations.



But who's responsible for your refund? The correct answer is: The online travel agent who took your money and acted as an intermediary for the transaction.



I contacted Cheaptickets on your behalf. A representative contacted you and said the company reviewed its phone transcripts and determined that it was at fault. The online agency refunded you $1,100 and let you keep the $400 voucher for the trouble.



Christopher Elliott is the ombudsman for National Geographic Traveler magazine. E-mail him at celliott@ngs.org.

***

CHATTANOOGA, Tennessee (CNN) -- When meeting Jeff Donohoo, it's not immediately apparent he is a 36-year-old man living with autism. In fact, unless you get him talking about the Atlanta Braves -- one of his true passions in life -- he is a very quiet person.



Jeff Donohoo, 36, at work in the kitchen at Memorial Hospital in Chattanooga, Tennessee.



Early on, his younger brothers and sister didn't know, either.



"Since they grew up with him, they just knew Jeff was Jeff," said Nancy Donohoo, his mother. "They didn't think of him as weird or anything."



But when friends started to notice Donohoo was different, Nancy Donohoo was quick to explain to a group of 10-year-olds why.



"Jeff has a social problem, not a mental problem," she explained. "He's very smart. He reads encyclopedias ... he just doesn't know how to talk to people."



From then on, friends who visited the house always made an effort to interact with Donohoo, through a high-five or a simple "hello."



Today, it's unlikely Donohoo will be the first to say hello in a group setting, but interacting with people is easier for him than it once was.  See how Donohoo copes every day »



Questioned about his childhood, his most elaborate response is "yeah" or "no." But when the topic is the Braves, it's hard to get him to stop talking about the latest statistics or his favorite player, Mark Teixeira.



Asked how long he's been a Braves fan, there was little hesitation: "All my life."



He's come a long way since he was a child. Then, just teaching Donohoo to talk was a challenge in itself, Nancy Donohoo said. "There was no eye contact, so I would hold his face in front of me, and say the word I wanted him to say."



Donohoo entered the first grade as a special education student. It was the first year special education was offered in his family's hometown of Florence, Alabama. He carried on with special education until the sixth grade, when he was mainstreamed, or put in classes with children without disabilities.  Explainer: Understanding autism »



For most of Donohoo's childhood, his mother had suspicions about his condition. "When he was little, I had watched a 'Marcus Welby' show, and they had an autistic child on there. But he was very passive; he sat in the corner and just hit things," Nancy Donohoo said. "Jeff was wild. He was the opposite, so I just assumed he couldn't be autistic. But he had a lot of those mannerisms."



It was Donohoo's freshman year of high school when Nancy and Bill Donohoo learned what was wrong with their son.



"There was a doctor in Huntsville that dealt a lot with hyperactive children," Nancy Donohoo said. "He said, 'I'm going to give you this sheet of paper; these are all the symptoms of autism.' " The list had 19 symptoms, and Nancy Donohoo was instructed to circle the ones her son had.



She circled 17.



The diagnosis didn't change how Nancy Donohoo dealt with her first-born son. In fact, the doctor said she already was doing all the right things, working to socialize Donohoo.



Today, Donohoo, living with his parents, finds comfort in strict routine. He wakes each day at 5 a.m. to make himself breakfast and prepare for work. At 6, Nancy Donohoo drives her son to Memorial Hospital, where he's entering his 16th year of service with the cafeteria.



Ollie Forté is Donohoo's supervisor, and has worked with Donohoo almost since the beginning. "He's very valuable to us at this department. He's dependable, on time, no attendance problems," said Forté. "We love Jeff."



After work, at 2:30 p.m., Donohoo rides with his mother to the YMCA

***

Perugia, Italy (CNN) -- Family members of Meredith Kercher said Saturday they were satisfied with the verdict that found American Amanda Knox and her Italian ex-boyfriend, Raffaele Sollecito, guilty of the fatal knifing of the British student.



"Ultimately we are pleased with the decision," said Lyle Kercher, Meredith Kercher's brother. "But it was not a moment of celebration. We are here because our sister was brutally murdered."



The victim's sister, Stephanie Kercher, talked Friday about her family's grief.



"Our lives have been on hold, really. You can't really carry on as normal," she said. "You have to take each day as it comes. It's not ever going to be the same without [Meredith]."



Knox and Sollecito were found guilty of murder Friday after a lengthy, sensational trial. Knox was given a 26-year sentence; Sollecito was sentenced to 25 years. Both will appeal, attorneys said.



Knox and Sollecito were convicted on all charges except theft. The pair was accused of staging a theft to cover up the killing. Authorities said 300 euros (about $444) was discovered missing from Kercher's purse.



The pair must pay 5 million euros ($7.4 million) to Kercher's family. In addition, Knox must pay 40,000 euros (nearly $60,000) to a man whom she falsely accused of the killing.



One of Knox's sisters said Saturday that Amanda "had a rough night."



Her mother, Edda Mellas, said, "She had a lot of support. The inmates and the guards were all taking great care of her. They care a lot.



"Amanda, like the rest of us, is extremely disappointed -- upset about the decision," Mellas said. "We're all in shock; we're all heartened by the support" that she said residents of Perugia and other Italians had shown.



"People from all over the world have been sending us messages of support all through the night," Mellas said. "We told her she's going to get out of there. It's [just] going to take a little longer."



Sollecito's lawyer, Luca Maori, criticized his client's punishment -- less than the life sentence the prosecution requested but far short of exonerating Sollecito -- as making no sense.



"For the grave crimes they claimed, you either sentence them to life. ... or you acquit. There is no middle way," Maori said.



Public prosecutor Giuliano Mignini told CNN he feels he presented a strong case. He said about 20 magistrates worked alongside police during the investigation. However, he said that in the face of the planned appeals, clearly the conviction is not final.



Learn how the murder case played out



People who disagree with the verdict should at least respect it, because so many professionals were involved in the investigation, Mignini said.



"I believe, evidently, that they think there was violence. They are the deputies who establish the foundation" of charges, he said. "And they did this."



The victim's mother said she believed the defendants were guilty of the slaying.



"You have to go with the evidence," Arline Kercher said.



Take a look at the evidence against Knox



Knox's lead defense attorney, Luciano Ghirga, said that when he met with his client Saturday morning, she was angry and continued to proclaim her innocence.



He told CNN the situation has been a trying experience, and Knox hardly slept Friday night after the verdict. She was consoled by the other prisoners, who managed get her a cup of warm milk, Ghirga said.



The jury reached its verdict after deliberating nearly 11 hours on the 11 counts. Jurors must submit an explanation of how they reached their decision to the judge within 90 days, and this "jury motivation" will be made public.



Prosecutors had asked for a sentence of life in prison. Italy does not have the death penalty.



CNN's Richard Greene and Hada Messia contributed to this report.

***

London (CNN) -- A comprehensive new study identifying the most threatened sea turtle populations worldwide has been published by conservationists.





The report, jointly produced by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), the Marine Turtle Specialist Group (MTSG), Conservation International (CI) and the U.S.'s National Fish and Wildlife Foundation, is the first detailed appraisal of global sea turtle populations, say the authors, and will provide a blueprint for future conservation efforts.





"This assessment system provides a baseline status for all sea turtles from which we can gauge our progress on recovering these threatened populations in the future," Roderic Mast, co-chair of the MTSG and vice-president of CI said in a statement.





"Through this process, we have learned a lot about what is working and what isn't in sea turtle conservation, so now we look forward to turning the lessons learned into sound conservation strategies for sea turtles and their habitats," Mast added.





Almost half of the world's most threatened sea turtle species can be found in the northern waters of the Indian Ocean and on nesting beaches lying within Exclusive Economic Zones in countries such as India, Sri Lanka and Bangladesh, according to the report.





Threatened populations here include both loggerhead turtles (classified "endangered" by the IUCN Red List) and ridley turtles ("vulnerable").





"The report confirms that India is a home to many of the most threatened sea turtles in the world," B. C. Choudhury, from the Wildlife Institute of India said in a statement.





"This paper is a wake-up call for the authorities to do more to protect India's sea turtles and their habitats to ensure that they survive," he added.





Other hotspots for sea turtles include the east Pacific Ocean (running from the U.S. to South America) and the east Atlantic Ocean -- specifically off the coast of western Africa.





According to the report, threats to sea turtles vary from region to region but can be broadly categorized.





These include accidental (caught in fishing nets) and deliberate targeting (for trades in eggs, meat and shells), coastal development, pollution and climate change.





Join Philippe Cousteau for "Your Green World"





As well as highlighting danger areas, the report also pinpoints regions which are supporting healthier populations which face relatively low threats.





Species including the hawksbill turtle and the green turtle are thriving in nesting sites and feeding areas in Australia, Mexico and Brazil, along with southwestern Indian Ocean, Micronesia (in Oceania) and French Polynesia.





The report helps set up "priorities for different populations in different regions," says Bryan Wallace, director of science for the marine flagship species program at CI and lead author of the report.





"Sea turtles everywhere are conservation-dependent, but this framework will help us effectively target our conservation efforts around the world," Wallace said in a statement.





The report is published in the online science journal PLoS (Public Library of Science).

***

ATLANTA, Georgia (CNN)  -- Every year, I take at least one vacation out of the country to get my international travel fix. And this time, I'm taking you with me.



The travel bug is a forever-itch that leaves you longing to wake up in a foreign country, Jarrett Bellini says.



No, not literally. Sit down. This year, YOU can weigh in on where I go and what I do once I get there. We're calling it: Let's Ruin Jarrett's Vacation!



By adding your comments below or sharing your ideas on CNN.com Live's Facebook page, you can send me to either Argentina, Greece, South Africa or Turkey. The destination that gets the most positive response is where I'll go. And to make it more fun, I won't even find out where I'm heading until I actually get to the airport this Sunday, August 30.



There, I will tear open an envelope, read the results for the first time, and then head to my departure gate -- hopefully with at least a few articles of appropriate clothing.



Once I get to wherever it is you send me, I'll be blogging on CNN.com and and checking in from time to time on CNN.com Live. By sharing your ideas on Facebook, you'll be able to guide many aspects of this vacation. You call the shots. And I'll cry myself to sleep at night wondering why I agreed to work on vacation and let other people plan it.



I suppose, now, you might want a little background on why I'd actually want to do this. I mean, besides the fact that clearly, I'm a glutton for punishment. Really, though, I think I just like a challenge.



In the fall of 2003, after an entire month of fruitlessly waiting by my phone to hear back about an entry-level position with CNN, I finally gave up hope and took my apparent job snub as some sort of cosmic sign from the Slacker Gods.



I decided, then, that the only reasonable course of action was to buy a plane ticket to Europe to spend the next three months running around with my backpack, trying -- again, quite fruitlessly -- to meet foreign chicks.



Though not quite a rucksack Casanova, I did come back from these magical three months with a far greater ability to entertain myself in a completely new place among absolute strangers. (Granted, for me, this can be accomplished by the presence of shiny objects.)



Amazingly, the day after I returned from Europe, CNN called and offered me the position. It took four long months, but the timing was remarkable and I couldn't have been happier.



But, as I started my new professional life, I was sick. I had the travel bug. Now, this is not to be confused with bed bugs, which, FYI, I painfully fell victim to in Copenhagen at a horrible, bomb-shelter-of-a-hostel they call Sleep in Heaven. Apparently, Heaven smells like mildew and leaves you with a rash.



No, this was the travel bug -- the forever-itch that leaves you longing to wake up in a foreign bed in a foreign country, rising to face new ideas and new people beneath an unfamiliar sky.



Of course, that's just my poorly poetic way of saying: The world is huge and amazing. It's so good! Once it hits your lips, it's so good!

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Whether you're a fan of any sport, or even just a keen music follower -- you've probably visited a major stadium.





The ugliest stadiums in the world? Have a look at our list and tell us what you think of the choices.





Like all buildings with any form of public use, stadiums tend attract more than their fair share of criticism.





It's hard to visit a massive venue that has possibly seen millions of dollars of taxpayer money poured into it, without forming an opinion.





While usability, safety, comfort for players and fans, and the ability to generate a steady income are probably the most important factors for modern-day stadiums, there is one other aspect that is sometimes forgotten: how they look.





We have scanned the world for some of the ugliest stadiums in the world, and we've drawn up a first XI of the less attractive venues.





The stadiums come from all corners of the globe and have been built under all types of budgets. Some of these structures may have been referred to by others as "ugly", they may be facing the threat of being torn down, or we may have just decided that they aren't so easy on the eye.  See a photo gallery of ugliest stadiums in the world »





Some examples that made it into the list include the King Fahd Stadium in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, which was built in 1987 and lays claim to having the biggest stadium roof in the world. But sadly does not boast the most attractive structure.





The choice of Wembley Stadium in London, England, may be a controversial one, however, it was named in a list of Britain's ugliest buildings by Britain's The Times newspaper as "a bloated middle-aged office block with a pitch attached."





Do you agree with our list? Are there ugly stadiums we have missed? Tell us in the sound off box below.

***

(CNN) -- A former police officer convicted of murdering his girlfriend and their unborn child tearfully apologized to her family Monday in front of the jury that will decide whether he lives or dies.



Bobby Cutts Jr. weeps openly as his mother describes his childhood during a sentencing hearing.



"It was a nightmare that will continue to haunt me for the rest of my days," said Bobby Cutts, Jr., 30, reading from a prepared statement at the penalty phase of his murder trial.



"Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, I'm asking you to spare my life."



Cutts was convicted on February 15 of the murder of girlfriend Jessie Marie Davis and the aggravated murder of the unborn girl Davis had planned to name Chloe.



Chloe's slaying, which jurors found occurred during the commission of another crime, makes Cutts eligible for the death penalty



"To imagine that I was responsible for the death of Jessie, the mother of my children and my unborn daughter, is beyond any words that I can express," Cutts said. "Words cannot bring them back, nor can they erase the pain I've caused, but I want to apologize."  Watch Cutts' tearful apology »



He thanked Davis' family for taking care of the other child he had with Davis. Blake was 2½ at the time of his mother's murder in June 2007.



"I pray that you find peace and you someday find room for forgiveness," he said.



Earlier, Cutts' mother, Renee, Jones, had told jurors, "I don't know what I would do without him." She described Cutts as a former honor student who loved his job as a police officer.



"He was my firstborn, my only son," Jones testified tearfully. "He means so much to me," she continued. "He used to call me three, four times a day." Watch Cutts react as his mother pleads for his life



Cutts' punishment is being decided by the same jury of six men and six women who found him guilty. All the jurors are white; Cutts is African-American.



Cutts' sister, father and one of his school teachers also testified.



Judge Charles E. Brown ordered jurors to return early Tuesday for attorneys' closing arguments. When the arguments conclude, jurors will begin their deliberations.



If jurors do not agree on the death penalty, Cutts could receive a possible sentence of life in prison without parole or become eligible for parole in 20, 25 or 30 years.



Jones, was the first witness called to the stand by the defense. She said her son was a good youngster who was active in sports, Scouts and his church.



"I never had any trouble out of him," she said as Cutts teared up at the defense table. She said Cutts' relationship with his father deteriorated after the parents split.



A former teacher described Cutts as a social child given the nickname "Gobble" by his classmates. He was helpful in class, often volunteering to pick stray crayons up from the floor.



His father testified that he gave Cutts the nickname "Gobble" because as an infant he resembled " a little Butterball turkey."  He said Cutts was a "gifted child" in school.



He blamed himself for the break up of his marriage, saying his drinking and gambling contributed to it.



Cutts' own personal life was rocky, according to testimony. Davis was nine months pregnant when she disappeared in June 2007. Her body was found in a northeastern Ohio park after a 10-day search that brought national media attention



He is Blake's father, as well as the father of the unborn girl, Chloe.



According to testimony, Cutts, 30, rolled Davis' body in a comforter and dumped it in a park, leaving  toddler son Blake in the house alone at the crime scene in a soiled diaper.



"Mommy's in the rug," Blake told police, according to testimony.



During the guilt phase of the trial, Cutts sobbed on

***

Editor's note: Join Roland S. Martin for his weekly sound-off segment on CNN.com Live at 10:30 a.m. Wednesday. If you're passionate about politics, he wants to hear from you. A supporter of Sen. Barack Obama, Martin is a nationally syndicated columnist and Chicago, Illinois-based radio host. He is the author of "Listening to the Spirit Within: 50 Perspectives on Faith" and "Speak, Brother! A Black Man's View of America." Please visit his Web site.



Roland S. Martin urges the candidates to stop with the lofty talk and simplistic solutions and be specific.



(CNN) -- If you are a member of America's middle class in this presidential year, you are sort of like a blue-chip football recruit, lavished with praise, attention and adoration from fawning coaches and alumni who would love nothing better than to land the prized player to win the national championship.



For "Coach" John McCain and "Coach" Barack Obama, the title to win is president of the United States, and like the big-time football coaches, they will say and do anything to make it happen.



Tax cuts? Oh, absolutely, we don't want you to feel any more pain. Let the rich -- and the poor -- deal with carrying the burden. You want more jobs?



Sure, we're going  to force companies that send jobs overseas to make them stay at home because we know you need those long disappearing and high-paying manufacturing jobs that helped build this nation.



Can't afford to send your kids to college? Don't sweat it. We've got tax credits, Pell grants, super-duper loans and all kinds of other options to make this a reality.



Are they cutting back on health care at your job? No big deal. Coach McCain says he's got some nifty tax credits lined up to tickle your fancy and ignite your soul. Coach Obama? He's going to go for the whole enchilada by pushing for virtual universal health care.



Oh, these guys are wonderful with their sales pitches. They have the ability to make every single one of you feel so special and loved; no one else is more important to them -- at that moment.



I must admit, the pathetic pining and pandering for middle-class votes has turned so moronic that at times it drives me nuts.



First, who in the world are we even talking about? If you listen to the candidates and their campaigns, those in the middle class could make upward of $200,000 a year, while some suggest middle class means earning as little as $20,000.



I moderated a panel Tuesday for the National Black MBA Association and heard descriptions of the lower middle class, the middle class and the upper middle class. Someone even suggested that it's really about a "state of mind."



That's right. It boils down to how we feel and think. If that's the case, then you can have $5 million in the bank, but if you love your family, go to church and share the same values as others around you, you're middle class.



Please, can we just stop with lofty talk and plain-spoken and simplistic solutions and be as specific as possible?



There are really four fundamental issues affecting middle-class voters.



Jobs



We've seen a loss of 600,000 jobs under President Bush, so how exactly will McCain and Obama create jobs? Is there anything in their past that shows they have the ability to do just that? I've heard "drill, drill, drill!" from McCain, and Obama says we're going to turn the old textile and steel mills into a green machine by targeting wind and other sources of energy.



Housing



Congress is providing a backstop for Wall Street -- making billions available if cash is needed. What will McCain and Obama actually do to keep folks from losing their homes?



Oh, I know a lot of people suggest that these middle-class folks should have read the fine print and not gotten

***

Washington (CNN) -- A federal appeals court has certified the largest class-action employment lawsuit in U.S. history, in a long-standing dispute against retailer Wal-Mart Stores Inc. over alleged gender bias in pay and promotions.





The divided 6-5 ruling by the San Francisco-based 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals on Monday allows the combined multiparty litigation to move ahead to trial, where a decision against the company could result in billions in damages. The Arkansas-based chain of stores has the option of appealing Monday's ruling to the U.S. Supreme Court for review.





At issue is whether more than a million current and former Wal-Mart employees can band together in their claims of discrimination, which they say has occurred over the past decade, at least.





The plaintiffs allege that women were paid less than, and were given fewer opportunities for promotion than, their male counterparts. They seek back pay and punitive damages against the world's largest retailer.





The lawsuit alleges that the company's "strong, centralized structure fosters or facilitates gender stereotyping and discrimination."





The workers bringing suit also say women make up more than 70 percent of Wal-Mart's hourly work force but in the past decade made up less than one-third of its store management.





The suit was first filed by Betty Dukes, a store greeter in Pittsburg, California, along with five of her co-workers in 2001.





"It has taken a very long time, and a tremendous amount of work, but it looks like we're finally going to get our day in court," Dukes said after the ruling was announced. "That's all we've ever asked for."





"We disagree with the decision of the sharply divided 6-5 court to uphold portions of the certification order, and are considering our options, including seeking review from the Supreme Court," Wal-Mart said in a statement. "We do not believe the claims alleged by the six individuals who brought this suit are representative of the experiences of our female associates. Walmart is an excellent place for women to work and fosters female leadership among our associates and in the larger business world."





The federal appeals court concluded that there was enough merit in the claims to proceed to trial on a class-action track. Since the lawsuit was filed, both sides of the dispute have held so-called discovery hearings, in which preliminary testimony was taken to establish facts.





Judge Susan Graber of the appeals court said that although "the size of this class action is large, mere size does not render a case unmanageable."





The company has protested the size of the class action, which it called "historic" in scope, saying it would be too onerous to litigate. The company has more than 3,400 stores in 41 regions.





Declaring class-action status for the lawsuit raises the financial and judicial stakes considerably, since more individual plaintiffs can now join, and creates greater potential liability for the company being sued. In federal courts, such certification must generally follow well-established principles to ensure that it does not become so large as to be impracticable and allows the parties to fairly represent the common interests of the larger class of plaintiffs.





"Wal-Mart tries to project an improved image as a good corporate citizen," said Brad Seligman, a Berkeley, California, lawyer representing the female workers. "But no amount of [public relations] is going to work until it addresses the claims of its female employees."





Wal-Mart has been accused in separate lawsuits of discrimination against African-American truck drivers and workers with disabilities. In 2001, the company settled 13 lawsuits by paying out $6 million.





Beyond this particular suit, most workplace discrimination lawsuits fail to reach a court for resolution, according to data compiled by the federal Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.





In 2003, when the Wal-Mart litigation was in its preliminary court stages, about 27,000 sex discrimination claims nationwide were resolved administratively by the EEOC, little changed from the prior decade. More than 57 percent -- 15,000 claims

***

(CNN) -- A California movement protesting $1 billion in budget cuts to the state's university system appeared to have burgeoned into a nationwide demonstration on Thursday.



Students and professors in dozens of states were challenging administrators and state lawmakers over budget cuts and tuition increases that they say are reducing students' class options and increasing their expenses.



Some of the demonstrations turned chaotic. In Oakland, California, police arrested 160 protesters who shut down a major freeway, according to city police spokeswoman April McFarland.



The Oakland protesters had left a march from the University of California, Berkeley to Oakland City Hall and wound up on the Interstate 980/880 interchange, CNN San Francisco affiliate KGO reported. KCRA: Protesters threaten to block interstate



McFarland said the protesters brought Thursday evening rush hour traffic to a halt for an hour and 45 minutes.



One man is in critical condition after he tried to elude arrest by jumping off the freeway onto a tree, KGO reported. He fell from the tree onto the street below, a roughly 22 foot drop from the interchange, according to KGO.



At the University of California Davis, police held back student protesters who had threatened to shut down nearby Interstate 80, CNN affiliate KCRA in Sacramento reported.



Police fired rubber bullets into the ground in an effort to deter students, who made it as far as an I-80 exit ramp just south of campus.



At the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, at least 15 people were arrested in demonstrations Thursday, according to CNN affiliate WTMJ.



A University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee vice chancellor allowed a protester to drop off pamphlets in the chancellor's office, then called campus police when dozens of protesters tried to enter the building, according to WTMJ.



University police called the Milwaukee Police Department for backup, and officers spent an hour rounding up protesters.



Students yelled "Let her go!" and "What did he do?" as Milwaukee police led students into their black and white vans.



Across the country, students told of having to work second jobs and make lifestyle adjustments in the face of dramatic tuition hikes.



"I work at two jobs, go to school full time to make ends meet," said Tyler, a fifth-year senior at San Francisco State University, where students and faculty protested Thursday. She did not give her last name.



"I have been here a really long time. I struggle to keep [taking] classes to be able to keep my financial aid every semester, and I really don't know when I'm going to be able to get out of here. Every semester, something is cut, and I can't get the class I need. Who knows when I will be out of here," she said.



Many of Thursday's demonstrations focused on cuts to state-funded colleges and universities, which supporters say drive up tuition, limit classes and make higher education unobtainable to many. A blog called Student Activism, which was compiling a list of the protests, said that 122 events were scheduled in 33 states -- most on campuses, and some at state capitols.



Are you taking part in protests? Send photos, videos



Professors and students say dissatisfaction, anger and an uncertain future had led to call for a "Day of Action" to defend education.



At the University of Massachusetts-Amherst, dozens of protesters gathered Thursday and chanted, "Hey hey, ho ho, these student fees have got to go."



Video submitted from the demonstration by a CNN iReporter calling himself Bowtieguy showed students carrying handmade signs with messages like "Where's Holub's pay cut?" -- a reference to university chancellor Robert C. Holub.



Another homemade sign read "Chop from the top."



At California State University-Fullerton, dozens of students marched outdoors, chanting, "Students united will never be divided." A video submitted by a CNN iReporter who calls herself MelissaF showed handmade signs saying "Protect humanities" and "What happened to our future?"



State funding for the California State University system was reduced by nearly $1 billion for the academic

***

LONDON, England (CNN) -- Predatory mice are threatening the albatross population on a remote south Atlantic island and have caused the birds' worst nesting season on record, a British bird charity says.



Baby albatross on a remote Atlantic island are threatened by killer house mice.



The research from the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds indicates bad news for the Tristan albatross, whose only home is Gough Island in the middle of the south Atlantic. House mice not native to the island are threatening the Tristan albatross with extinction, the RSPB said.



The mice are also threatening the native population of bunting, one of the world's largest finches, the RSPB said.



"Without removal of the mice, both the albatross and the bunting that live there are doomed to extinction," Grahame Madge, a conservation spokesman for the RSPB, told CNN.



The mice on the island eat the chicks of the albatross and bunting before they make it to the fledgling stage, the RSPB said. This makes it especially difficult for the albatross population to survive because the birds lay eggs only once every two years -- a very low reproductive rate compared to other birds, Madge said.



"What [the mice] are affecting is the ability of the albatross to produce enough young to sustain the population," he said.



Adult Tristan albatross are threatened by longline fishing at sea, a practice in which boats put up numerous 100-meter long fishing lines baited with squid or fish. The albatrosses are attracted to the bait and while some manage to steal it successfully, many more get snagged and drown, Madge said.



Because of the impact from house mice, introduced to the island by sealers in the 18th and 19th centuries, conservation alliance BirdLife International earlier this year listed both the Tristan albatross and the Gough bunting as critically endangered -- the highest threat level before extinction.



Gough Island, a British territory almost midway between Argentina and South Africa, is a place of stunning natural beauty.



The island is not inhabited by humans. Gough Island and nearby Inaccessible Island are both listed as UNESCO World Heritage sites.



A survey of the albatross on Gough Island in January showed 1,764 adults incubating eggs, the RSPB said. A later survey revealed only 246 chicks had survived to fledgling.



"We've known for a long time that the mice were killing albatross chicks in huge numbers," said RSPB scientist Richard Cuthbert, who recently visited the island to assess the problem. "However, we now know that the albatrosses have suffered their worst year on record."



The bunting suffer because the mice eat their eggs and chicks, and may also compete with them for food in the winter, Cuthbert said.



"The decline in bunting numbers is alarming," said Peter Ryan of the University of Cape Town, who has been studying buntings on the island since the 1980s. "Without urgent conservation action to remove the mice, both the albatross and the bunting are living on borrowed time."



The RSPB has been studying whether it is possible to remove the mice. It said trials so far look promising, but it urged the British government to step up funding for the project. It said eradicating the mice from Gough Island would solve the primary conservation threat facing both bird species.



The RSPB said it had been working with New Zealand conservationists on a program to remove the smaller mice by dropping poisoned bait from helicopters.



Tristan albatrosses are one of 22 species of albatross in the world. Albatrosses principally live in the southern Atlantic but some also live in the Pacific, the RSPB says.



Albatrosses are among the largest flying birds, weighing up to 25 pounds (22.5 kilograms). One species -- the wandering albatross -- has a wingspan of 11 feet, the RSPB says.



The birds can fly thousands of miles without a pause, and their only need to touch land is to nest and raise their young, the RSPB says.

***

(Mental Floss) -- From the moment Justice David Souter announced he'd be stepping down, Washington has been gearing up for a confirmation fight. But as Senator Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.) told Judge Sonia Sotomayor yesterday, "Unless you have a complete meltdown, you are going to get confirmed."



Robert Bork is not the only nominee who did not make it to the Supreme Court.



Let's take a look back at eight nominees who didn't make it to the bench, at least on their first try.



1. Robert Bork



In our time, the most famous rejected nominee is Robert H. Bork, a legal scholar and U.S. Court of Appeals judge with a long paper trail of conservative opinions. Nominated by President Ronald Reagan in 1987, Bork could have tilted the Court decisively to the right.



As a known quantity, he was an easy target for liberal opponents, who organized a campaign against him. He was rejected by the Senate Judiciary Committee after 12 days of hearings. Mental Floss: Washington's struggle to find a chief justice



2. Alexander Wolcott



"Oh degraded Country! How humiliating to the friends of moral virtue -- of religion and of all that is dear to the lover of his Country!" the New-York Gazette Advertiser wailed in 1811 over President James Madison's nomination of customs inspector Alexander Wolcott.



Wolcott's strong enforcement of the controversial embargoes against Great Britain and France cost him support in the Senate and in the press.



The Senate turned him down by a 9-24 vote, the widest rejection in Supreme Court history.



3. Roger Taney



Roger B. Taney (pronounced tawny) is largely remembered as the chief justice who handed down the Dred Scott decision in 1857. With his sepulchral countenance, Taney is inextricably linked to the grim ruling that all blacks -- slaves as well as free -- were not and could never become citizens of the United States.



But when President Andrew Jackson nominated him in 1835 as associate justice, opposition Whigs were still smarting from Taney's removal of government deposits from the Second Bank of the United States while he was a recess-appointed Secretary of the Treasury. The Senate voted to indefinitely postpone the nomination.



However, after Chief Justice John Marshall died in 1836, Jackson sent Taney's name up again. He was confirmed, this time as chief justice.



4. Ebenezer Hoar



You might think the Senate just couldn't stomach elevating to the highest court in the land a man with the name Ebenezer Hoar, but it seems the senators were offended by something other than aesthetics.



As President Ulysses S. Grant's attorney general, Hoar had insisted on rewarding merit rather than political loyalty, thus blocking a well-trod route for patronage. So when Grant nominated Hoar to the Court in 1869, miffed Republican senators gave the virtuous Hoar thumbs down. Mental Floss: What was Marbury v. Madison? Who were Roe and Wade?



5 and 6. Wheeler Hazard Peckham and William B. Hornblower



A senator has the right to reject a court nomination simply because the nominee is from the senator's home state. Upon this invocation of "senatorial courtesy" rests the demise of Wheeler Hazard Peckham and William B. Hornblower.



Both men were nominated by President Grover Cleveland. Both nominees were New Yorkers, and New York Sen. David Hill invoked senatorial courtesy to squelch their nominations in 1894. (Peckham's brother, Rufus Wheeler Peckham, became a justice in 1896.)



7. Harriet Miers



Some nominees withdrew themselves from consideration before they could be rejected. Such was the case of Harriet Miers, whom President George W. Bush nominated in 2005, but withdrew under criticism that she was unqualified. Mental Floss: Why there's a Mohammed statue at the Supreme Court?



8. Douglas Ginsburg



Another withdrawal was that of Douglas Ginsburg (not related to current justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg), the conservative, former pot-smoking federal appellate judge who is a footnote in the Bork saga.



After Bork was Borked, Reagan eyed the more moderate Anthony Kennedy for the seat. But Sen. Jesse Helms (R-

***

(CNN) --   Global activist and U2 frontman Bono attended the United Nations General Assembly in New York to push world leaders to join his ONE campaign in fighting disease, poverty, and hunger. He talked to CNN's John Roberts on "American Morning" about recent successes and what's next.



Bono said politicians who love signing checks but not cashing hurt plans to help the world's poor.



ROBERTS: All this talk has been about the economy collapsing, $700 billion bailout. Congress is absolutely absorbed with that. Did that in any way affect what you were trying to do this week? Are people more focused on this economy than in helping out developing nations?



BONO: We got good news this week. I know normally I'm on your program with bad news -- the whingeing rock star -- but it's great. There's a disease, malaria -- it's 3,000 African kids die every day of mosquito bites. Sounds mad, but it's true. And people have committed and it looks like the funds are on the table so that that disease will be no more by 2015. That makes people like me punch the air and everyone who wears a ONE T-shirt and all our white band campaigners on college campuses all over the country -- it was a great day for them yesterday so we're celebrating that. I know it's extraordinary, that while you're having this meltdown on the markets, that people could even concentrate on this stuff, but I'm really grateful that they did. We had both [presidential] candidates make very powerful statements about the necessity for nonmilitary tools, for instance, in foreign policy. This is an America that both candidates want to show to the rest of the world -- the greatness of America.



ROBERTS: So you're hearing what you want to hear from these candidates?



BONO: Yeah. And you couldn't imagine a few years ago that you would have candidates so close to an election talking about this stuff, so yeah.  Watch Bono say how he uses his star status on politicians »



ROBERTS: You were talking to Christine Romans outside the studio, who just did that piece for us a few minutes ago on what else could you do with $700 billion. What could you do with $700 billion?



BONO: We wouldn't be asking for that kind of money. These are serious matters, people have lost their jobs. But I think the bill for the whole world -- so America would be like a third of it -- for $25 billion you could absolutely change the world. You could put kids in school, most kids in school. You could eradicate diseases like malaria, as we're saying. We could change the water supplies. But what's important is that people who want to change the world, want to see their country, they see it as a patriotic act to show the world innovation of America, technology of America, pharmacology of America.



ROBERTS: For $25 billion, you could put every kid who's out of school in the world into school? That seems like a lot of people for $25 billion. Pretty good return on your investment.



BONO: It's a great return on investment. You heard me on your program before talking about debt cancellation. Strangely Americans don't know that because of debt cancellation there are already an extra 29 million African children in school. That's incredible. Because people got out on the streets on the (RED) campaign and stuff like that, there's now 2.5 million Africans on AIDS drugs, which are expensive. So your country is turning for me in the right direction on these issues.



ROBERTS: So you're hearing some of what you want to hear, particularly on the malaria issues. But the European Union had promised to increase aid by $50 billion between 2005 and 2010. It looks like they're going to fall $40 billion short.



BONO: They are, but they're still ahead of America. That's the bad news. You don't want to get me into the ring.

***

NAIROBI, Kenya (CNN) -- An Al Qaeda-linked militant group waging war against Somalia's fragile government is becoming an increasing threat to Western ally Kenya and could potentially destabilize the region with dire consequences for global security, officials and analysts warn.



Al-Shabab fighters count their bullets in neighborhood of Mogadishu.



Al-Shabaab, one of the strongest Islamic militias battling for control of Mogadishu, has gained ground in recent weeks, according to officials, and has started to flex its muscles beyond Somalia's border with terror strikes, kidnappings and recruitment drives.



They warn that unless the world takes action the group, which wants to impose an extreme type of Islamic sharia law, could extend its grip across parts of East Africa to gain control of a region that flanks busy shipping routes already plagued by Somali pirates



Appeals by Somalia's government for international help to unpick its long-running civil conflict have escalated Al-Shabaad's threats with the group behind warnings of an attack on the Kenyan capital, Nairobi.



And, say experts, the group is being backed by foreign fighters -- some said to have links to Osama bin Laden's Al Qaeda network -- a situation that draws direct comparisons with the group's influence in pre-9/11 Afghanistan.



"Al-Shabaab is a threat to the whole world," Somali Information Minister Farhan Ali Mohamoud told CNN. "First to Somalia, to the neighborhood, and to everywhere they have disagreed with."  Watch more on Somalian threat »



Mohamoud, whose transitional government has largely failed in its long-term goal of reconciling Somalia's militias, concedes Al-Shabaab is making major gains on his administration and says the global community must act to prevent their threat escalating.



"Somalia's problems are not for Somalia alone to solve. Not only for the African Union to solve. It is a global and regional issue. We are very appreciative that the international community understands that, but they need to act now, rather than later."



"The issue is not Somalis taking over from other Somalis. But the issue is foreign jihadists imposing their ideas into the region. So Somalia can be a launching pad for a greater and wider jihadist issue."



Kenyan government spokesman Alfred Mutua told CNN his country did not yet fear direct attacks from Al-Shabaab but said it was becoming increasingly alarmed about its activities and its links to foreign networks.



Despite the concerns, Mutua said the problem was nothing new and while his country struggled to exert control over its porous border with Somalia, it was taking steps to limit the danger. But he warned the threat was not limited to Kenya and could have global reach.



"We do believe that Al-Shabaab poses a threat, not only to Kenya, but to all neighboring countries such as Ethiopia and Eritrea," he said.



"It is not just a problem that we foresee in Kenya, just because we are neighbors to them, it is a problem that we foresee that may occur to a lot of countries and also poses a threat to outside even this region," he added.



"Our concern is not limited to Al-Shabaab. We know that Al-Shabaab are not able to do it without foreign intervention in terms of money and weapons that they are getting from other countries."



Ernst Jan Hogendoorn, an analyst with the International Crisis Group, told CNN that while Al-Shabaab had whipped up concerns with headline grabbing acts such as the recent kidnap of two French citizens in Mogadishu and three aid workers on the Kenyan side of the border, countries such as Kenya should pay heed.



"I think that Kenya could do a much better job. There is always the possibility that someone could sneak across the border and launch an attack against a soft target. Obviously Kenya has been the target of attacks in the past that are very, very challenging to prevent."



But, says Hogendoorn, with an African Union peacekeeping mission in Somalia proving largely ineffective, and Ethiopian military presence withdrawn in January ahead of an Al-Shabaab push, Kenyan military involvement was unlikely to offer any

***

Los Angeles, California (CNN)  -- The high school honor student and the NFL's highest-paid defensive back stroll down the destitute streets of Skid Row.



"I can sell you something right quick," a drug dealer hisses.



Another shouts, "Gonna whoop your ass!" More expletives are hurled.



Seventeen-year-old Kenneth Chancey is giving a tour to Nnamdi Asomugha, showing the NFL star the streets that he and his sister used to walk to get to school while living in a Skid Row homeless shelter. Prostitutes, addicts and drug dealers scatter. "Camera! Camera!" they shout.



The two make it safely past the park, one of the roughest areas of Los Angeles. An orange soda whizzes through the air, nearly hitting the teen and the Oakland Raiders' All-Pro cornerback worth $45 million.



"Wow," the teen says. "I'm sure they watch you every Sunday, and they don't even recognize who you are."



It is Kenneth's inner strength and his love for education that have brought together this high school class president and NFL star.



"The thing I took away is how fearless he is," Asomugha said later. "The things he's been through are so big and so severe -- they were threatening our lives and throwing things at us on Skid Row. But it doesn't bother him.



"His potential meter is at 1,000 right now."



Escaping through education



Even while Kenneth lived on Skid Row, he dreamed of attending Harvard to become a neurosurgeon. When Asomugha saw Kenneth's story on CNN, he wanted to help. He runs a foundation, the Asomugha College Tour for Scholars, that takes talented inner-city kids on tours of college campuses they otherwise would never be able to see. He's helped get 25 teens into college over the last four years.



On this day, he's come to tell Kenneth that he will be among the 16 students traveling in the spring to visit schools in Washington, D.C.



"I'm thankful to be able to give back," Asomugha said.



Hours before the Skid Row tour, Asomugha traveled to Hollywood's Helen Bernstein High School, where Kenneth is a starting running back in his senior year. They met at the school's football stadium, where Asomugha told Kenneth in person.



"This smile on my face," Kenneth said, "is a freaking good thing. This is awesome!"



Asomugha leaned closer. "You know who we're working on now?"



"Obama?" Kenneth asked nervously.



"We have to," the NFL star replied.



Kenneth's fever-pitched excitement reached a crescendo, "Oh my gosh!"



His father, Gordon Costello, joined in and handed a folded paper to Asomugha. The proud dad didn't show off football awards or his son's athletic achievements. Instead, it's Kenneth's latest report card, straight A's.



"He might overqualify for the tour," Asomugha said as he studied the report card. "This shows someone with a lot of drive and ambition. These are some great grades."



"I'm at a loss for words," the teen said. "Stuff like this doesn't happen every day."



Asomugha came from a family where education was stressed from day one. He remembers asking his mom as a boy, "Can I have some ice cream?"



"No," she responded. "You haven't finished your homework."



"I'd say, 'but I'm 3!' "



Asomugha's sister is a pediatrician, his mother holds a doctorate. Two other siblings have secondary degrees.



"I am the least educated in my family," Asomugha said. "I catch a lot of heat from my family."



The football star, who is the highest-paid defensive back in NFL history, has a degree in finance from the University of California-Berkeley.



Kenneth is energized

***

FARGO, North Dakota (CNN)  -- More than 1,000 volunteers rushed to fill sandbags early Wednesday as many in North Dakota tried to protect themselves from a historic floods that are expected to swamp the area.





A Fargo resident surveys the sandbags outside his home, located about 15 feet from the Red River, on Tuesday.





Even at 3:30 a.m., hundreds of volunteers packed into individual sandbagging centers, an organizer said.





"There have been so many volunteers that we had to turn people away," said Ryan McEwan, a supervisor at one volunteer coordinating center. "It is very busy. They are filling sandbags as fast as they can."





Fargo city officials estimated that as many as 10,000 volunteers have come forward since Sunday to aid in a sandbagging effort that's taken over North Dakota State University's central arena, the Fargodome, and to help build levees along the now closely watched Red River. See map of affected area »





That river posed the greatest risk of about eight rivers in the state that were at flood levels, emergency officials said.





The fear is that the Red River could overtake all previous records. As of Wednesday morning, the Red River ran at about 33 feet -- 15 feet above flood stage. A record level of 41.1 feet was set in 1897.





The record level of the river set in the April 1897 flood could be surpassed Friday, Cecily Fong of the North Dakota Department of Emergency Services said Tuesday.





More than 1,000 people were evacuated from an area near the city of Bismarck on Tuesday night as the Missouri River flooded, Rick Robinson of the North Dakota Department of Emergency Services said Wednesday.





Recent rain and blizzard conditions have swollen the rivers.





Gov. John Hoeven received word late Tuesday that North Dakota had received a presidential disaster declaration.





"We've had a severe winter and are experiencing significant flooding across the state, so we are grateful to receive this federal assistance as we continue the flood fight and recovery effort," Hoeven said. Under the declaration, the federal government will cover 75 percent of the costs.





"We're concerned about the rise of the river and how fast it's coming up, so our concern is that we're going to hit 41 feet," Fargo Deputy Mayor Tim Mahoney said Tuesday, adding that the way the levees are currently set up, they would protect against overflow only up to 38 feet.





Officials are guessing the Red River, which runs through the eastern parts of North and South Dakota, and western Minnesota, could crest in Fargo -- North Dakota's largest city, with about 99,200 residents -- anytime Friday or Saturday and that the water may linger at its crest height.





The city has canceled all trials scheduled in Fargo Municipal Court through April 2 because of the expected flooding, to allow all police officers to be available for possible emergencies, according to the city's Web site.





As of late Tuesday, Fargo residents and out-of-town volunteers had filled more than 1 million sandbags out of the needed 2 million. Mahoney said he hoped that, with the 24-hour sandbagging effort at the Fargodome, that goal will be met by Thursday. iReport.com: Are you there? Share photos, video





Another factor threatening efforts is the possibility of freezing temperatures, because sandbags freeze together and then aren't individually stackable.





Despite the stress, volunteers have been working around the clock.





"You got old people, young people -- all helping out," Mahoney said. "It's heartwarming to see how many people are here."





CNN's Robyn Sidersky contributed to this story.

***

HARARE, Zimbabwe (CNN) -- Zimbabwe's opposition leader called the cholera outbreak in his country a "man-made crisis," as new figures released Thursday showed the death toll had soared to more than 2,700.





Morgan Tsvangirai tours a cholera ward at Budiriro Polyclinic in Harare Thursday.





Some 2,755 have died and 48,623 people are suspected to have been infected with cholera since last year, the World Health Organization (WHO) said.





Opposition party leader Morgan Tsvangirai, speaking to reporters, pointed a finger at the Mugabe government. "Cholera in Zimbabwe is a man-made crisis. The problem we have here is coupled with (the) fact of negligence on the part of government to provide the necessary facilities. It shows the collapse of the health delivery system," said Tsvangirai.





The Movement for Democratic Change leader's comments came after he toured some of the worst affected areas in the country's capital, Harare.





Zimbabwe's cholera epidemic, which started in August, has been aggravated by erratic water supplies, shortages of water purification chemicals, broken water and sewer pipes and uncollected garbage.





Cholera is an intestinal disease cause by bacteria in contaminated water.





The epidemic was followed a month later by a strike by doctors and nurses demanding a review of their salaries. They are demanding that archaic hospital equipment be replaced and that medicines be available in hospitals. The health emergency comes at a time when Zimbabwe is mired in the worst economic crisis it has faced since it gained independence from Great Britain in 1980.





Last week, the United Nations' Children's Fund (UNICEF) gave $5 million to Zimbabwe's ailing health sector to help end the industrial action by health personnel.





As Tsvangirai was visiting the cholera affected areas, some residents could be seen getting water from the wells and rivers. Most suburbs in Harare have had no water for close to two weeks, forcing residents to depend on shallow pits and rivers for drinking water.





The Zimbabwe National Water Authority was quoted by the state-owned media Saturday attributing the dryness to a water pump which had broken-down. The areas particularly affected include the townships of Glen Norah, Glen View and Budiriro.





"I am here with my kids for the last two days," said Ennie Musararei, a mother of three at Budiriro clinic. "It (cholera) just started after we drank water from a well. We thought it was safe to drink since it was covered by a metal sheet."





President Robert Mugabe's government have now declared cholera a national emergency, so that international organizations such as UNICEF, Doctors Without Borders and Red Cross can gain access. But death toll has continued to increase daily.





"This week alone has witnessed a sudden increase of patients," said a nurse at Budiriro clinic. "I think it is mainly because of the rains and dryness of the suburbs over the past week or so."





Earlier this month, Zimbabwe's health minister, David Parirenyatwa, said the death toll was likely to increase as the country is in its rainy season.





The meteorological office in Zimbabwe has predicted floods in some parts of the country.

***

(CNN) -- One of the largest Jewish cemeteries in the Los Angeles, California, area has been accused of desecrating the remains of those buried there, according to a lawsuit.



The cemetery holds the remains of celebrities such as Groucho Marx and Lenny Bruce.



The suit, filed Thursday in Los Angeles Superior Court, alleges that employees at Eden Memorial Park, in Mission Hills, California, "intentionally, willfully and secretly desecrated the remains of deceased individuals," often moving them to make room for new remains.



Attorney Michael Avenatti, who filed the suit, told CNN that his investigation revealed that as many as 500 graves may have been torn up without the families' permission.



"We allege that Eden Memorial Park and its management for the better part of 15 years were engaging in improper burial practices, including the desecration of graves and the improper disposal of human remains," he said.



The lawsuit is filed by F. Charles Sands, whose parents are buried at Eden Memorial Park, against the cemetery and its owner, Service Corporation International, based in Houston, Texas. The company is the largest owner of cemeteries and funeral homes in the United States.  Watch what the lawsuit says workers did to remains »



This is not the first time Service Corporation International has faced allegations of digging up graves and moving bodies to make room for new remains. It reached a $100 million settlement with families of people whose remains were desecrated at Menorah Gardens in Florida. The company also reached a $14 million settlement with the Florida state attorney's office over issues related to those claims.



A number of celebrities are buried at Eden Park, including comedians Groucho Marx and Lenny Bruce, according to several Web sites that track burials of celebrities.



Anthony Lampe, the general manager of Eden Memorial Park, said he had not seen the lawsuit and referred inquiries to Service Corporation International. Company spokeswoman Lisa Marshall said the allegations in the lawsuit were not valid. She said SCI had investigated and confirmed burial issues at Eden Memorial Park in 2007, but she could not provide specifics of that investigation.



The lawsuit alleges groundskeepers were secretly instructed to break buried concrete interment vaults that contained caskets that were already buried, using backhoes. It also alleges human remains would often fall out of the broken caskets, and those body parts were either scattered or thrown away.



In one case, Avenatti said, a human skull was discarded.



"We have uncovered evidence that the groundskeepers and others at Eden Memorial Park have been instructed to break off or break apart that concrete vault and, at many times, that exposes human remains," Avenatti said.



Asked about the seriousness of the allegations, he said, "If the allegations are proven true, this is incredibly horrific."



The lawsuit said that under Jewish tradition, "the deceased are typically required to be interred within 24 hours, thereby leaving little time to obtain consent to move an encroaching vault in an adjacent plot and giving defendants a motive to desecrate human remains and commit other immoral acts rather than comply with the law."

***

Rome, Italy (CNN) -- Prosecutors in Italy allege that a businessman supplied Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi with about 30 women, or escorts, in order to win favor with him.





It's the latest development in a long-running sex scandal. Transcripts of some of 100,000 wiretap recordings made between September 2008 and 2009 were filed with a court in the southern city of Bari Friday, as prosecutors wrapped up a three-year prostitution investigation.





The transcripts reveal that Berlusconi and businessman Gianpaolo Tarantini repeatedly discussed bringing women to parties.





Tarantini selected women to be of "young age and slender" and instructed them in what to wear and how to behave at Berlusconi's parties, the prosecutors say.





Among them was Patrizia D'Addario, prosecutors say, who in 2009 alleged she and other women were paid to attend parties at Berlusconi's residence. He denied her claim.





In another conversation, they discuss what women they should each bring to a party that night. Berlusconi says that the male guests are powerful men "so the girls have the idea of being in front of men that can decide their destiny."





He says he has "two young girls whom I've not seen for a long time" -- one of them a journalist and the other a 21-year-old Brazilian "who cried over the phone telling me that I'd forgotten her."





Discussing a party the night before in a wiretap from October 10, Berlusconi tells Tarantini there were perhaps too many women. "At the most to have two each, but now I want you also to have yours, otherwise I feel in debt. Why don't you bring yours for you and I bring mine. ... "





Tarantini agrees, and Berlusconi continues: "Then we can exchange them ... "





In a conversation between Tarantini and one of the women he recruited, she said Berlusconi told her he would help her.





Berlusconi is not accused in this case filed in Bari but faces a separate trial in Milan for allegedly paying for sex with a then-17-year-old Moroccan belly dancer named Karima el Mahroug, nicknamed "Ruby the Heart-stealer."





El Mahroug has denied having sex with the premier. Both admit that he gave her money, although they say it was an act of kindness to help her. Berlusconi has always denied wrongdoing and also denies ever having paid for sex.





The latest revelations in the Bari case have reignited calls among his critics for Berlusconi to resign.





In a letter published Saturday to the Foglio newspaper, run by his former spokesman Giuliano Ferrara, Berlusconi wrote that he had no intention of quitting.





He said his behavior was nothing like what had been described in the media, and that he had done nothing to be ashamed of.





In a separate but linked investigation by prosecutors in Naples, Tarantini is accused of having blackmailed Berlusconi over the scandal.





According to the Naples prosecutors, Berlusconi was a victim of "veiled and implied threats" and paid 800,000 euros to Tarantini.





The prime minister denies having been blackmailed and says he gave the money to Tarantini as an act of charity.





CNN's Livia Borghese contributed to this report.

***

Editor's note: Carly Fiorina is chief executive of Carly Fiorina Enterprises and former chief executive of HP. She was an adviser to Sen. John McCain's presidential campaign last year.





Carly Fiorina says outrage at Wall St. pay is justified but salaries shouldn't be set by government.





(CNN) -- Americans are outraged over excessive CEO pay and perks. That outrage is justified, particularly when American taxpayers are footing the bill.





Our capitalist system works best when there is transparency and accountability. There has been too little of both on Wall Street.





Inevitably, the president and Congress are now attempting to respond to taxpayer anger and restore some "common sense," as President Obama recently declared, to CEO compensation. The proposed solution caps top executive pay at $500,000 for institutions that have received bailout money.





I don't think this is the answer, although it is an understandable reaction. It's arbitrary: Why not $400,000 or $600,000? It's incomplete. It only applies to institutions that will receive more government assistance going forward. And it doesn't strengthen our economy when government decides how much each job is worth. In America we leave that job to markets.





So what's the answer? To strengthen transparency, all aspects of CEO pay and perks should be fully disclosed on a regular basis. This should include airplanes, cars, golf-club memberships, bonuses, stock options, retirement plans and salaries -- in short everything that a common-sense person would consider part of a CEO reward package. See Fiorina discuss exec pay, including her own »





To strengthen accountability, all aspects of CEO compensation should be voted on by shareholders on an annual basis.





Ultimately, it is the owners of a company who must determine whether a CEO's rewards are justified by a CEO's performance. And because the American taxpayer is now a partial owner in many companies, the government can get a vote as well -- in some cases a very sizeable vote.





In addition, "clawback provisions," which require a CEO to return compensation to shareholders if promised results aren't delivered, should be standard fare.





Finally, when a company comes to Washington for American taxpayer money, it is an admission that mistakes have been made and major bets have failed. These CEOs should be prepared to tender their resignations and those of their boards. To earn a bailout, a CEO and board should be held accountable.





We should not weaken our economy while trying to fix it. These are difficult times. President Obama has described our current situation as a "crisis" and an impending "catastrophe." In such times, action is required. The key is to take actions that help in the short-term, while also being sensible for the medium and long-term.





Too often our politicians react to crisis and public anger by over-reaching, and they create new, unforeseen problems that only become clear with the passage of time.





In this country, the opportunity to be rewarded for taking prudent risk is fundamental to our economic vitality and strength. Let's not lose that fundamental principle in our outrage over Wall Street greed and excess.





The opinions expressed in this commentary are solely those of Carly Fiorina.

***

(CNN) -- The mother of Lisa Irwin, an 11-month old Missouri girl missing for nearly two weeks, said in an interview she was drunk the night the infant disappeared.





Deborah Bradley made the admission during an NBC interview, portions of which were aired Monday on "Today."





She also said she last saw Lisa at 6:40 p.m. October 3, when she put the girl to bed, not at 10:30 p.m., as initially believed.





Lisa was reported missing at 4 a.m. October 4, after Lisa's father, Jeremy Irwin, came home from work to find the door unlocked, lights on and a window that had been tampered with at the family's Kansas City home.





Bradley told NBC she is afraid she will be arrested. Police have accused her of killing Lisa, she said, and told her that she failed a lie detector test, with deception indicated when she was asked where Lisa was.





"I was the last one with her," a tearful Bradley said in the interview. "And from judging on how the questioning went, that's kind of a fear that I have. And the main fear with that is, if they arrest me, people are going to stop looking for her. And then I'll never see her again, and I'll never know what happened."





Asked how much she had been drinking that night, Bradley said, "enough to be drunk."





But she rejected the notion that she could have harmed her daughter while under the influence of alcohol.





"No, no, no," she told NBC. "And if I thought there was a chance, I'd say it. No. No. I don't think alcohol changes a person enough to do something like that."





She said it's "terrible" that police may be focusing on her. "My daughter is missing," she said. "The last thing that I want to have to worry about is something like that. I shouldn't have to put any energy, any time or effort, into anything but finding her."





Asked whether he had questions about Bradley, Irwin told NBC, "No. There's no question to be had there. I know who she is. I know the kind of mother she is."





He said it's possible someone could have entered the house without Bradley hearing, as the couple's bedroom is on the opposite corner of the house from Lisa's room and Bradley sleeps with a fan at high speed.





Police have said three cell phones were also missing from the home along with Lisa.





On Sunday, Missouri Gov. Jay Nixon ordered the one-day deployment of 25 National Guardsmen to help search for Lisa.





Two anonymous benefactors have offered a $100,000 reward for Lisa's safe return, according to Bill Stanton, a private investigator working with the family.





Irwin and Bradley told NBC they have refused to let authorities re-interview Lisa's older brothers.





"They said they heard noises (the night Lisa disappeared)," Bradley said. "I don't know if that was before we went to sleep or after." She said she has not talked to her sons about it because she is reluctant to put them through "anything else."





Asked what she would say to someone who might be holding Lisa, Bradley told NBC, "She needs her family, and we need her. We're losing more sanity as each day progresses."





Lisa is described as being 30 inches tall with blue eyes and blond hair, according to police. She weighs between 26 and 30 pounds and was last seen wearing purple shorts and a purple shirt with white kittens on it.





The missing girl has two bottom teeth and a "beauty mark" on her right outer thigh, police said. At the time of her disappearance, she had a cold with a cough.

***

Philadelphia, Pennsylvania (CNN)  -- I wore a path between Washington and Philly for interviews and shoots for our recent "Cheating Death" special with Dr. Sanjay Gupta.





In the field: Jeremy Harlan





My job as a photojournalist is to shoot and edit stories for CNN and make sure my news team eats well on the road.





On assignment: Philadelphia, Pennsylvania





Now, I love cheese steaks as much as the next guy. But my arteries can only take so much steak, cheese and peppers. So here are a few places that are great alternatives in the City of Brotherly Love.





Reading Terminal Market





Hours: 8 a.m.-6 p.m. Monday through Saturday; 9 a.m.-5 p.m. Sunday





Cuisine: You name it, the market has it





How do I describe the Reading Terminal Market? It's like the Las Vegas of food. Everywhere you turn, there's something interesting to see, smell and taste. It is food sensory overload.





The hardest part of going to the market is not eating the very first thing you see. Give yourself 15 minutes to walk through the market before deciding where to spend your hard-earned lunch dollar.





I saw apple dumplings, muffalettas, spanakopita, pulled pork, snapper soup, strombolis, all the fresh veggies, meat and cheese you could throw in your fridge and of course cheese steaks.





I finally decided to stop at Dinic's Pork and Beef for the famous roast pork sandwich. The service was fast and friendly. The sandwich was fantastic, and if you sit at the counter long enough, you might hear one of Philly's finest talk about the crazy arrest of the day.





And make sure you save room for a smooth and creamy cupcake (or two) from the Flying Monkey.





Magic Carpet





Hours: 10:30 a.m.-3 p.m.





Cuisine: Mediterranean/vegetarian





The first thing I ask our local contact on a story is where I'm eating lunch. If you ask Holly Auer, University of Pennsylvania Hospital's senior medical communications officer, she'll immediately say, "Magic Carpet."





This vegetarian culinary delight is actually a small vendor trailer just across from Penn Hospital. If you haven't been to Philly, you need to know this city takes its street vendor food pretty seriously.





I still scratch my head at how these folks make so much delicious food in such cramped quarters. My personal favorite at Magic Carpet is a pita sandwich stuffed with grape leaves. It's so good, I usually eat two.





Maybe the best part: The sandwiches are around five bucks. Definitely the worst part: the long line of neurosurgeons, med students, nurses and cardiologists waiting for their delicious ride on the Carpet, too.





The Franklin Fountain





Hours: noon-midnight





Cuisine: Ice cream





The Franklin Fountain is a cool escape back to the early 20th-century ice cream fountain shop. Although it opened in the summer of 2004, you would think it was 1944 when you walk in the door. The owners left no detail ignored in building this dairy delight.





The fountain offers sundaes, splits, ice cream waffle sandwiches, fresh pies, house-made cakes, phosphates and America's oldest soft drink, just to name a few.





Coffee lovers will enjoy the Lightning Rod sundae. Everyone will enjoy his or her trip back in time.

***

New Delhi (CNN) -- In India, milk is used in holy ceremonies, it is offered to the gods, poured over deities and generally considered the healthiest of drinks.





But a first-of-its-kind government survey reveals that a stunning 68.4% of milk sold in India does not meet basic government standards.





The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India tested milk across the country. It took 1,791 samples -- and of of those, 1,226 were found to be "non-conforming."





In seven Indian states, 100% of the samples failed to meet standards.





Some samples contained water and milk powders; others included potentially toxic ingredients.





"We found about 14% of the samples which found traces of detergent," said V.N. Gaur, the chief executive officer of the food safety authority.





In lesser percentages, the tests also found hydrogen peroxide and urea -- a substance found in fertilizer and urine.





"There is a problem and they need to face it head-on and they have to kind of really take some strict action against those people who are violating simple consumer rights of getting a clean glass of milk," said Savvy Soumya Misra, the food safety and toxins deputy program manager with the Center for Science and Environment.





Doctors say ingested over long periods of time, chemicals like detergent can eat away the lining of intestines, stomach and affect the liver and the kidneys.





Just adding water to the milk can pose a real danger in India where waterborne illnesses are commonplace.





"What you get is diarrhea. Vomiting. What we call gastroenteritis," said Dr. Suranjit Chatterjee, a senior consultant for internal medicine at Delhi's Apollo hospital said. "You can get something like cholera. You can have jaundice. There are infections like typhoid fever, which are all part of water-borne infections in this part of the world."





At a dairy on the outskirts of India's capital, a worker dilution is widely practiced -- but that his plant does not participate.





"A lot of people do it. They add water and take the milk and sell it," Ram Prasad said. "They add water because it increases the quantity of milk and there is more to sell."





The milk industry in India is a chaotic mix of producers and sellers.





Milk comes to the market in many different ways. It can be carried in on the heads of farmers in pails, put in containers which are strapped to a train or a bicycle, or delivered in a massive milk truck.





In many places, including the capital, fresh milk is still delivered to homes.





The sources also vary: from a family with three cows, to farms with more than 30 cows and buffaloes, to huge dairy plants.





Government authorities say 70% of the milk on the market comes from small to medium farms that operate in, what is known, as the "unorganized sector."





In the government test, less than a third of the milk samples came from large producers.





While India has strict regulations in place to ensure milk safety, consumer advocates say enforcement is so lax it's laughable.





"Well it does reflect that there is a need to strengthen our implementation machinery, Gaur said. "That need is definitely underlined by this study."





But, he said, his office has been granted new powers recently and it plans on more surveys. He expects there will be better enforcement in the coming weeks, months and years.





Food safety watchdog groups say milk dilution has been around for decades.





They hope the milk survey will mean good news for consumers because -- for the first time -- the government itself has revealed the true scope of the problem and pledged to do something about it.





CNN's Sumnima Das contributed to this report.